
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: pa/10288/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester CJC              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 16 October 2019                   |On 11 November 2019                  |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between

                                 mr A A A A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Howard, Fountain Solicitors (Walsall)
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of  Sudan  who  claims  to  be  a  non-Arab
    Darfuri from the Berti tribe.  That was the basis of his  asylum  claim
    before the Secretary of State made  on  24  February  2018,  which  was
    rejected in a decision dated 16 August 2018.   The  Appellant  appealed
    against that decision and his appeal came before Judge  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Herwald for hearing on 28 September 2018.

 2. In a decision and reasons promulgated on 16  October  2018,  the  judge
    dismissed the appeal, finding that  the  Appellant's  account  was  not
    credible and that he was not a member of the Berti tribe.

 3. Permission to appeal was sought, in time, on the basis that:

(i)  firstly,  the  judge  had  erroneously  failed  to  apply  the  country
guidance decision in   AA (Non-Arab-relocation) Sudan CG [2009] UKAIT  00056
which held that all non-   Arab Darfuris are at a real persecutory  risk  on
return to Darfur and cannot     reasonably be expected to relocate  and  had
further erred in failing to apply the    country  guidance  decision  in  MM
(Darfuris) Sudan CG UKUT 00010 (IAC).  It was     contended  that  following
the decision in SG Iraq [2012] EWCA Civ 940 that  Tribunal       Judges  and
decision makers are required to follow  country  guidance  decisions  unless
very strong grounds supported by  cogent  evidence  are  adduced  justifying
there not     doing so;

(ii) secondly, it was submitted the judge had erred in failing to apply  the
country  guidance decision in IM and  AI  [2016]  UKUT  00188  at  [236]  in
relation to the risk the   Appellant faces on return to Khartoum in  respect
of the duty on the decision maker   to build a comprehensive picture of  the
Claimant;

(iii)    thirdly, the judge had erred at 15U  in  apparently  accepting  the
Appellant  had  been      tortured  but  then  finding  at  15T   that   the
Appellant's account was not credible in this     respect.

(iv) fourthly, that the judge had given  inadequate  reasoning  for  finding
that the      Appellant's account was incredible, particularly  given  there
were two witnesses     along with two letters all of which  corroborated  to
the lower standard of proof that    the Appellant was from the Berti tribe.

(v)  fifthly, the judge failed to adequately consider the risk on return  to
Khartoum as a     failed asylum seeker and whether the  Appellant  would  be
considered to have an  imputed political profile that would put him at  risk
on return.

 4. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Doyle  in
    a decision dated 12 November 2018, on the basis it  was  arguable  that
    the judge did not carry out sufficient analysis  to  justify  departure
    from the country guidance case AF  [2004]  UKIAT  00284  and  YC  China
    [2018].

     Hearing

 5. At the hearing before the Upper Tribunal, Mr McVeety helpfully provided
    a copy of the recent decision of the Upper Tribunal in AAR and AA (non-
    Arab Darfuris-return) Sudan [2019] UKUT 00282 (IAC) where  a  panel  of
    the Upper Tribunal held  that  the  "the  situation  in  Sudan  remains
    volatile after civil protests started in late 2018 and  the  future  is
    unpredictable.  There is insufficient evidence currently  available  to
    show that the guidance given in AA (Non-Arab  Darfuris-relocation  (op.
    cit.) and MM Darfuris Sudan  requires  revision.   Those  cases  should
    still be followed."

 6. Due to the nature of this particular  challenge,  I  asked  Mr  McVeety
    first to clarify the Respondent's position in the absence of a Rule  24
    report.  Mr McVeety accepted that,  in  theory,  the  judge  had  erred
    materially in law for the reasons set out in ground 1.   However,  that
    would only be material if it had been established  that  the  Appellant
    was indeed a member of the Berti tribe as claimed  and  the  judge  had
    found that he was not.

 7. In  light  of  Mr  McVeety's  submission,  Mr  Howard  sought  to  rely
    essentially on ground 4 of the grounds of  challenge  viz  the  reasons
    challenge in light of the evidence that the Appellant was a  member  of
    the Berti tribe.  He submitted  the  judge  had  not  given  sufficient
    reasons for rejecting the evidence of the witnesses or  the  documents.
    He submitted looking at [15](a) to (p) that the letter from  the  Berti
    community was written by the leader of that organisation and the letter
    from the Darfur Union had also been written by the  Secretary  of  that
    organisation.

 8. In relation to the recent evidence he submitted that it  was  plausible
    that the witness can add credence to the fact the Appellant is from the
    Berti tribe.  In relation to the fact the Appellant had  coincidentally
    bumped into the witnesses,  Mr  Howard  submitted  that  this  was  not
    unusual that they had met by accident given that as members of the same
    community they had  attended  meetings  or  events  organised  by  that
    community in the UK.

 9. In response, Mr McVeety submitted that the difficulty with that is that
    Mr Howard has essentially proffered an alternative explanation but this
    is not sufficient to establish a material error of law.  He  sought  to
    rely on the decision of the Upper Tribunal in Durueke [2019] UKUT 00197
    (IAC) where it was held  that  permission  to  appeal  should  only  be
    granted if it can properly be said that the judge had made  a  decision
    that was irrational.  Mr McVeety submitted that  the  Appellant's  case
    was a disagreement with the weight that the judge had attached  to  the
    evidence but rather the judge had considered everything in  the  round.
    The Appellant had given completely contradictory evidence as  to  where
    he was born and brought up  and  this  was  not  in  either  Darfur  or
    Khartoum but in the east of Sudan.  The judge was entitled to find that
    that was a major  contradiction  and  the  judge  then  considered  the
    background documentary evidence.

10. Mr McVeety submitted that the judge was entitled to be  concerned  that
    the document emanating from  the  Berti  community  appeared  to  be  a
    template and that  he  was  not  told  what  extensive  enquiries  that
    organisation had made and that there was a contradiction  between  that
    evidence and the other background evidence.  Mr McVeety submitted  that
    really ground 4 is nothing more than a challenge to the weight that was
    attached but this is  well-established  is  a  matter  for  the  judge.
    Therefore there was no material error  of  law  identified  but  rather
    simply a disagreement with the judge's findings of fact which were open
    to him on the evidence before him.

11. In reply Mr Howard submitted that whilst the weight to be  attached  to
    evidence may be a matter for the judge, in respect of  the  documentary
    evidence at [15] (k) and (l) the judge  had  failed  to  give  adequate
    reasons for not accepting the witness evidence and that the  judge  had
    failed to explain how he  reached  his  decision  not  to  accept  this
    evidence.

12. I reserved my decision with I now give with my reasons.

     Findings and reasons

13. In light of the fact that the recent decision in AAR and  AA  (non-Arab
    Darfuris-return) Sudan [2019] UKUT 00282 (IAC)  advises  following  the
    previous country guidance  viz  AA  (Non-Arab  Darfuris-relocation)  CG
    [2009] UKAIT 00056 and MM (Darfuris) Sudan [2015] UKUT 00010 (IAC)  the
    issue of whether or not the Appellant is a member of the Berti tribe is
    definitive of his claim.

14. The First tier Tribunal Judge rejected the Appellant's claim  to  be  a
    member of the Berti tribe at [15](p), for reasons he set out in  detail
    at [15](a)-(o). His reasons for so doing were:

(i)   that in his screening interview at q 1.13 he said  his  ethnicity  was
"Alhpap" which he      subsequently explained was an error  as  he  had  not
understood the interpreter (a)-)b)  refer;

(ii) in his screening interview the Appellant said he  was  born  in  Tokar,
which is in East  Sudan whereas in his asylum interview he said he was  born
in Al Genena, which is     in Darfur and at  the  hearing  he  said  due  to
problems his family encountered they    moved to Tokar (c);

(iii)    the Appellant stated he attended primary school both in Darfur  and
in Tokar, which   is inconsistent with his  statement  that  he  stayed  the
whole of term time with Mr      Jaafar Ali in Darfur (e);

(iv) at q 130 of his asylum interview he said that  when  a  couple  married
they  go  off  to     live  together,  whereas   according   to   background
information cited at [31] of the    refusal he wife  continues  to  live  in
her parents' household for the first year of     marriage  and  her  husband
visits her there periodically. The Appellant stated he  did      not  follow
the Berti traditions because he married  in  East  Sudan,  which  the  Judge
found was grist to the mill that he is indeed not Berti (g);

(v)  the first supporting witness, Mr  Rani  Mohamed,  said  that  both  the
Appellant's   maternal aunt, who was married to the witness' uncle, and  the
Appellant's mother     were from tribes in the East of  Sudan;  he  had  met
the Appellant at his wedding in the     east of Sudan. The Judge  found  the
witness  assumed  the  Appellant  is  Berti   because   of       a   distant
relationship between their parents (i);

(vi) the witness Mr Jaafar  Ali  considered  the  Appellant  must  be  Berti
because they share     the same  great  grandfather;  that  the  Appellant's
mother was not Berti and that the   Appellant had lived with him on and  off
between 1999 and 2003; they met at the  Appellant's wedding  and  then  just
happened to come across each other at a party  in       Manchester  in  June
2018 (k);

(vii)    he was not persuaded that the witnesses would suddenly come  across
the Appellant     in the UK after he had only been  here  for  a  relatively
short time nor  that  either       witness  could  attest  in  full  to  the
Appellant's ethnicity (l);

(viii)   the letter from the Berti Community UK caused him  disquiet  as  it
appears to be a   template where the Appellant's  name  has  been  inserted;
the  writer  purports  to  have      made  extensive  enquireies  about  the
appellant's family background and contacted,      among  others,  Mr  Jaafar
Ali and a Mr Shaikh, who confirmed he is one of  the    Appellant's  friends
and is from Darfur. He  found he could place little  reliance  upon   it  in
that it purports to recite an interview with the Appellant to   confirm  his
tribal   affiliations but the witness could not be cross-examined and  there
is no date relating    to the interview (o);

(ix) as to the letter from the Union of the People of  Darfur  dated  8.9.18
the Appellant is  purported to have been asked 9 questions  and  "of  course
by the time the Appellant was   asked such questions, he had  been  in  this
country for some time and knew what was needed,  in order  to  persuade  the
decision-maker that he might be from Darfur originally."

15.  The first part of ground 4 of the grounds of appeal  asserts  that  the
Judge had given   inadequate reasoning at [15] for finding  the  Appellant's
account incredible. This is     clearly not the  case  given  the  extensive
reasoning provided by the Judge for his      finding that the  Appellant  is
not a member of the Berti tribe.

16.  The second part of the ground  4  asserts  that  the  Judge  has  given
inadequate    reasoning for not accepting the evidence  of  the  Appellant's
two witnesses together     with the letters from the Union of the People  of
Darfur and the Berti Community UK   as  being  corroborative  to  the  lower
standard of the Appellant having Berti origin.

17.  I have concluded  that  the  judge  erred  materially  in  law  in  his
treatment of the   witness  and  documentary  evidence  in  support  of  the
Appellant's claim to be from    the Berti tribe, for the following reasons:

17.1.    Mr Rani Mohamed gave oral evidence before the Judge, based  on  his
own personal  knowledge, due to the fact that the Appellant's maternal  aunt
is married to the      witness' uncle. The Judge has failed to set  out  the
evidence given at the Tribunal nor  whether his evidence was  challenged  by
the Respondent in cross-examination and I    find  there  is  no  evidential
basis upon  which  the  Judge  could  properly  find  that  Mr     Mohamed's
evidence was based on an assumption as opposed to knowledge arising     from
his familial relationship;

17.2.     similarly, the witness Mr Jaafar Ali and the Appellant  share  the
same great    grandfather and thus he can reasonably  be  expected  to  know
the  Appellant's    ethnicity  on  the  basis  that   their   mutual   great
grandfather is Berti. The Judge has held      against  both  witnesses  that
they met the Appellant by accident in Manchester,     however, I  find  that
there is sense in Mr Howard's submission that it was not  unusual that  they
had met by accident given that as members of  the  same      community  they
had attended meetings or events organised by that community in      the  UK.
I  find  that  the  Judge  has  failed  to  give  sufficient   reasons   for
disregarding Mr   Ali's evidence;

17.3.    I find that the Judge's  finding  that  neither      witness  could
attest  in  full  to  the   Appellant's  ethnicity  (l)  is   based   on   a
misapprehension of the fact that a person who    is of  mixed  ethnicity  is
treated as being from his father's tribe, which in this  case  is     Berti,
his mother being from East Sudan as the witnesses consistently maintained.

17.4.    I find that the Judge further erred in his  reasons  for  rejecting
the corroborative effect   of the letter from  the  Berti  Community  UK  as
there is nothing inherently  wrong  in     utilising  a    template  nor  in
conducting extensive enquiries into the Appellant's  family      background,
including  contacting  Mr  Ali  and  a  Mr  Shaikh.  The   Judge's   further
reasoning is unclear but he appears to reject the letter in the  basis  that
no date has   been provided for when the Appellant was interviewed  and  the
writer of the letter   was not available  for  cross-examination.  Whilst  I
find that this may reduce the   weight to be attached to the document it  is
not sufficient reason to place little reliance   upon it;

17.5.    I find that the reasons provided by the  Judge  for  rejecting  the
letter from the Union of   the People of  Darfur  dated  8.9.18,  which  was
based on an interview of 9 questions,   was  cynical,  based  on  assumption
and lacking in any or any proper evidential basis.

18.  I  find  that  these  errors  are  material  in  that,  had  the  Judge
considered the evidence in      support of the Appellant's claim to be  from
the Berti tribe in the round, as it was      incumbent upon him  to  do,  he
may have reached a different conclusion.

Notice of Decision

I find material errors of  law  in  the  decision  of  First  tier  Tribunal
Herwald. I set that decision aside and remit the appeal  for  a  hearing  de
novo to be heard by a different Judge.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Rebecca Chapman                         Date 6 November 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman
