
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: pa/10375/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated         |
|On 4th April 2018                           |On 19th April 2018                     |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal judge ROBERTS


                                   Between

                                 miss l.a.w.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     In person accompanied by her mother
For the Respondent:    Ms Ahmad (Counsel)


Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
An anonymity direction is made. As a protection claim, it is appropriate to
do so.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Uganda (born [ ] 1999).  She  arrived  in
    the United Kingdom on 7th April 2017 (aged 17 years) and claimed asylum
    on the same day.  She appeals to this Tribunal against the decision  of
    the Respondent dated 28th September 2017 refusing her claims for asylum
    and humanitarian protection and her human rights claim.  Her appeal was
    heard by  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Geraint  Jones  QC  and
    dismissed on all grounds in a decision  promulgated  on  20th  November
    2017.

 2. An application for permission to appeal was lodged and  permission  was
    granted by the First-tier Tribunal on the following grounds:

    It was found arguable that the Tribunal;

    (i)  failed to make reference to two letters, one from Kesta Desmond, a
         High Intensity CBT Therapist, and one from Rosa  Benato,  a  Senior
         Lecturer  at  the  City  of  London  University  School  of  Health
         Sciences.  It was arguable as  to  whether  the  judge  took  these
         documents into account when coming to his findings;

    (ii) failed to properly assess the Appellant's Article 8  claim  taking
         into account her age (17 years on  entry)  and  dependence  on  her
         mother; and

    (iii)   made no reference in its decision to the Appellant's  diagnosis
         of PTSD.

 3. There is a Rule 24 response on file from the Respondent,  the  relevant
    part of which says, "The Judge made adequate findings of fact  and  has
    given adequate reasons for the findings  made.   This  is  set  out  at
    paragraphs 30 and  onwards.   The  Judge  also  sets  out  findings  in
    relation to the various letters and documents as set out at  paragraphs
    28 and 29."

 4. Thus the matter comes before me to decide whether the decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal discloses  such  error  of  law  that  it  must  be
    satisfied and be remade.

The Hearing

 5. Before me Ms Ahmad appeared for the Respondent.  The Appellant appeared
    in person, unrepresented.  Because the Appellant was aged 17 years when
    the Respondent's decision was made and because she was unrepresented, I
    allowed her mother to speak on her behalf although I  also  heard  from
    the Appellant herself.  Ms Ahmad who was in agreement with this  course
    outlined that it may be helpful if the Respondent's case was set out at
    the beginning of submissions in order to enable the Appellant to better
    respond.

 6. I heard submissions from Ms Ahmad first.  Ms Ahmad referred to case law
    particularly the decision in VW (Sri Lanka) and SSHD  [2013]  EWCA  Civ
    522.  She referred to the FtT's decision and said that the core of  the
    Appellant's claim was that she could not return to Uganda on account of
    her sexuality.  The judge set out the Appellant's  claim  over  several
    lengthy paragraphs [7] to [22].

 7. He then recorded that the Appellant gave oral evidence by adopting  her
    witness statement [23]  and  that  he  took  account  of  her  mother's
    evidence [27].

 8. The judge's findings are contained in [30]. He goes into  great  detail
    setting out why he comprehensively disbelieved the Appellant's  account
    and found:

         "That the appellant's claim to be a  lesbian  is  not  established,
         even keeping in  mind  the  modest  standard  of  proof  in  asylum
         appeals."

 9. He followed this up by finding:

         "That  the  appellant's  mother  was  complicit   in   making   the
         appellant's travel arrangements for her to come to this country and
         funded her travel.  It is not claimed that the  appellant's  father
         provided any funds.  The appellant does not claim to have  had  any
         funds of her own.  The appellant's mother works as  a  nurse  at  a
         London hospital and given her history of travel  (detailed  in  her
         witness evidence) she plainly had the  wherewithal  with  which  to
         fund the appellant's travel and, as I find, the inclination  so  to
         do."

10. Ms Ahmad submitted that the judge had made findings which were open  to
    him.  She referred to the grounds granting permission and  specifically
    to the two letters mentioned therein. She said, referring to  VW,  that
    it was not necessary for a judge to refer in his decision to  each  and
    every piece of evidence placed before him.  She invited me to  consider
    the letter from Rosa Benato and to find that it is not a letter that is
    capable of materially affecting the decision.  Ms Benato has  not  even
    met the Appellant.  She was the  personal  tutor  for  the  Appellant's
    mother and simply records details of what she  has  been  told  by  the
    Appellant's mother.  So far as the letter dated 9th November 2017  from
    Kesta Desmond is concerned, it depended upon a  history  given  by  the
    Appellant.  The FtTJ had  made  a  clear  finding  on  the  Appellant's
    credibility, and that is a matter for the judge.

11. I then heard submissions  from  the  Appellant  and  her  mother.   The
    Appellant handed in  a  statement  which  was  in  fact  her  statement
    referring to her historical claim.  She also handed in a further report
    from Kesta Desmond, the High Intensity CBT Therapist from South  London
    and Maudsley NHS Foundation Trust.   I  note  with  concern  that  this
    letter is neither signed nor dated. I was told that  it  is  of  recent
    origin, and the content is consistent with the assertion that it  post-
    dates the report of 9th November 2017.   It expands upon  the  original
    letter from Kesta Desmond (also unsigned) which it was said was  before
    the FtTJ.  It sets out the treatment which the Appellant is undertaking
    in respect of a diagnosis of PTSD,  said  to  be  on  account  of  what
    happened to her in Uganda.  It was said by the Appellant's mother  that
    the judge had not looked at all the evidence properly in the  light  of
    the diagnosis that the Appellant was suffering from  PTSD.   She  asked
    for the decision to be set aside and for her daughter  to  be  given  a
    fresh hearing.

Error of Law Consideration

12. The challenges raised against the FtT's decision are two-fold:

    (i)  that the FtTJ  has  failed  to  have  proper  regard  to  relevant
         evidence  -  specifically  two  documents,  a   letter   from   the
         Appellant's mother's personal tutor at City  University  School  of
         Health Sciences and secondly a letter from a CBT therapist employed
         by South London and Maudsley NHS Foundation Trust; and

    (ii) whether in view of the Appellant's age and claimed  dependency  on
         her mother, Article 8 ECHR family life is engaged.

13. I begin my consideration by dealing with the first  challenge  mounted.
    The judge's starting point in his decision was to establish whether the
    Appellant's claim to be a lesbian was a credible one.  In  taking  this
    approach, the judge clearly kept in mind the test set out in HJ (Iran).
     He essentially engaged in  a  fact-specific  enquiry  on  whether  the
    Appellant has established that she is a lesbian.

14. Credibility is at the heart of this appeal.  The judge  considered  the
    history  to  the  Appellant's  claim  and   found   it   wanting.    He
    comprehensively disbelieved the  historical  claim  made  and  set  out
    lengthy findings giving reasons for that disbelief.

15. The judge also found that the Appellant's and her mother's evidence was
    lacking, not least because of  the  Appellant's  claim  that  she  left
    Uganda in the company of an unspecified woman who armed with forged  or
    false documents, brought her to the UK.

16. However it is well established law that in asylum appeals a judge  must
    apply anxious scrutiny to the evidence before him. Failure to take into
    account relevant evidence amounts to an error capable of requiring  the
    decision to be set aside for inadequacy of reasoning.

17. I have carefully considered both letters.  I find I  can  discount  the
    letter from Rosa Benato.  It is based entirely upon what she  has  been
    told by the Appellant's mother.  It expresses shock  that  evidence  of
    homosexuality is being requested by the Home Office.  She has not  even
    met the Appellant, and the contents render it in my judgment a partisan
    letter.  Therefore I find  that  the  fact  that  the  judge  makes  no
    specific reference to this  letter  would  not  materially  affect  his
    decision.

18. However it is a different  matter  so  far  as  the  report  dated  9th
    November 2017 from Kesta Desmond is concerned.  The same considerations
    discounting Rosa Benato's letter do not apply to  the  CBT  Therapist's
    report.  Nowhere in the decision do I  see  that  the  judge  has  made
    reference to this report.  Therefore I cannot be satisfied that he  has
    taken it into account.   The  report  constitutes  evidence  which  the
    Appellant put forward in support of her claim. She is entitled to  have
    this evidence assessed to see to what extent if any it  shows  internal
    consistency in her  claim,  and  to  see  if  it  provides  independent
    probative value to her claim.  In other words the judge is required  to
    look at the evidence holistically.  I find that there is nothing in his
    decision to show that he has done so, and  that  renders  the  decision
    unsafe.

19. Miss Ahmad did her best to persuade me that the judge's findings on the
    Appellant's credibility were so clearly reasoned that they could  stand
    in the face of a report which depended heavily upon a history given  by
    the Appellant, a history which the judge  comprehensively  disbelieved.
    I disagree.  That is the wrong approach.  The assessment of credibility
    must be made in the light of all the evidence as a whole. This includes
    making a judgment on the Health Care Professional's report.  It  cannot
    simply be ignored.  I find the  decision  must  be  set  aside  in  its
    entirety.

20. So far as the Article 8 ECHR point is concerned that is bound  up  with
    the fact finding on the  Refugee  claim.  That  too  will  have  to  be
    considered afresh at the rehearing.

Decision

21. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated  on  20th  November
    2017 is hereby set aside for legal error.  The matter  is  remitted  to
    that Tribunal (not Judge Geraint Jones QC) for a fresh hearing.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   C E Roberts                    Date     17 April 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Roberts

