
 [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Number:
PA/10465/2016



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard at  Field House                     |Decision and Reasons  Promulgated |
|On 15th March  2017                       |                                  |
|                                          |On 3rd May 2017                   |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                 DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL FARRELLY





                                   Between


                                   MR.KAA
                                           (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                          Appellant



                                     And



               THE  SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                          Respondent



Representation:

For the Appellant:         Mr J.Dhanji, Counsel, instructed by Duncan Lewis
                    and Co,      Solicitors
For the Respondent:     Mr Parminder Singh, Presenting Officer.



Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless  the  Upper  Tribunal  or  a
Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  the  original
Appellant. This direction applies  to,  amongst  others,  all  parties.  Any
failure to comply with this direction could give rise to contempt  of  court
proceedings.




                            DECISION AND REASONS


Introduction

   1. The background to this appeal is set out in the Decision and Reasons
      in the error of law hearing of 24 January 2017.The parties are
      referred to this for details.


   2. The First-tier judge had accepted the underlying claim of events
      leading to the appellant's departure from Afghanistan. However, a
      country expert report had been submitted and the judge concluded that
      the appellant could safely live in parts of Kabul. The refusal letter
      and the parties had focused on the index event. The decision was set
      aside in fairness to the appellant to give him an opportunity to
      address the issue of his safety in Kabul as per the Directions issued.
      The practicalities of re-establishing himself and the possibility of
      renting property in a safe area are to be considered.

   3. At the resumed hearing the appellant's representative produce an
      addendum from the country expert. Maps of Kabul show neighbourhoods
      and areas of relative safety. There is a further statement from the
      appellant. There is also a statement from a member of staff of his
      legal representatives who contacted his father in Kabul by telephone.
      I also received statements from the New Kabul Bank running from
      January 2010 to November 2016 in relation to the appellant's father.

   4. The appellant's evidence was that his parents live in Kabul as do his
      five married sisters. Another married sister lives in Ghazni. The
      appellant said he came to the United Kingdom in August 2010 in order
      to study. He was allowed to work part-time up until 2015 in order to
      defray the costs. His father had met his living expenses. However, he
      claimed his family had fallen on hard times and support from home
      stopped in 2016. His father is retired and no longer has property but
      lives in rented accommodation. His parents are now supported by
      remittances sent from his brother in Canada. His father has savings of
      around US$2000.He is owed between US$4000 and US$5000 by others. The
      appellant's brother has been granted refugee status in Canada but is
      not in a position to help as he has his own family to support. He
      sends money when he can to their parents. He said the family home is
      located about 80 km from Kabul and was let but the rent has not been
      paid. He said it would not be culturally acceptable for him to live
      with his married sisters.

   5. In submissions, the presenting officer contended that the appellant
      had sought to underplay the family circumstances as this was in his
      interest. The lack of activity in the bank statements submitted was
      highlighted and it was pointed out they did not show remittances from
      Canada. When the appellant was applying for his student visa he was
      portrayed as coming from a wealthy family. His father was a property
      developer. Not only were his studies financed but he was able to
      travel backwards and forwards to Afghanistan. It was submitted that he
      could possibly live with his parents or rent. His brother in Canada
      and his sisters in Afghanistan could help him financially with the
      transition. He is educated to degree level. The presenting officer was
      sceptical of the claim that a friend would let him live for so long
      rent-free. He referred to the lack of supportive evidence of this and
      questioned how the appellant managed financially at the moment.

   6. In response, his representative refers to the high cost of
      accommodation in the safer parts of Kabul. He submitted it would not
      be safe for the appellant to live with his parents, given the history
      of threatening letters delivered there and that the Taliban maintained
      an intelligence network. He pointed out the appellant's account of
      events before he left had been found credible. Consistent with this,
      his claim about limited finance was likely to be true.

Consideration.

   7. The immigration history supports the view he came from a wealthy
      family. In order to obtain his student visas he would need to
      demonstrate financial viability. He would need to fund the tuition
      fees, maintain and accommodate himself. The fact he was in a position
      to apply for a degree course is indicative that he is not from a very
      poor family. He did not claim that the family circumstances were poor
      initially. Rather, his father was a successful property developer.
      However, he now claims the family fortunes have significantly worsened
      due to his father's age and the downturn in the economy.

   8. The original application for a student visa, valid for one year, was
      made in July 2010. Thereafter, there were repeated successful
      applications, the last of which was in July 2015. He had sufficient
      funds to return to Afghanistan the following year. When those further
      applications were made he would have needed to demonstrate financial
      viability. The statement of additional grounds dated March 2016 para 4
      describe him as coming from an educated and affluent family.

   9. His brother, MH, was born in June 1972.He held various appointments
      from 2003 with the United Nations until he left Afghanistan following
      the January 2016 index incident. There is a document in the papers
      entitled `employment verification' stating he was employed in
      Afghanistan as a contractor for the provision of services. His total
      salary per month was almost US$2000.

  10. The bank statements produced relate to one account in the name of his
      father opened in November 2010. It was at its highest in April 2011
      showing a balance of US$31,618. The transactions would indicate money
      transfers from his brother into that account in November 2010 of
      US$1250; in December 2010, $1000; in February 2011, $900 and $31, 000;
      and in March 2011, US$8500. The account has been inactive since July
      2012, with a balance thereafter of under US$2000.

  11. The country guidance decision on Afghanistan, AK (Article 15(c))
      Afghanistan CG [2012] UKUT 00163 (IAC) held that the level of
      indiscriminate violence was not at such a high level as to mean that a
      civilian, solely by being present in the country, faces a real risk.
      In assessing a claim in the context of Article 15(c) in  Kabul city ,
      it said it was necessary to take into account  not only the level of
      violence in the city but  the difficulties experienced by that city's
      poor and  the many internally displaced persons (IDPs) living there.
      However, the guidance was that those considerations would not in
      general make return to Kabul unsafe or unreasonable.

  12.  Dr Giustozzi, who has provided an expert report in the present
      appeal, gave evidence in the country guidance case. At para 176 of the
      decision, the Upper Tribunal  commenting on the report from Dr
      Giustozzi said :

         It would also have assisted if his treatment of likely
         accommodation problems facing returnees to Kabul had not assumed
         that for a single man such as the appellant there would not be the
         option of sharing a flat or rooms or quarters.


  13. The addendum report from Dr Giustozzi for this appeal is dated January
      2017. He states that the districts of Shar-e Naw and Taimani is where
      most rental property is. He states there area is populated by the
      upper middle-class and is ethnically mixed. He stated an individual
      would need US$350-US$400 monthly to rent a place. He sets out the
      rents in the different districts in a numbered table at the back of
      his report.  The $350 -400 referred to appears from the table to
      relate to Taimani and Carte Parwan, as the table records that rents
      for Sher e Naw are $1000 per month. He also states that the average
      salary is US$170 per month. He states that the area is composed of
      family houses rather than single accommodation. Again, he makes no
      reference to the possibility of sharing costs with others.


  14. I have been provided with an article from the United Nations
      Assistance Mission dated October 2016 in relation to Kabul. The
      statistics for the first three quarters of 2016 showed continuing high
      numbers of civilian casualties albeit the figures are down from the
      previous year.

  15. I have been provided was a statement from a solicitor in the firm
      representing the appellant. It relays the contents of a conversation
      with the appellant's father. His father said he was in rented
      accommodation in the Kote Sange district. The expert dos not comment
      on this district .His father complains of having poor health and goes
      to Pakistan every four-month for medical treatment. He refers to six-
      month treatment costing approximately US$300- US$400. It is not clear
      if he means this is the cost of medication. He said his son in Canada
      sends him $100-$200 intermittently.

  16. In the appellant's statement on the family finances he acknowledges
      that when he applied for entry clearance in 2010 he submitted bank
      statements showing US$18,000. He said the money had been given to him
      by his father. He said his father is now in parlous circumstances, and
      he has lost money due to falling house prices. He said this should
      mean rentals should be cheaper but they remain higher than the average
      earnings. He states that he has an accent which would put him in
      danger in certain parts of Kabul. He refers to safe areas where the
      rents are US$350 per month but he said he could not afford this.

   Conclusions.

  17.  I appreciate it can be difficult to prove a negative, namely, that
      the appellant would not have adequate resources. However, the limited
      information I have been given makes my task difficult. I find force in
      the presenting officer's point that it is in the appellant's interest
      to portray himself as in dire straits. He states his father
      circumstances have changed. The bank account he presented as his
      father's only bank account in fact shows no recent transactions. On
      the basis that the average income in Afghanistan is $170 per month his
      ability to have US$18,000 and to travel to the United Kingdom to study
      indicates the comparative wealth of his family. I find no satisfactory
      explanation has been given for their family's sudden turn in fortunes.
      He was able to travel back to Afghanistan as recently as January 2016.




  18. I do not attach weight to the statement from the appellant and that
      relayed from his father as they are self-serving and unsupported. Had
      I been provided with an active bank account showing remittances from
      Canada then I would have been better placed to make an assessment.


  19. The appellant's brother is in Canada. He was in a very well paid job
      in Afghanistan. No information has been provided about his economic
      circumstances in Canada beyond a bald statement. No details about the
      remittances have been provided. A rent of US $350 per month may be a
      lot for a worker in Afghanistan but by standards in Canada is not so
      great. No adequate explanation has been demonstrated as to why his
      brother, who has been granted refugee status in Canada, could not help
      defray these costs.

  20. The appellant has six sisters in Afghanistan, five of whom are in
      Kabul. He said it would not be socially acceptable for him to live
      with them. He is not convincingly explained why they could not
      financially help him.

  21. The background information suggests the Taleban do target workers who
      provide help with government institutions. The appellant however was
      only targeted indirectly because of his brother. It has not been
      suggested there are no safe areas in Kabul for the appellant. This was
      referred to at paragraphs 46 and 47 of the First-tier tribunal
      decision and the report from the expert. The issue has been the cost.

  22. The skeleton argument on behalf of the appellant addresses the
      question of sufficiency of protection and submits that the fact the
      Taliban fled when a police patrol appeared does not mean they would be
      sufficient protection for the appellant. Although reference is made to
      country information about police corruption and so forth I am
      influenced by the country expert report provided which does indicate
      there are areas of Kabul which could be safe for the appellant.

  23. The expectation is that the appellant could become self-sufficient by
      obtaining employment. He is educated to degree level. No health issues
      have been identified. The transition can be cushioned by help from his
      family members and any resettlement payment.

  24. I am not satisfied that the appellant has given a true account of the
      family finances. He has claimed neither his parents nor his brother
      and six sisters can help. I am not satisfied this is so. In
      particular, I was not impressed by the submission of an inactive bank
      statement which appears to have been opened to support of his original
      visa application. My conclusion is that there are areas of Kabul where
      he could reasonably relocate and live in safety. Having set the
      original decision aside so that this can be considered I remake it,
      dismissing the appeal.

Decision

The appeal is dismissed under the Refugee Convention.
The appeal is dismissed on human rights grounds.
The appeal is dismissed on humanitarian grounds.
The appeal is dismissed under the Immigration rules.

An anonymity direction is made.


Signed   FJFarrelly                          Date 26th April 2017.










