
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10942/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 1 August 2019                     |On 12 August 2019                    |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                    I K K
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss Pickering instructed by Legal Justice
Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mrs R Pettersen Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer.


                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS

    1. The appellant  appeals  with  permission  a  decision  of  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge Fox ('the Judge') promulgated  on  24  April  2019  in
       which the Judge dismissed the appellant's appeal  on  protection  and
       human rights grounds.

Background


    2. The appellant is a citizen of Namibia born on 1 July 1997 who entered
       the United Kingdom lawfully as a visitor on 18  December  2016.   The
       applicant  claimed  asylum  which  was  refused  against  which   the
       appellant appealed on 13 September 2018.

    3. The Judge sets out findings of fact from [44] of the  decision  under
       challenge.

    4. The appellant sought permission to appeal asserting,  inter  alia,  a
       failure to apply the Joint Presidential Guidance Note No. 2, 2010 and
       related case law.

    5. Permission to appeal was granted  by  another  judge  the  First-tier
       Tribunal on 6 June 2019, the relevant section  of  which  is  in  the
       following terms:

           "3.    It is apparent from [39] that  the  judge  was  addressed
                about the appellant's  vulnerability  and  the  Presidential
                Guidance about dealing with vulnerable  witnesses.   Despite
                this there is no reference in the Judge's  decision  to  the
                vulnerability (or otherwise) of the  appellant  being  taken
                into account when considering  the  appellants  credibility.
                It is arguable  in  these  circumstances  that  the  Judge's
                decision  involves  an  error  of  law  as  set  out  in  AM
                (Afghanistan) v SSHD  [2017]  EWCA  Civ  1123.  It  is  also
                arguable that the Judge has  given  inadequate  reasons  for
                treating the experts evidence  as  having  little  probative
                value."

Error of law


    6. There is no dispute that the issue of the  appellant's  vulnerability
       was raised by her representative at the start of the hearing  as  the
       Judge  clearly  records  this   in   his   Record   of   Proceedings.
       Notwithstanding, the Judge makes no  mention  at  all  of  the  Joint
       Presidential  Guidance  Note  No.2  of  2010  or  the  case   of   AM
       (Afghanistan) v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 1123.

    7. In [30-33] of AM the Court of Appeal found:

           "30.   To assist parties  and  tribunals  a  Practice  Direction
                'First-tier and Upper Tribunal Child, Vulnerable  Adult  and
                Sensitive Witnesses', was issued by  the  Senior  President,
                Sir  Robert  Carnwath,  with  the  agreement  of  the   Lord
                Chancellor  on  30  October   2008.   In   addition,   joint
                Presidential Guidance Note No 2 of 2010 was  issued  by  the
                then President of UTIAC, Blake J and the acting President of
                the  FtT  (IAC),  Judge  Arfon-Jones.  The  directions   and
                guidance contained in them are to be followed  and  for  the
                convenience of  practitioners,  they  are  annexed  to  this
                judgment. Failure to follow  them  will  most  likely  be  a
                material error of law. They are to be found in the Annex  to
                this judgment.

           31.    The PD and the Guidance Note [Guidance] provide  detailed
                guidance on the approach to be adopted by the tribunal to an
                incapacitated or vulnerable person. I agree  with  the  Lord
                Chancellor's submission that there are five key features:

                    a. the early identification of issues  of  vulnerability
                    is  encouraged,  if  at   all   possible,   before   any
                    substantive hearing through the use of a  CMRH  or  pre-
                    hearing review (Guidance [4] and [5]);

                    b. a person who is incapacitated or vulnerable will only
                    need to attend as a witness to give oral evidence  where
                    the tribunal determines that "the evidence is  necessary
                    to enable the fair hearing of the case and their welfare
                    would not  be  prejudiced  by  doing  so"  (PD  [2]  and
                    Guidance [8] and [9]);

                    c. where an incapacitated or vulnerable person does give
                    oral evidence, detailed  provision  is  to  be  made  to
                    ensure their welfare is protected before and during  the
                    hearing (PD [6] and [7] and Guidance [10]);

                    d. it is necessary to give special consideration to  all
                    of the personal circumstances  of  an  incapacitated  or
                    vulnerable person in assessing their evidence  (Guidance
                    [10.2] to [15]); and

                    e.  relevant  additional   sources   of   guidance   are
                    identified in the Guidance including from  international
                    bodies (Guidance Annex A [22] to [27]).

           32.    In addition, the Guidance at [4] and [5] makes  it  clear
                that one of the purposes  of  the  early  identification  of
                issues of vulnerability is to minimise exposure to  harm  of
                vulnerable  individuals.  The  Guidance   at   [5.1]   warns
                representatives   that   they   may   fail   to    recognise
                vulnerability and they  might  consider  it  appropriate  to
                suggest  that  an  appropriate  adult   attends   with   the
                vulnerable witness to give him or her assistance. That said,
                the primary responsibility for  identifying  vulnerabilities
                must rest  with  the  appellant's  representatives  who  are
                better placed than the Secretary of State's  representatives
                to have access to private medical and personal  information.
                Appellant's  representatives  should  draw  the   tribunal's
                attention to the PD and Guidance and should make submissions
                about  the  appropriate  directions  and  measures   to   be
                considered  e.g.  whether  an  appellant  should  give  oral
                evidence or  the  special  measures  that  are  required  to
                protect his welfare or make effective his access to justice.
                The SRA practice note of 2 July 2015 entitled  'Meeting  the
                needs of vulnerable clients' sets out how solicitors  should
                identify and communicate with vulnerable  clients.  It  also
                sets out the professional duty on  a  solicitor  to  satisfy
                him/herself that the client either does  or  does  not  have
                capacity. I shall come back to the guidance to  be  followed
                in the most difficult cases where a  guardian,  intermediary
                or facilitator may be required.

            33. Given the emphasis on the determination  of  credibility  on
                the facts of this appeal, there is particular force  in  the
                Guidance at [13] to [15]:

                    "13.    The  weight  to  be  placed  upon   factors   of
                    vulnerability may differ depending on the matter  under
                    appeal, the burden and standard of proof and whether the
                    individual is a witness or an appellant.

                    14.    Consider  the  evidence,  allowing  for  possible
                    different degrees  of  understanding  by  witnesses  and
                    appellant compared to those [who] are not vulnerable, in
                    the context of evidence from others associated with  the
                    appellant and the background evidence before you.  Where
                    there were clear discrepancies  in  the  oral  evidence,
                    consider the extent to which the age,  vulnerability  or
                    sensitivity of  the  witness  was  an  element  of  that
                    discrepancy or lack of clarity.

                    15.    The decision should record whether  the  Tribunal
                    has concluded the appellant (or a witness) is  a  child,
                    vulnerable  or  sensitive,  the  effect   the   Tribunal
                    considered the identified vulnerability had in assessing
                    the evidence before it and this whether the Tribunal was
                    satisfied whether the appellant had established  his  or
                    her case to the relevant standard of proof.   In  asylum
                    appeals, weight should be given to objective indications
                    of risk rather than necessarily to a state of mind.""

    8. The Judge is criticised for failing to set out in  the  determination
       an  explanation  for  how  the  appellant's  vulnerability  has  been
       factored into the weight to be given to the  appellant's  credibility
       or the weight to be given to the evidence.  It  is  also  argued  the
       Judge did not adequately consider the expert report.

    9. There is no indication that in making the adverse finding any  regard
       was given to the appellant's vulnerability. Miss Pickering is correct
       when referring to the fact that there is no reference in the decision
       to either the Presidential Guidance on  the  assessment  of  evidence
       from vulnerable witnesses or mention of or  specific  application  of
       the principles set out in the above case law.  It  is  therefore  not
       possible to ascertain whether the Judge did apply  relevant  guidance
       when assessing the weight to be given to the appellants evidence  or,
       even if the same was  in  the  Judge's  mind,  how  such  weight  was
       assessed in light of the vulnerability.

   10. As it is not clear an appropriate assessment of the evidence was made
       it  is  not  established  the  Judge's  findings   are   sustainable.
       Accordingly the determination shall be set aside  with  no  preserved
       findings and the appeal remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal  sitting
       at Manchester to be considered afresh by a  judge  other  than  Judge
       Fox.

Decision


   11. The First-tier Tribunal Judge materially erred in law.  I  set  aside
       the decision of the original Judge. I remit the appeal to  Manchester
       to be heard afresh by a judge other than Judge Fox.

  Anonymity.

   12. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to  rule  45(4)(i)  of
       the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.

       I make such order pursuant to  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
       (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.


Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 1 August 2019

