
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10907/2019
                                                               PA/10913/2019

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 13 March 2020                     |On 15 April 2020                     |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 ANDRIY [L]
                                  JULIA [L]
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

For the Respondent:    Mrs Koulla Degirmenci instructed by Yemets
Solicitors.


                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS


    1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission a decision  of  First-
       tier Tribunal Judge  Herbert  OBE  ('the  Judge')  promulgated  on  7
       January 2020 in which the Judge allowed the above  First  respondent,
       (AL) appeal on asylum and human rights grounds and the appeal of  the
       second respondent (JL) as a dependent pursuant to article 8 ECHR.


Background


    2. AL is a Ukrainian national born on  26  September  1979.  JL  is  his
       daughter who was born on 12 August 2000.
    3. The Judges findings, set out from [53],  can  be  summarised  in  the
       following terms:


        a. The respondent has made no attempt to verify the summonses which
           have been in its possession since 2016, despite such information
           being easily obtainable from  the  authorities  in  the  Ukraine
           [53].
        b. The expert report authenticates the documents on the balance  of
           probabilities [55].
        c. An issue with the signature  and  other  issues  raised  by  the
           expert did not undermine the authenticity of the  documents  [55
           -57].
        d. The account relied upon is credible with documents supplied more
           likely than not to be genuine meaning AL  will  face  arrest  on
           return to Ukraine and punishment for his failure to comply  with
           previous summonses [58].
        e. Detention conditions in  Ukraine  will  breach  AL's  Article  3
           rights as accepted by the respondent in the refusal letter [59].
        f. The Judge relied upon the opinion of Professor  Galiotti,  which
           was not disputed by the Presenting  Officer  that  circumstances
           have changed in Ukraine and prosecutors are much more likely  to
           open cases and courts find in their favour [60].
        g. In relation to the JL, there is a presumption that under  276ADE
           her article 8 rights become entrenched in the UK.  JL's  removal
           will be undesirable as  there  are  no  countervailing  factors.
           Pursuant to section 117B JL speaks English and is likely  to  be
           of benefit the UK economy. Her removal will not be in accordance
           with her article 8 rights [62].
        h. The appeal of AL is allowed on asylum grounds as  he  will  face
           persecution for a  Convention  reason  namely  his  aversion  to
           military service and that prosecution will amount to persecution
           and subject him to treatment in breach of article 8 ECHR [63].
        i. JL's appeal is allowed as she  forms  a  family  unit  with  her
           mother and leaving her on her own even as  a  19-year-old  woman
           would be a clear breach of article 8  and  that  of  her  father
           [64].


    4. The Secretary of State appealed asserting the Judge failed to  follow
       existing country guidance, relied solely upon the expert report,  and
       that the summons cannot be genuine and the evidence credible,  as  it
       is said the first summons was issued for  conscription  in  2002  yet
       conscription was not introduced in Ukraine until 2014.
    5. It is also asserted the Judge erred in referring to  JL's  mother  as
       being in the UK when her  last  known  residence  was  in  the  Czech
       Republic.
    6. Permission to appeal was granted by another judge of  the  First-tier
       Tribunal on 27 January 2020 on the grounds as pleaded which are  said
       to be arguable.
    7. In a Rule 24 response received on the 9 March 2020 AL and  JL  oppose
       the application asserting:


        a.  The  ground  asserting  regarding  receipt  of  a  summons  for
           conscription in 2002 is erroneous as the appellant's  claim  has
           never been that he received military call-up papers in 2002. The
           reference to 2002 is a typographical error, a claim supported at
           [4] of the decision That sets out the full dates  of  the  court
           summonses 15 October 2015, 18 March 2015, 14 March  2016  and  3
           October  2016  which  is   consistent   with   the   appellant's
           documentary evidence.
        b. At [21] of the determination where  it  is  claimed  this  error
           arises is not part of the Judge's findings.
        c. The grounds are  wrong  when  claiming  there  was  no  military
           conscription in 2002 as this was reintroduced in May 2014  after
           being stopped in October 2013 according to the CPIN.
        d. It is asserted the Judge did not find that  solely  because  the
           summons were genuine the AL faced immediate detention on  return
           to Ukraine. The Judge found both the military call-up notice and
           court determination that the appellant had  been  convicted  and
           sentenced in his absence, genuine.
        e. The grounds rely on the country guidance case of  PK  which  has
           been overturned by the Court of Appeal. The decision is in  line
           with the  current  country  guidance  of  VB  which  found  that
           although criminal convictions  were  rare  those  who  had  been
           subjected to criminal proceedings were  at  risk  on  return  to
           Ukraine. Prospects of a trial are asserted as  being  irrelevant
           as if that was the case the appellant would spend  a  period  in
           pre-trial detention centre which would place him at risk of ill-
           treatment.
        f. It was  found  that  a  convicted  draft  evader,  returning  to
           Ukraine, would come to the attention of the authorities  at  the
           airport and will be taken into detention.
        g. The Judge was entitled to  find  where  AL  had  run  away  from
           military service there was a real risk of a period in  detention
           beyond the initial period of weeks and months taken to determine
           the issue a trial and that it was unlikely  that  given  AL  had
           absconded that he will be granted.
        h. The Judge considered country guidance.
        i. It is not correct the Judge took an almost  uncritical  approach
           to the expert report which had not been  challenged  before  the
           First-Tier Tribunal.  It is  argued  the  Judge  considered  the
           expert report and the same was not challenged by the  Presenting
           Officer.
        j. The Secretary of State had been in possession of the  appellants
           documents since 2016 yet made no attempt to  verify  them  which
           the Judge was entitled to take into account.
        k. The grounds materially misread  the  Judge's  findings  at  [64]
           relating to JL.


Error of law


    8. The current country guidance relating to Ukraine is  VB  and  Another
       (draft evaders and prison conditions) Ukraine CG  [2017]  UKUT  00079
       (IAC) in which it was held that:

           (i)    at the current time it is not reasonably  likely  that  a
                draft-evader  avoiding  conscription  or   mobilisation   in
                Ukraine would face criminal  or  administrative  proceedings
                for  that  act,  although  if  a   draft-evader   did   face
                prosecution proceedings the Criminal Code  of  Ukraine  does
                provide, in Articles 335, 336 and 409, for a prison sentence
                for such an offence. It would be a matter for  any  Tribunal
                to consider, in the light of  developing  evidence,  whether
                there  were  aggravating  matters  which   might   lead   to
                imposition of an immediate custodial sentence, rather than a
                suspended  sentence  or  the   matter   proceeding   as   an
                administrative  offence  and  a  fine  being  sought  by   a
                prosecutor;


           (ii)   there is a real risk of anyone being returned to  Ukraine
                as a convicted criminal sentenced to a term of  imprisonment
                in that country being detained on arrival,  although  anyone
                convicted in absentia would probably be entitled  thereafter
                to a retrial in accordance with Article 412 of the  Criminal
                Procedure Code of Ukraine; (iii) there is a real  risk  that
                the conditions of  detention  and  imprisonment  in  Ukraine
                would subject a person returned to be detained or imprisoned
                to a breach of Article 3 ECHR.

    9. The more recent decision of the Upper Tribunal in PK  (draft  evader;
       punishment; minimum severity) Ukraine [2018] UKUT 241 was  overturned
       by the Court of Appeal in PK (Ukraine) v SSHD [2019]  EWCA  Civ  1756
       and the case remitted. The Upper Tribunal is to rehear PK on  27  and
       28  April  2020,  subject  to  the  current  disruption  to   listing
       arrangements, and so is not a decision available to the Judge in  the
       decision under challenge.
   10. It was accepted by Mrs Degirmenci that the Judge had erred in law  in
       allowing the appeal of AL on  Refugee,  Humanitarian  Protection  and
       Article 2 ECHR grounds, on the facts as found, as there is  no  legal
       basis for such findings. The country guidance case is  authority  for
       the proposition that prison/detention conditions for  those  detained
       as draft evaders are so poor that if the appellant was to be detained
       it would amount to a breach of his rights pursuant to Article 3 ECHR.
   11. The decision of the Judge to allow the appeal of AL on anything other
       than Article 3 ECHR  is  therefore  set  aside.  The  Tribunal  shall
       consider the merits of the challenge to ascertain whether  any  error
       has been made in the assessment of the Articles 3 element and, if so,
       whether it is material to the decision to allow the appeal.
   12.  The  reference  to  the  2002  summons  has  been  shown  to  be   a
       typographical error when the decision and available evidence is  read
       as a whole. No arguable legal error is made out on this ground.
   13. The Secretary of State asserts the Judge relied entirely on the  view
       set out in the expert report of Professor Galeotti dated  4  December
       2019. The Judge clearly places weight upon report [60] but it was not
       disputed by the Presenting Officer before the  Judge.  Concerns  were
       raised regarding the objectivity of Professor Galeotti by  Mr  Walker
       who claimed the weight given to his report had to  be  considered  in
       this context.
   14. The Judge was arguably wrong to conclude at [53]

           "53.   Firstly, the Home Office has since the summonses in  2016
                has made no effort to verify those documents  which  on  the
                information before me be quite easily be obtained  from  the
                Ukrainian government, from Jthe ustice [sic] system and  the
                Ukrainian Army. I take judicial note that there are a number
                of Ukrainian  asylum  seekers  in  the  United  Kingdom  and
                therefore whilst there was no  explanation  put  forward  by
                this respondent, the embassy in the Ukraine could not be  so
                overwhelmed or overburdened with work. There  is  simply  no
                explanation for this failure."

   15. Where a claimant seeks to rely on a  document  then,  in  the  normal
       course, the burden lies on the claimant to show that it is a document
       that can be relied on. The Judge fails to give adequate  reasons  for
       why on the facts of  this  case  the  burden  should  be  effectively
       reversed. There appears no engagement with the substantial number  of
       cases such as Tanveer Ahmed* [2002] UKIAT 00439 which found "there is
       no obligation on the Home Office to  make  detailed  enquiries  about
       documents produced by individual claimants.  Doubtless there are cost
       and logistical difficulties in the light of the number  of  documents
       submitted by many asylum claimants.  In the absence of  a  particular
       reason on the facts of an individual case  a  decision  by  the  Home
       Office not to make inquiries, produce in-country evidence relating to
       a particular document or scientific evidence should not give rise  to
       any presumption in favour of an individual claimant  or  against  the
       Home Office".
   16. In MJ (Singh v Belgium : Tanveer Ahmed unaffected) Afghanistan [2013]
       UKUT 253 (IAC) the Tribunal held that the conclusions of the European
       Court of Human Rights in Singh v Belgium (Application No. 33210/2011)
       neither justify nor require any departure from the guidance  set  out
       in Tanveer Ahmed [2002] Imm AR 318 (starred). The Tribunal in Tanveer
       Ahmed envisaged the existence of particular cases  where  it  may  be
       appropriate for enquiries  to  be  made.   On  its  facts  Singh  can
       properly be regarded as such a particular case.  The documentation in
       that case was clearly of a nature where verification would  be  easy,
       and the documentation came from an unimpeachable source.
   17. There is no explanation in the decision under  challenge  how  it  is
       said verification could be easily undertaken on the facts.
   18. In MA (Bangladesh) and AM (Bangladesh) [2016] EWCA Civ 175, the Court
       of  Appeal  said  the  statement  in  PJ  (Sri   Lanka)   that   'the
       circumstances of particular cases might exceptionally necessitate  an
       element of investigation' did not lay down a legal requirement that a
       case must be 'exceptional' before  such  a  duty  arose.  Rather  the
       situation, in which  such  a  duty  would  arise,  would  occur  only
       exceptionally.
   19. The Court of Session in LB, Petition for Judicial Review [2019]  CSOH
       45 has held that there was no obligation on the Home Office  to  take
       steps to verify the claimant's alleged refugee status in Italy (which
       was in issue).  It was explained (see [20]) that the case was one  in
       which it would not have been at all easy or straightforward  for  the
       Home Office to have checked the authenticity of the Italian documents
       relied upon.
   20. The respondent asserts the Judge's  finding  the  summons  and  court
       documents are genuine is contrary to the country  guidance  case  law
       yet VB found that although it  was  not  reasonably  likely  a  draft
       evader would face criminal or administrative proceedings  if  such  a
       person did face prosecution a prison sentence may result.
   21. The Upper Tribunal in the conclusions at [104 - 107] of VB write:

           "104.  It is accepted by all  as  probable  that  on  return  to
                Ukraine the two appellant's would be entitled to  a  retrial
                in the light of Professor  Bowring's  evidence.  Given  that
                they would both undoubtedly request this as a preliminary to
                challenging their prison sentences we find it probable  that
                they would be held during the process of decision-making  by
                the authorities on  this  issue  in  a  pre-trial  detention
                facility, or SIZO.  We accepted the  evidence  of  Professor
                Bowring that this would likely take a  matter  of  weeks  or
                perhaps months: it is not an entirely clear-cut legal  issue
                and not one which arises routinely and the context is one of
                a recent large turnover of judges and the  chief  prosecutor
                being new and inexperienced in this field.  We  do  not  see
                that the appellant's could possibly apply for bail until the
                issue of entitlement to a re trial has  been  determined  as
                they would until this point simply  be  convicted  offenders
                was sentences of imprisonment.


           105.   Whilst it seems highly likely the issue of a trial  would
                be eventually determined in their favour even at this  point
                whether the appellant were to be granted bail  cannot  be  a
                foregone conclusion. There is a  presumption  in  favour  of
                bail under the current criminal procedural code, however the
                appellant's have shown  themselves  persistent  avoiders  of
                military service and the Ukrainian justice  system,  and  it
                might be  is  that  the  authorities  have  chosen  to  make
                examples of them in the  context  of  their  previous  harsh
                sentences. We find a real risk that the period of  detention
                in the SIZO  would,  in  this  context,  extend  beyond  the
                initial period of weeks or months  taken  to  determine  the
                issue of the retrial in their favour.


           106.   We do not find that there is evidence to support the idea
                that ultimately, on a  retrial,  the  appellant's  would  be
                sentenced to serve a period of imprisonment. At the  current
                time this is clearly a very rare occurrence. We find  it  is
                more  likely  that  they  would  receive  an  administrative
                penalty in the form of a fine or if a criminal penalty  were
                pursued that this would ultimately  result  in  a  suspended
                sentence of imprisonment or be converted to probation.  From
                the material before the Tribunal at the current time this is
                clearly the way  proceedings  for  failure  to  do  military
                service are generally dealt with in the few cases which have
                reached this stage.


           107.   The question then  arises  as  to  whether  the  probable
                period of several months in a SIZO  on  return  to  Ukraine,
                that we find that the appellants are  likely  to  experience
                prior to this retrial, would amount to  a  real  risk  of  a
                breach in their Article 3 ECHR rights.  We  find  that  this
                would be the case following the  country  guidance  set  out
                above, most probably due to the high  likelihood  that  they
                will be held in a SIZO in overcrowded  and  materially  poor
                detention conditions."

   22. Whilst the country guidance case supports  the  Secretary  of  States
       contention that ordinarily punishment for  draft  evasion  would  not
       include a period of imprisonment the case  does  not  rule  out  that
       imprisonment may be considered an appropriate  sentence  particularly
       in a case where the draft evader  has  absconded  and  is  unable  to
       present their case to the court.
   23. AL's position is that he has been subjected to  criminal  proceedings
       and has been tried in absence on 27 November 2016 and sentenced to  2
       months imprisonment. The issue before the Judge was therefore whether
       the documents presented by AL in support of his  claim  are  genuine.
       The Judge records, in summary, the evidence of the expert in relation
       to such documents between [31 - 35] in the following terms:

           "31.   The expert states  that  he  has  seen  all  the  various
                documents and stated that the  document  presented  appeared
                genuine on the balance of probabilities. He said the  layout
                of the documents is in the style, language, font and  format
                as he has seen previously. He said that there  was  appeared
                to be an absence of receipts especially in the  early  years
                of conflict.


           32.    He said that there was a possibility that  the  signature
                for the receipt was collected in another way and it was  not
                sufficient to treat the entire  papers  as  a  fake  but  he
                brought it to the court's attention.


           33.    He said that the appellant would have been called up as a
                reservist given his age but that could  occur  in  a  lawful
                manner.


           34.    He also states that the absence of  a  signature  by  the
                appellant did not undermine the existence of  the  document.
                There was a problem since in the 2014 draft  since  refusing
                to sign was possible and therefore  alternative  signatories
                from family members were collected or by an  affidavit.  The
                expert queries the Home Office source as being from  an  NGO
                who had briefed the Canadian Refugee to  Prof  disputes  the
                fact  that  a  single  anonymous  source  who  may  have   a
                considerable expertise in Ukraine commenting in  2015  would
                not be sufficient to undermine the authenticity  of  such  a
                document.


           35.    The court summons he dealt with at paragraph 27 - 30  and
                stated that the correct address  format  and  style  of  the
                document  was  provided  and  as  was   with   the   current
                determination. He commented on the case of  VB  and  another
                (draft document-present condition) Ukraine in CG  2002  UKUT
                00079 and stated that, "Ukrainian military  prosecutors  are
                much likely to open cases on court that are likely on  their
                favour at the time. He also stated that, it is a  matter  of
                record that draft  dodgers  had  been  imprisoned.  He  also
                commented that those offenders  who  attended  court,  admit
                they are guilty or otherwise demonstrate contrition are  far
                less likely to face custodial sentences". He continues,  "of
                course, those who do no not such as Mr [L] are  more  likely
                to receive such treatment. The  expert  gives  a  number  of
                examples of draft dodgers having been  imprisoned.  He  also
                commented on the fact that they were far less likely  having
                evaded conscription to be granted bail in the interim."

   24. The opinion of an expert that just because a document may be  in  the
       correct format does not necessarily mean it is  a  genuine.  But  the
       Professor clearly gives his opinion upon her issues identified in the
       Reasons for Refusal  letter  to  impact  upon  the  validity  of  the
       document and still concludes, on the balance of  probabilities,  that
       the documents provided by AL are genuine.
   25. Although the Secretary of States disagrees with this  conclusion  the
       Court of Appeal have made it clear that the Upper Tribunal  must  not
       interfere in a decision of the First-tier Tribunal unless  a  genuine
       error of law is identified in their decision.  The  Judge's  findings
       are reasoned and the weight to be given to the evidence was a  matter
       for the Judge. Whilst the Secretary of State may consider this to  be
       unduly generous decision the problem for Mr Walker at this  stage  is
       that the Home Office Presenting Officer  before  the  Judge  did  not
       challenge the experts report at that hearing. It appears the  content
       of the report and validity of the expert were taken as read.  If  the
       Secretary of State has concerns regarding the quality of the  reports
       produced or reliability/objectivity of the same by this expert,  such
       matters need to be set out  to  enable  a  judge  to  hear  competing
       argument and adjudicate upon the same. That did  not  occur  in  this
       appeal.
   26. Neither the country guidance case nor the expert state that  a  draft
       evader will never  receive  a  prison  sentence.  Whilst  it  may  be
       unlikely that an individual may be convicted in absentia the evidence
       before the Judge did not establish that this was  impossible  or  did
       not happen.
   27. The Ground asserting the Judge allowed the appeal pursuant to article
       8 as it was found AL would face persecution due to  his  aversion  to
       military service is made out  in  light  of  the  finding  the  Judge
       allowing the appeal on  Convention  grounds  was  arguably  unlawful.
       However as the finding in relation to article 3 appears to be finding
       within the range of those available to the Judge on the  evidence  it
       is not made out that any error is material.
   28. The forthcoming country guidance case, when published, may give  more
       up-to-date clarification regarding  the  situation  concerning  draft
       evaders from Ukraine. If that establishes on the basis of the  latest
       material that there will be no breach of Article 3 in  respect  of  a
       person similar to that of AL the Secretary of State may  be  able  to
       take further action. That is a matter for the future. At this stage I
       find no arguable legal error material to the decision  to  allow  the
       appeal made out in relation to the Article 3 ECHR grounds only.
   29. Although the Grounds challenge the Article 8 findings in relation  to
       JL, it was accepted by Mr Walker that if AL's decision stood he would
       have no basis for challenging the findings relating JL.
   30. In conclusion, I find that the Judge's decision to allow AL's  appeal
       pursuant to Article 3 ECHR only has not been shown to be affected  by
       arguable material legal error. That aspect of the  decision  and  the
       decision to allow JL's appeal pursuant to Article 8 ECHR shall stand.

Decision

   31. There is no material error  of  law  in  the  Judge's  decision.  The
       determination shall stand as per [30] above.


  Anonymity.


   32. The First-tier Tribunal did  not  make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
       45(4)(i) of the Asylum and  Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
       2005.


       I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
       (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.



Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 23 March 2019
