
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
PA/10742/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields             |Decision & Reasons  Promulgated    |
|On 3 August 2017                   |On 11 August 2017                  |
|                                   |                                   |


                                   Before


                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE

                                   Between

                                    S S O
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant: Ms L Brakaj of Iris Law Firm
For the Respondent: Ms R Petterson, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

DECISION AND REASONS

1. I make an anonymity order under Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008, precluding publication of  any  information  regarding
the proceedings which would be likely to  lead  members  of  the  public  to
identify the appellant, preserving the anonymity order made  at  the  First-
tier, because the appellant is a minor.

2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  the  decision  of  First-tier
Tribunal  Judge  Cope  promulgated  on  02/03/2017,  which   dismissed   the
Appellant's appeal on all grounds.



Background


3. The Appellant was born on [  ]  2000  and  is  a  national  of  Iraq.  On
20/09/2016 the Secretary of State refused the Appellant's protection claim.


The Judge's Decision

4. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge Cope ("the Judge")  dismissed  the  appeal  against  the  Respondent's
decision.


5. Grounds of appeal were lodged and  on  02/05/2017  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
McWilliam gave permission to appeal stating

      "The appellant seeks permission to appeal against the decision of JFtT
      Cope to dismiss his appeal on asylum grounds.


      It is arguable that the Judge did not  make  findings  in  respect  of
      whether or not the appellant has family in Iraq and risk on return  in
      the context of the circumstances at the date of the hearing."

The Hearing

6. (a) Ms Brakaj, moved the grounds of  appeal.  She  told  me  that  it  is
accepted that the appellant's father  was  killed  by  Isis,  and  that  the
appellant is no longer in contact with his mother and sisters, so  that  the
appellant is a minor (his 18th  birthday  is  not  until  April  next  year)
without support.  She  told  me  that  the  Judge  failed  to  consider  the
situation facing a minor returning to IKR with no  family  support,  and  no
accommodation. She told me that the appellant is a member  of  a  particular
social group because he  is  a  vulnerable  minor.  She  told  me  that  the
respondent's  decision  forces  the  appellant  to  become   an   internally
displaced person, and that is  not  something  that  the  Judge  has  either
considered or factored into his assessment of risk on return.

(b) Ms Brakaj told me that in this case it was not sufficient to find  that,
because there is no internal armed conflict in IKR,  the  comparative  peace
there was sufficient for the appellant to return safely. She referred me  to
various pieces of the country information  guidance  reports  which  discuss
the situation around Mosul and the plight of internally  displaced  persons.
It is common ground that the appellant comes  from  Makhmur,  which  was  an
area of significant conflict. She told me that  that  is  the  area  of  the
appellant would be returning to, and  emphasised  his  vulnerability  as  an
unsupported minor. Ms Brakaj relied on AA (unattended children)  Afghanistan
CG [2012] UKUT 00016 (IAC)

(c) Ms Brakaj told me that the Judge's consideration of internal  relocation
was inadequate, and that it is unduly  harsh  to  expect  the  appellant  to
return to his home area, which has been ravaged by  conflict.  She  told  me
that it is not reasonable to expect the appellant to  relocate  within  IKR.
She emphasised that the convention reason plead is that the appellant  is  a
member of a particular social group because of his young age.  She  told  me
that the appellant's appeal should succeed on article 3  ECHR  grounds.  She
urged me to set the decision aside and substitute my own  decision  allowing
the appeal.

7. (a) Mr Petterson, for the respondent, told me  that  the  appellant  will
not be at risk on return. She told me that the  First-tier  Judge  correctly
acknowledged that the situation in Makhmur has changed since  the  appellant
left. At [54] of the decision the Judge accepts that the appellant  is  from
Makhmur and accepts that the appellant's father was killed by Isis  and  his
mother and sisters have disappeared. However, she reminded me  that  someone
from the village helped the appellant leave for the UK.  She  told  me  that
the FtT Judge had correctly acknowledged the change of  circumstances  since
the appellant left his home area.  She  told  me  that  the  appellant  will
return to the IKR as a former resident of IKR.

(b) Ms Petterson noted that it is claimed that the appellant is a member  of
a particular social group, but told me that the agent of persecution is  not
identified. She told me that the question of whether or  not  the  appellant
still has a village to return to is not argued, so  that  the  appellant  is
not an internally displaced person. She told me the  arguments  in  relation
to the reasonableness of internal relocation are without  relevance  because
the Secretary of State does not  argue  that  the  appellant  will  relocate
internally. The Secretary of State's position  is  that  the  appellant  can
return to his home area, where there is not an agent of persecution  nor  is
there a risk of persecution. She reminded me that the Judge  summarises  the
appellant's claim at [20] of the decision.

(c) Mr Petterson conceded that the  Judge  may  have  erred  in  failing  to
consider what, if any,  family  members  the  appellant  could  rely  on  on
return, but insisted that as  the  appellant  does  not  succeed  under  the
refugee convention he can safely returned to his  home  area.  She  told  me
that he might be young but he will  not  be  persecuted.  She  urged  me  to
dismiss the appeal and allow the decision to stand.

Analysis

8. The appellant's home town, Makhmur, is a town in  Iraq.  It  is  part  of
Makhmur District in Erbil Governorate. Makhmur is mainly populated by  Kurds
and Arabs. During the 2014 ISIL crisis, the town  was  taken  over  by  ISIL
militants before being regained again by combined  Kurdish  forces,  led  by
the Kurdistan Workers' Party. A volunteer civilian  militia  to  defend  the
town in the future was started in response

9. When the  appellant  lodged  a  notice  of  appeal  with  the  First-tier
Tribunal, his appeal was made specifically  on  the  basis  of  his  imputed
political opinion. No other convention reason was argued.  At  [20]  of  the
decision  the  Judge  summarises  the  appellant's  case  and  records   the
submissions made to him. It is clear that the appellant claimed proceeds  on
the basis of a fear of Isis, and that the convention reason was his  imputed
political opinion. Today I am told that the convention reason is  membership
of a particular social group because of his age.

10. In LQ (Age: immutable characteristic)  Afghanistan  [2008]  UKAIT  00005
the Tribunal found that a  person's  age  is  an  immutable  characteristic.
Although it changes constantly, one can oneself do nothing  to  change  what
it is at any particular time.

11. In the rule 24 response the respondent says

      "The respondent  does  not  oppose  the  appellant's  application  for
      permission to appeal and invites the tribunal to determine the  appeal
      with a fresh oral (continuance) hearing. The Judge  did  not  consider
      whether the appellant had family to return  to  at  the  date  of  the
      hearing and whether the appellant at the date of the  hearing  was  at
      risk on return for a convention reason as he was still a minor."

12. The Judge writes a careful,  well-reasoned,  decision  with  sustainable
findings of fact. For the clear reasons given,  the  Judge  finds  that  the
appellants appeal cannot succeed on the basis that is placed before him.  At
[56] the Judge correctly identifies  the  appellant's  home  area.  He  then
moves on to consider the background materials and at [65] explains  that  he
will consider the changed circumstances which were apparent at the  date  of
hearing.

13. At [71] the Judge gives clear reasons for rejecting the submission  that
the appellant comes from a part of Iraq occupied by Isis. Between  [72]  and
[76] the Judge finds that the appellant is less than 18  years  of  age  and
has lost his family.

14. What is absent from the  consideration  between  [72]  and  [76]  is  an
analysis of the circumstances the appellant would  face  on  return  to  his
home area. It is accepted that the appellant is a minor  who  has  lost  his
family. The background materials indicate that  the  appellant's  home  area
was a battleground until it was recovered by  peshmerga  and  Iraqi  forces.
Further fact-finding is required to assess whether the appellant has a  home
to return to, and if he has not whether it is reasonable for  the  appellant
to relocate to another area of IKR.

15. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that it is  arguable  that
there are inadequate findings on whether or not the appellant has family  in
Iraq, and the quality of the assessment of risk on return. In  the  rule  24
note the respondent  partially  concedes  the  appeal  and  accepts  that  a
further oral hearing is necessary to consider those issues.

16. I therefore find that the decision is tainted by  a  material  error  of
law.  I  must  therefore  set  the  decision  aside,  however  there  is  no
justifiable criticism of the Judge's  fact-finding  exercise.  There  is  no
challenge to the Judge's rejection of the appellant's claim to have a  well-
founded fear of persecution because of  his  imputed  political  opinion.  I
therefore find that the  Judge's  findings  of  fact  will  stand.  What  is
required in this case is a further assessment of risk  in  relation  to  the
degree of support the appellant might have if returned to IKR,  and  quality
of  reception  the  appellant  would  have  as  a  minor  in  IKR.   Further
consideration must be given to the reasonableness of return and the risk  of
rendering the appellant a displaced person.

 Remittal to First-Tier Tribunal

17. Under Part 3 paragraph 7.2(b) of the Upper Tribunal  Practice  Statement
of the 25th of September 2012 the case may be  remitted  to  the  First-tier
Tribunal if the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that:

   (a) the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before the First-
   tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other  opportunity  for  that  party's
   case to be put to and considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or


   (b) the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding which is necessary
   in order for the decision in the appeal to be re-made is such that,
   having regard to the overriding objective in rule 2, it is appropriate to
   remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

18. In this case I have determined that the case should be remitted  because
the assessment of risk to this appellant on return needs to be completed.

19. I remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal sitting at  North  Shields
to be heard before any First-tier Judge other than Judge Cope.

Decision

20. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is tainted by a  material  error
of law.

21. I set aside the Judge's  decision  promulgated  on  2  March  2017.  The
Judge's findings of fact are preserved. The appellant's appeal  is  remitted
to the First-tier Tribunal so that an assessment of risk on  return  can  be
completed.

Signed                Paul Doyle
  Date  8 August 2017
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle

