
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10639/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester CJC              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 3rd April 2019                    |On 4th June 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                   mr s s
                         (ANONYMITY direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. J. Dhanji (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr. A. McVeety, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against a decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge O. R.
    Williams promulgated on 18th December  2018,  following  a  hearing  at
    Manchester on 23rd November 2018.  In the decision, the judge dismissed
    the appeal of  the  Appellant,  whereupon  the  Appellant  subsequently
    applied for, and  was  granted,  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Afghanistan, and was born on  [~]
    1982.  He appealed against the decision of the Respondent refusing  his
    application for asylum and  for  humanitarian  protection  pursuant  to
    paragraph 339C of HC 395.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The Appellant's claim is that in 2016 a Taliban judge visited his house
    in Afghanistan and asked him to  pay  money  for  the  expenses  of  an
    Islamic school, which the Appellant  undertook  to  do,  only  to  then
    subsequently realise that the money was  being  misused  for  different
    purposes.  The Appellant himself held a senior position in the Etisalat
    Telecom company, and this being so, he  was  in  September  2017,  also
    asked by the Taliban to monitor the telephone  numbers  of  Afghan  and
    foreign officials, which he refused  to  do.   In  November  2017,  the
    Appellant then attended his graduation at the University of London, and
    then returned back to Afghanistan.  In December  2017  he  attended  an
    ACCA event in Kabul, and became the first Afghan national to  become  a
    member of the ACCA, with a Masters Degree in Chartered Accountancy from
    the UK, and the event was even broadcast and shown on  Afghan  national
    TV channels.

 4. On 14th December 2017, he was in receipt of a letter from  the  Taliban
    threatening him, whereupon he went to the Kabul police, but did not get
    any help, and even complained to the local MP to no avail.

 5. Between January and February 2018, the Appellant left  Afghanistan  for
    the second time, travelling  to  Dubai,  and  then  returning  back  to
    Afghanistan in March 2018.  After he had  arrived  in  March  2018,  he
    received a telephone call from  the  Taliban  asking  him,  if  he  had
    received a threatening letter from them, and proceeding to threaten him
    further, requiring him to obey the Taliban demands.

 6. Later that month he was attacked by three Taliban members who attempted
    to abduct him.  This attempted kidnapping failed because members of the
    public came running towards the Taliban, whereupon they ran away.

 7. In March 2018 he also, towards the end of the month, received a  second
    threatening letter telling him that he would be killed with his family,
    because he was thought to be a British spy who had trained spies at the
    American University in Afghanistan.   At  the  end  of  March  2018  he
    contacted the police but they again refused to help him.  On  the  last
    day of March he received  a  further  text  message  from  the  Taliban
    warning him to accept the demands.

 8. He was attacked  by  Taliban  members  in  April  2018  and  physically
    assaulted.  He made a written complaint to the police in April.  In mid-
    April, he finally left Afghanistan arriving  at  Heathrow  Airport,  to
    claim asylum.



The Judge's Decision

 9. The judge's decision essentially consists of three  major  findings  of
    fact against the Appellant.  First, it was  said  that  notwithstanding
    his being encountered by the Taliban for the first time in April  2016,
    whereby he was issued with multiple demands, he did not experience  any
    further problems from them until April 2018.  This  was  despite  being
    frequently contacted by  them.   Given  that  this  is  the  case,  the
    Appellant's account was not consistent with what the  country  guidance
    case of AS (Safety of  Kabul)  Afghanistan  CG  [2018]  UKUT  118,  had
    established.

10. This case makes it clear (as set out in Dr Giustozzi's expert report at
    A/B, B37) that:-

         "if the Taliban need somebody's services, they can only use him  if
         they can convince or coerce them cooperate.  But if they failed  to
         convince or coerce  that  individual,  they  would  first  formally
         warned him and then insert him in their blacklist,  which  includes
         people who could be targeted by the Taliban's assassination  teams"
         (see paragraph 20 of the judge's decision).

    The judge went on to say that "It is reasonably likely that the Taliban
    would not have, "delayed acting for 2 years" if the Appellant's account
    was as described.




11. Second, it was said that  the  Appellant's  account  was  not  credible
    because he had twice left his country, once in November 2017  and  then
    in March 2018, only to return back to Afghanistan, and without changing
    his telephone number so as to avoid having to receive  any  threatening
    telephone calls, leaving his claim to be lacking in credibility.




12. Third, in relation to the medical evidence, he had argued that  he  was
    suffering  from  depression,  but  there  was  no  evidence  that   the
    psychologist had pinpointed any more serious a mental disability,  such
    as would make his return back to Afghanistan a violation of  his  human
    rights (paragraph 22).


13. For all these three reasons, the appeal was dismissed.

Grounds of Application

14. The Grounds of Application state that the judge failed to consider  the
    relevant parts of the country guidance case and  the  expert  evidence;
    did not apply these points to the consideration  of  the  Taliban  that
    letters which were accepted as having been received by  the  Appellant;
    and did not consider the expert report in its entirety.

15. On 5th February 2019 permission to appeal was granted.

Submissions

16. At the hearing before me on 3rd April 2019,  Mr  Dhanji,  appearing  on
    behalf of the Appellant, began by drawing attention to  the  fact  that
    the Appellant had been teaching at the American  University  in  Kabul,
    and had been a Senior Manager at Etisalat in Afghanistan, and was their
    Head of Finance, and had been earning as much as $6,500 per month  (see
    paragraph 30 of the decision).   His  ACCA  accountancy  qualification,
    together with his Masters Degree was from the UK.  He had  appeared  in
    broadcasts in TV and social media in Afghanistan.  He had even attended
    in November 2017 upon his graduation ceremony in the UK.  However,  the
    judge's findings, that the Appellant's claim that he was now at risk of
    ill-treatment, on  the  basis  that  what  he  had  described  was  not
    consistent with the country guidance case, was flawed.  Mr Dhanji  gave
    me the following reasons for this.

17. First, if one looks at the country  guidance  case  of  AS  (Safety  of
    Kabul) Afghanistan CG [2018] UKUT 118, here the Upper Tribunal makes it
    clear (at paragraphs 71 and 77), the modus operandi of the Taliban.  In
    particular, what is said (at paragraph 73) is as follows, namely, that:-



         "The Taliban introduced a new system from around  2006,  which  has
         been quite mature  from  2010,  for  the  identification,  warning,
         trying and sentencing of persons before a sentence is carried  out.
         Those who are targeted are limited to those who have  already  been
         sentenced by a Taliban court.  Once a sentence has been imposed  it
         remains forever until carried out.  It is only those who have  been
         warned and sentenced  who  can  legitimately  be  targeted  by  the
         Taliban."

    In this case, submitted Mr Dhanji,  the  Appellant  had  actually  been
    forewarned before he was targeted.  He  had  two  letters  and  a  text
    before he was attacked.

18. Second, the judge had referred to paragraph 77 of AS, but had failed to
    quote the relevant parts in full.  Then in the full, what paragraph  77
    said was that:-

         "The  sentence  takes  the  shape  of  a  third  letter  or  verbal
         communication [and in this case the  Appellant  received  a  text],
         passed on to the collaborator or somebody close to him.  A sentence
         implies that the individual has been added to the  blacklist.   Not
         all of those who received warnings would be added to the blacklist,
         as it allowed people an opportunity to change or repent, or to make
         deals with the Taliban instead.  A person  could  not  be  targeted
         simply because they were a relative of a person who is a target  or
         a threat to the Taliban.  Dr Giustozzi  assumed  that  the  details
         included on the blacklist would be a person's name,  father's  name
         and place of birth as that is the usual way to identify  people  in
         Afghanistan."

19. This particular quotation, submitted Mr Dhanji, had not been recited by
    Judge Williams.  The failure of the judge  to  direct  himself  and  to
    consider the entirety of this paragraph in AS,  rendered  his  decision
    unsustainable (at  paragraph  20  of  the  decision),  when  the  judge
    concluded that the Appellant "... would not have been  kept  alive"  by
    the Taliban.  It was not as simple as  that.   The  Appellant  was  not
    being  kept  alive.   He  was  forewarned  and  was  being  given   the
    opportunity to repent and to amend his ways.  This much is allowed  for
    in the country guidance case of AS if  paragraph  77  is  read  in  its
    entirety.  The sentence to which the Appellant was subjected was  dated
    26th March 2018 and what came before it was harassment and coercion  by
    the Taliban.

20. Third, it is true and the judge had referred to the  two  letters  (see
    the Appellant's bundle at pages 79 to 83) that the Appellant  had  been
    sent by the Taliban.  The judge did  not,  however,  consider  the  two
    letters in the proper fashion.  The second of the  two  letters,  which
    was dated 26th March 2018, gave the Appellant an opportunity to  comply
    with the demands, because it is clear that, "... otherwise  [he]  would
    be assassinated ...".  Given that this  was  so,  this  was  remarkably
    similar to what paragraph 77 of AS had actually  stated,  in  that  the
    Appellant was being given an opportunity to "... to change  or  intent,
    or to make deals with the Taliban".  In this respect, paragraph  78  of
    AS was also relevant, but the judge did not explain adequately its true
    implications, because that paragraph allowed  the  Appellant  to  avail
    himself of what was said in AS (Afghanistan).

21. What paragraph 78 of AS (Afghanistan) stated was that:-

         "Dr Giustozzi's evidence on whether a person could be removed  from
         the blacklist was that this was possible only in one of  two  ways.
         First, by death and secondly,  by  contribution  to  the  Taliban's
         cause in such a  way  that  the  individual  would  be  offered  an
         amnesty.  In his written report, he said that sentences issued from
         1996 onwards remained valid and would be implemented by the Taliban
         whenever possible and that events a significant time  in  the  past
         would not affect that.  However, the  likelihood  of  a  particular
         target being picked from the blacklist  depends  on  the  Taliban's
         operational environment and in oral  evidence,  he  stated  that  a
         person who had done something a long  time  ago  and  had  a  lower
         profile would be a lower priority for the Taliban as they would  be
         likely to pose a lesser risk of damage to them."

    This also, submitted Mr Dhanji, explained why  the  Appellant  was  not
    immediately attacked.  He posed a lesser risk of damage to them.

22. Finally, insofar as the medical evidence was concerned, the entirety of
    the expert report was not considered.  The judge wrongly concluded that
    the Taliban's delay "... in implementing their threats ... does not sit
    well with the expert report" (paragraph 20), but more importantly,  the
    GP's report that the judge refers to,  is  only  partially  considered,
    because reference is made to, "... poor sleep and  stress/tension,  has
    nightmares ...".  What also  needs  recognising  (see  the  Appellant's
    bundle at page 41) is the GP's reference to "headaches likely  tension,
    would like psychotherapy - refer if not  improving  symptoms  and  mood
    low, see again to discuss anti-depressants" (letter  dated  25th  April
    2018).  The judge did have before  him  notes  from  the  psychological
    therapist (see Appellant's bundle at pages 42 to 43).   It  would  have
    been clear from those notes that the Appellant was  actually  suffering
    from PTSD.  This was linked to the Appellant's personal experiences  in
    Afghanistan.  The judge has not assessed this  evidence.   He  has  not
    evaluated the reference to PTSD evidence.  He has in fact dismissed  it
    and taken a narrow view of the expert report, taking the view that  the
    expert had not had "... sight of the Appellant and Respondent's bundles
    in order for the opinion to be fully considered and carry weight".

23. For his part, Mr McVeety submitted that the reference  to  the  country
    guidance case of AS (Afghanistan) would all be very  well,  except  for
    the fact that this is a case  where  the  Appellant  had  already  been
    attacked before the  threatening  letters  were  sent  to  him  by  the
    Taliban.  The chronology which the judge sets  out  (at  paragraph  11)
    draws attention to how, "On 21 March 2018, the Appellant  was  attacked
    by three Taliban members [who] attempted to abduct him" (see  paragraph
    11xii).  It was only after that when a second  threatening  letter  was
    sent on 26th March 2018 (see paragraph 11xiii).   This  threatened  the
    Appellant with the killing of the Appellant alongside  his  family,  on
    ground that he was a British spy.  Therefore, the  Appellant's  account
    of how he had been targeted was  simply  not  in  compliance  with  the
    country guidance case of AS (Afghanistan).

24. Moreover, the Appellant claimed that  when  there  was  an  attempt  to
    abduct him on 21st March 2018, he escaped the kidnapping "when  members
    of the public came running towards them the Taliban  left  him  on  the
    street and escaped" (paragraph 11xii).  This flies in the face  of  the
    country guidance case, which recognises that the Taliban is not  afraid
    of members of the public and do not heed them  when  they  set  out  to
    kidnap people.  As for the medical evidence, the fact remained that the
    general practitioner saw no  depression.   There  was  only  a  one-off
    reference to the Appellant  going  to  the  GP  and  complaining  about
    headaches.

25. In reply, Mr Dhanji submitted that the fact remained  that  there  were
    two threatening letters followed by a text message.  The Appellant  was
    attacked between the two.  However, this is not inconsistent  with  the
    country guidance case of AS (Afghanistan).   It was  accepted  that  if
    the account given by the Appellant was not actually  inconsistent  with
    the relevant paragraph cited in AS (Afghanistan),  then  what  one  was
    left with were the two additional reasons (given at paragraphs  21  and
    22) by the judge for refusing the appeal, and upon  close  examination,
    it was clear that these reasons did not hold up.

Error of Law

26. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007), such that I  should  set  aside  the  decision  and  remake  the
    decision.  My reasons are as follows.

27. First, the judge has taken the view that,  even  though  the  Appellant
    came to the attention of the Taliban in April 2016, following which  he
    refused multiple demands by them, he was not attacked until April 2018.
     The point here is, as demonstrated by the country guidance case of  AS
    (Afghanistan), that once targeted, a person is given an opportunity  to
    relent and mend their ways.  However,  once  targeted,  the  person  in
    question remains upon the blacklist so that even those  who  have  been
    issued  with  sentences  from  1996  onwards,  remained  at  risk  (see
    paragraph 78 of AS).

28. It would have been otherwise, if the Appellant had  not  been  attacked
    after being warned and having had  a  sentence  against  him.   He  was
    attacked after a threatening letter, and  an  attempt  to  abduct  him.
    Importantly, he was attacked after two  letters,  and  a  further  text
    message,  in  April  2018  when  four  Taliban  members  assaulted  the
    Appellant.  There is nothing  in  Dr  Giustozzi's  expert  report  that
    suggests that delaying acting for two years actually  suggests  that  a
    person is not at risk.  The Appellant received two letters (pages 79 to
    83 of the Appellant's bundle), and was given an opportunity  to  comply
    with the demands of the Taliban, "otherwise [he] would be  assassinated
    ...".

29. This is exactly what AS (Afghanistan) makes clear at paragraph  77,  in
    stating that a person would be given time to repent or  to  make  deals
    with the Taliban.  In  the  same  way,  Dr  Giustozzi  recognises  that
    sentences issued in 1996 "remained valid and would  be  implemented  by
    the Taliban whenever possible".   In  fact,  "a  person  who  had  done
    something a long time ago and had a lower  profile  would  be  a  lower
    priority for the Taliban as they would be likely to pose a lesser  risk
    of damage to them" (see paragraph 78 of AS (Afghanistan)).

30. Accordingly, if one considers the general import  of  how  the  Taliban
    proceeds, with a view to gradually moulding people to help assist them,
    it is clear that the Appellant's account was not improbable.  One  has,
    after all, to exercise "anxious scrutiny" in protection claims of  this
    kind.  I accordingly find, that the reasons given at  paragraph  20  by
    the judge mischaracterises the import of AS (Afghanistan), and fails to
    give credit to the Appellant's account as it is put, as  one  which  is
    not automatically to be disbelieved, simply because it does  not  tally
    with what the Tribunal said in AS (Afghanistan).

31. Second, that leaves the remaining  reasons  given  by  the  judge.   Of
    these, the first one (at paragraph 21) deals with the Appellant  having
    left Afghanistan in November 2017 to come to the UK for his  graduation
    ceremony, and then having left Afghanistan in  March  2018,  to  go  to
    Dubai.  What the judge states here is that, "it  is  reasonably  likely
    that the  Appellant  would  have  taken  active  steps  to  change  his
    telephone number to prevent  threatening  telephone  calls".   However,
    this does not necessarily follow.  Another person  in  the  Appellant's
    position may well have done so.  The fact that the  Appellant  did  not
    himself do so, does not mean to say that  the  Appellant  is  for  that
    reason alone lacking in credibility.  The Appellant may well have taken
    the view that changing  his  telephone  number,  did  not  prevent  the
    Taliban sending him letters of threats, or reaching out at him in other
    ways.

32. Of  the  second  reason  given  (paragraph  22),  namely,  the  medical
    evidence, I accept that there is a reference to the Appellant suffering
    from PTSD, which the judge has not taken into account.  However,  there
    was documentation (see B59 to B60) which the judge has not  considered,
    and he has not considered the documentation (at B41) such as  the  GP's
    notes in  its  entirety,  because  only  reference  to  depression  and
    sleeping is made.  There is no reference to PTSD.  What is indeed  said
    is  that  there  is  "no  mention  of  any  active  depression/anxiety"
    (paragraph 22).  The Appellant had, after all, asked for a referral  to
    a psychotherapist, and the judge's view was that  this  is  a  step  he
    would take if the Appellant was not seen to be improving (see letter of
    25th April 2018).

Notice of Decision

33. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law (see Section 12(1) of TCEA 2007),  such  that  I  set
    aside the decision.  I remake the decision as follows.  This appeal  is
    remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal, to be determined by  a  judge
    other than Judge Williams pursuant to Pracitce Statement 7.2(b) of  the
    Practice Directions.

34. An anonymity direction is made.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 30th May 2019




