
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10336/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5 June 2019                       |On 17 June 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HUTCHINSON


                                   Between

                                   mr a n
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms J Fisher, Counsel, instructed by Duncan Lewis &
Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr J McGirr, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Iran born 11 March 1982, who appealed  to
    the First-tier Tribunal against the decision of the respondent dated  6
    August 2018 to refuse the appellant's  fresh  claim.   In  a  decision,
    promulgated on 26 March 2019, Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Courtney
    dismissed the appellant's protection claim on all grounds.

Grounds of Appeal

 2. The appellant appeals with permission from the First-tier  Tribunal  on
    the grounds that the First-tier Tribunal erred:

          i) in finding that the appellant could be expected to  lie  about
             the existence of his Facebook account;

         (ii) in finding that the appellant had not shown that his  Facebook
             account was still extant and visible to the public at large;

         (iii)    in concluding that the appellant was lying as  to  whether
             he genuinely held anti-regime views;

         (iv) in not affording the appellant an opportunity  to  comment  on
             the issue of whether he had created the  Facebook  entries  in
             bad faith;

         (v)  in the reasons given for rejecting the expert's conclusions in
             relation to the court summons;

         (vi) in rejecting the expert's conclusions in relation to the death
             certificate and in the findings more generally in relation  to
             the death certificate, where it was argued that the judge  had
             misunderstood the evidence,  including  as  to  the  dates  in
             question.

Error of Law Decision

 3. Mr McGirr conceded at the outset of the appeal that that the judge  had
    gone awry in effectively requiring the appellant to lie at [81] of  the
    decision and reasons and he considered that grounds (i) to (iv) of  the
    appellant's grounds were properly arguable and  not  contested  by  the
    respondent.

 4. Mr McGirr initially contested that the judge's reasoning in relation to
    the appellant's activities in Iran could stand  and  initially  opposed
    therefore grounds (v) and (vi). However, following the submissions made
    by Ms Fisher he reversed his approach.

 5. Those submissions focussed, in particular, in relation to  the  judge's
    treatment of the expert evidence  and  the  failure  to  give  adequate
    reasons for rejecting that evidence, including her misunderstanding  of
    the expert's expertise in document assessment. Ms Fisher submitted this
    went to the heart of the appellant's claim, if the expert's evidence in
    relation to the expert report had been accepted, which she submitted it
    should have been,  in  respect  of  the  authenticity  of  the  summons
    provided.  Similarly, with ground 6, it was Ms Fisher's submission that
    the judge had misunderstood  the  evidence  and  had  not  given  valid
    reasons for rejecting the expert's conclusions in respect of the  death
    certificate and had misunderstood the evidence in relation to the  date
    of death (referring to paragraph 20 of page 155 of the appellant's main
    bundle).

 6. It was also Ms Fisher's submission  that  had  the  judge  applied  the
    proper standard of proof  in  relation  to  the  expert's  evidence  in
    respect of the  report  in  general,  noting  that  the  judge  wrongly
    required the expert to be able to make a "definitive judgment" at [47],
    she argued that a different conclusion would have been reached.

 7. Having heard the submissions Mr  McGirr  quite  properly  conceded  the
    remaining grounds of appeal and submitted that  the  appeal  should  be
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing.

 8. I agree that the judge materially erred both in the approach  at  [81],
    to what the appellant should be required to do or say on return to Iran
    (see including RT (Zimbabwe) and others v Secretary of  State  for  the
    Home Department [2012] UKSC 38 and  paragraph  457  of  AB  and  Others
    (internet activity - state of evidence) Iran [2015] UKUT  0257  (IAC));
    and in respect of the appellant's claimed activities in  Iran,  in  the
    failure to give adequate reasons for rejecting the expert  report  from
    Dr Kakhki, including a  lack  of  adequate  reasons  for  rejecting  Dr
    Kakhki's claimed expertise/experience in authenticating documents  (the
    reasons given appearing to  misunderstand/overlook  the  extent  of  Dr
    Kakhki's experience in this area.

Notice of Decision

 9. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error of law and is
    set aside.  No findings of fact are preserved, given that these  errors
    go to the heart of the  judge's  decision,  both  in  relation  to  the
    appellant's claimed activities in Iran and Sur Place activities.  Given
    the nature and extent of  the  fact-finding  required,  the  appeal  is
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal, other than to Judge Courtney,  for
    hearing de novo.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date 14 June 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As no fee was paid no fee award is made.


Signed                                  Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson
