
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10731/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Civil Justice    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Centre                               |                                     |
|On 6 August 2019                     |On 19th August 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN


                                   Between

                                     EOO
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. Z. Jafferji, Counsel, instructed by French &
Company
For the Respondent:    Mr. D. Mills, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision of First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Clarke who, in a decision promulgated on 25 February
    2019, dismissed the Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's
    decision to refuse a grant of asylum.

 2. As this is an asylum appeal, I continue the anonymity direction made in
    the First-tier Tribunal.

 3. Permission to appeal was granted as follows:

         "In reading the determination as a whole it is difficult to discern
         what findings of fact have been made by the judge.  At [20] it was
         accepted that the appellant's husband had been made chairman of the
         oil company but she finds that there is no specific separate
         finding relating to the appellant and fails to take into account
         the acceptance at [24] of the refusal letter that the appellant was
         the managing director of the company.

There has arguably been a general lack of engagement with the facts and
inadequate findings of fact.  Internal relocation was a major element in
this appeal but the judgment did not consider this."

 4. The Appellant attended the hearing.  I heard submissions from both
    representatives.  In his submissions, Mr. Mills accepted that, while he
    considered it almost inevitable that the Appellant's appeal would fail
    on the basis of internal relocation, he could not say that it was so
    inevitable that the errors in the decision, which were clear, were not
    material.

 5. I thanked Mr. Mills for his approach.  I stated that I found the
    decision involved the making of material errors of law.  I set the
    decision aside.

Error of Law

 6. I do not intend to go through all of the errors in the decision, but
    will focus on two areas where the Judge has erred.

 7. The previous decision of the First-tier Tribunal, which related to the
    Appellant's husband, was relevant.  It was necessary to apply
    Devaseelan principles.  However, as identified at [19] of the decision,
    there were three areas which required re-examination.  Although the
    previous decision was the starting point, this was an appeal by the
    Appellant, not her husband, and the basis of appeal was different.

 8. At [20] the Judge states:

         "Turning to the first of these issues: at paragraph 49 of his
         determination Judge Povey accepts, having considered the
         documentary evidence before him, that the Appellant's husband is
         the Chairman of [the oil company].  There is no specific separate
         finding in respect of the Appellant, but the alleged threats faced
         by the Appellant are as a result of her husband's business
         interests and religion and the Appellant states that she was often
         sitting next to her husband during these attacks.  I have no other
         cogent information before me.  I therefore find that this issue was
         considered and rejected by Judge Povey in November 2015 and I find
         there has been no material change in the factual situation and I
         make findings in line with that decision."

 9. In the second sentence of this paragraph the Judge states that there is
    no specific separate finding in respect of the Appellant.  However, at
    the end of the paragraph she states, "I make findings in line with that
    decision".  I find that this is internally inconsistent.  On the one
    hand she has found that there was no specific separate finding in
    respect of the Appellant, but on the other hand she has made findings
    in line with that decision.

10. The Judge also neglects to consider in this paragraph that at [24] of
    the reasons for refusal letter the Respondent accepted that the
    Appellant was the managing director of the oil company.  Therefore, not
    only has the Judge been internally inconsistent in this paragraph, as
    set out above, but she has failed to take into account the acceptance
    by the Respondent that the Appellant was the managing director of the
    oil company.  I find that this is a material error of law.

11. Further, in this paragraph, the Judge states that there was "no other
    cogent information" before her.  This indicates that she has not taken
    into account either the evidence of the Appellant, or the evidence of
    the expert.  The Judge deals with the evidence of the expert from [26]
    to [30].  She states that she does not find the report to be
    persuasive, and attaches little weight to its conclusions.  However, I
    find that inadequate reasons are given for not relying on the expert
    report.

12. Mr. Jafferji referred me to section 7 of the expert report, which
    covered the issues that the oil company had faced in Nigeria, section
    8, which dealt with the issue of the Appellant returning as a Christian
    to Nigeria, section 9, which referred to the position of a lone woman
    returning to Nigeria, and section 10, which referred to protection from
    the authorities.  I find that the Judge has failed to give reasons for
    not accepting any of this evidence.  As was pointed out, the expert
    report was properly referenced.  The Judge does not appear to have
    given any consideration to sections 7 to 10 of the report, sections
    which were all relevant to the Appellant's appeal.

13. These sections were particularly relevant to the issue of internal
    relocation, which is of paramount importance in this appeal.  Whereas
    at [33] the Judge cites the Country Information, Nigeria: Women fearing
    gender based harm or violence, and quotes from it "the individual
    circumstances of each case will need to be taken into account", she
    then fails to do this.  There is no proper consideration of the
    Appellant's individual circumstances.  I find that the Judge has not
    engaged with the issue of internal relocation at all, either by
    reference to the Appellant's evidence or by reference to the expert
    report.

14. I find, as set out in the grant of permission to appeal, that the Judge
    has not properly engaged with the Appellant's case.  She relied on the
    case of Devaseelan but failed properly to take into account that the
    determination of Judge Povey was in relation to the Appellant's
    husband, and that the Appellant's circumstances were different.
    Indeed, the decision of Judge Povey does not refer to the Appellant at
    all, even though the Appellant was dependent on her husband's appeal.

15. I find that the decision involves the making of material errors of law.
     I have taken account of the Practice Statement dated 10 February 2010,
    paragraph 7.2.  This contemplates that an appeal may be remitted to the
    First-tier Tribunal where the effect of the error has been to deprive a
    party before the First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other
    opportunity for the party's case to be put to and considered by the
    First-tier Tribunal.  Given the nature and extent of the fact-finding
    necessary to enable this appeal to be remade, and having regard to the
    overriding objective, I find that it is appropriate to remit this case
    to the First-tier Tribunal.

Decision

16. The decision involves the making of material errors of law and I set
    the decision aside.

17. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be reheard de
    novo.

18. The appeal is not to be listed before Judge Clarke or Judge Povey.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date 12 August 2019

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain


