
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: PA/10593/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Field House                          |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 26th June 2019                    |On 28th June 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY


                                   Between

                                     MH
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms V Easty, of Counsel, instructed by Elder Rahimi
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms S Cunha, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    Introduction

    1. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born in  September  1982.  He
       claimed asylum on 19th February 2018 and was refused in  a  decision
       dated 31st July 2018. His appeal against the decision was  dismissed
       by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  NMK  Lawrence  in  a  determination
       promulgated on the 14th November 2018.

    2. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal  Judge  Davey  on
       21st March 2019 on the basis that it was arguable  that  the  First-
       tier judge had erred in law and that all grounds may be  argued.  It
       was directed that Mr Hodson, who had represented before  the  First-
       tier Tribunal would need to make a statement and could not represent
       the applicant at the permission hearing. That direction was repeated
       in directions of Upper Tribunal Judge Finch, with a  time  direction
       of 14 days of notice of this decision, and she  also  directed  that
       the record of proceedings of Judge Lawrence be served on the parties
       within 7 days; that the Home Office Presenting  Officer  present  at
       the hearing in the First-tier Tribunal, Mr Bassi,  should  file  and
       serve a copy of his record of the hearing within  7  days;  and  the
       matter was transferred to Field House to be listed  in  coordination
       with Mr Hodson.

    3. The matter came  before  me  to  determine  whether  the  First-tier
       Tribunal had erred in law.

Submissions - Error of Law

    4. The grounds of appeal contend in short summary as follows.

    5. Firstly, that  at  paragraph  14  of  the  decision  the  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge misrepresents what was said in the  appeal  statement
       to make it appear to say the appellant left Pakistan  for  Dubai  in
       April 2008 fearing persecution when in fact, consistently with  past
       statements he said he felt he would have better  work  opportunities
       and avoid the general insecurity in Pakistan by  moving.   There  is
       also  a  misrepresentation  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  at
       paragraphs 16 and 17 that in this statement the  appellant  says  he
       feared persecution in Pakistan when he visited there after moving to
       Dubai.

    6. Secondly, it is contended that the First-tier Tribunal Judge  failed
       to  have  regard  to  the   email   evidence   that   the   previous
       representative, the Migrant Support Centre, took  a  poor  statement
       through an unsatisfactory method.

    7. Thirdly, it is argued that the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  wrongly
       states that the appellant contradicted his legal representative,  Mr
       Hodson at paragraph 31 of the  decision,  as  can  be  seen  by  the
       contemporaneous record of proceedings attached to the grounds with a
       statement of truth. It is also said  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
       Judge very significantly and material misrepresented the content  of
       the oral evidence of both of the appellant's witnesses: Mrs  SH  his
       wife was not asked by Mr Hodson when  her  husband  had  attended  a
       demonstration, and Mr MB only said members of the Baloch  Republican
       Party have a  membership  card  and  replied  yes,  so  he  did  not
       initially say a card was always carried and then say sometimes.

    8. Fourthly, it  is  argued  that  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  took  a
       procedurally unfair approach to documents at  paragraph  25  of  the
       decision, as he refused to let the representative ask the  appellant
       about his membership card because it was in  English.  It  was  also
       unfair to place weight on the absence of documentary  evidence  that
       the appellant had changed his return flight  to  Dubai  in  November
       2017 when he was not asked any questions on this issue and no  point
       was raised about it in the refusal letter, see paragraphs 19 and  23
       of the decision.

    9. Fifthly, it is  argued  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  made
       mistakes about material aspects of the case and evidence. Mention of
       the Baloch Club in Bahrain was simply a small amount  of  background
       evidence of something the appellant did as a child, and could not be
       seen as embellishing his account as is said at paragraph 29  of  the
       decision. There was also excessive reliance upon  the  Exit  Control
       List, which is a Wikipedia source of information, in  an  inaccurate
       way at paragraphs 40 and 41 of the decision.

   10. Sixthly, it is argued that there  is  a  failure  to  deal  with  the
       appellant's sur place activities in the UK. Illogically it was  found
       that the appellant could travel back as his witness was able to do so
       in 2011 without consideration  of  the  fact  that  the  witness  was
       travelling on a British passport, see paragraph 37 of  the  decision.
       It was also inaccurately stated that Mr  Hodson  had  said  that  the
       appellant would be unlikely to be stopped at Karachi  airport  if  he
       were returned when that was not the case, see  paragraph  43  of  the
       decision. It could not be logically assumed that the appellant  would
       not be seen as a failed asylum seeker given his period  of  residence
       in the UK and his Baloch ethnicity. Further consideration should have
       been given to the fact that the appellant could not  be  required  to
       lie about his internet activities  and  to  the  background  evidence
       regarding the violent position that the Pakistani authorities take to
       those who support Balochistan independence.

   Conclusions - Error of law

    11. At the hearing Ms Cunha conceded that the First-tier  Tribunal  had
        erred in law making it appropriate that the decision be set  aside,
        and for the matter to be remitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal  for
        rehearing de novo. In these circumstances it is  not  necessary  to
        give full reasons for my decision, as it was agreed by consent, but
        the following are identified as being seen by all as errors of  law
        in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal:

         . That there was no inconsistency, as was relied upon as  evidence
           of the appellant's lack of credibility in the  decision  of  the
           First-tier Tribunal, between the  appellant's  appeal  statement
           and his asylum interview record  on  his  move  to  Dubai  being
           primarily for work purposes with the added benefit  of  avoiding
           the general instability in Pakistan and that his visits prior to
           the one in November 2017 having been safe.

         .   The  First-tier   Tribunal   objected   to   the   appellant's
           representative questioning  the  appellant  about  documents  in
           English and then used conclusions about those documents  as  one
           reason to find  him  not  credible,  in  a  way  which  was  not
           procedurally fair.

         . It was inaccurately recorded in the decision of  the  First-tier
           Tribunal that putting the  difference  between  the  appellant's
           wife's witness statement and her oral evidence to  her  was  the
           appellant's representative, Mr Hodson, leading evidence  on  the
           point.

         . It was also inaccurately  recorded  in  the  decision  that  the
           appellant contradicted Mr Hodson, his representative when  asked
           about the subject of some photos: the  appellant  was  asked  if
           they were taken on 19th November 2017 at the  Nawaz  Atta  rally
           and said they were not and said that there were  no  photographs
           of that rally. This is not a contradiction as Mr Hodson was  not
           giving evidence but asking questions.

         .  It was not lawful to give less weight to  witness  evidence  in
           part on  the  basis  that  it  was  "self-serving"  as  this  is
           meaningless.

         . There was insufficient reasoning for  the  conclusion  that  the
           appellant's sur place did not place him at real risk of  serious
           harm on return to Pakistan.



          Decision:

   1. The making of the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
      making of an error on a point of law.

   2. I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal with  no  findings
      preserved.

   3. I remit the remaking to the First-tier Tribunal as  I  find  that  the
      remaking will be extensive and there was procedural unfairness in  the
      approach of the First-tier Tribunal.







Signed:     Fiona Lindsley                         Date:   26th June 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley







