
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10394/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Centre                               |                                     |
|On 25th June, 2019                   |On 3rd July 2019                     |
|Given extempore                      |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |


                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley


                                   Between

                                     HYL
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Holmes of Counsel, instructed by Knightsbridge
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                     REASONS FOR FINDING AN ERROR OF LAW


                                  Anonymity

           An anonymity order was made by the First-tier Tribunal.
                   I see no reason at all to discharge it.



1.   The appellant, HYL, was born on 15 October, 2015 and is  a  citizen  of
    Iraq.  She is an accompanied asylum seeking child.  It is claimed  that
    she entered the United  Kingdom  at  Manchester  Airport  illegally  on
    22nd/23rd September, 2017.

2.   She attended the Asylum Intake Unit with her mother on  30th  November,
    2017 and claimed asylum.  The appellant's mother  applied  for  spousal
    visa in Oman using her Iraqi passport.  A visa  was  issued  and  valid
    from 6th October, 2016 to 6th July, 2019.  The appellant's mother moved
    to join her British citizen husband  in  the  United  Kingdom,  Mr  YL,
    entering the United Kingdom on  16th  October,  2016  and  subsequently
    returning to Iraq on 6th December, 2016 with  re-entry  to  the  United
    Kingdom on 21st January, 2017.  The appellant's mother was living  with
    her husband in the United Kingdom during this time.

3.   The appellant's  mother  was  interviewed  on  8th  January,  2018  and
    confirmed her relationship with the  appellant  and  also  her  British
    citizen husband.  She confirmed her address where she was  living  with
    her husband, a bus  driver.   The  appellant's  mother  said  that  the
    appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on  22nd/23rd  September,  2017
    some eight months after her arrival.  It is apparent that the appellant
    was  brought  into  the  United  Kingdom  illegally  by  agents.   This
    seemingly was because the appellant's mother had applied for a  British
    passport for her daughter, but it had  been  refused  last  year.   The
    appellant's mother claimed that she was the  child's  mother  and  gave
    details of the appellant's father.  Social Services visited  the  child
    in January, 2018.  The appellant's mother claims that  she  had  a  DNA
    test in the United Kingdom for the  appellant  which  showed  that  her
    current husband is not the father of the child.  She expressed  a  fear
    of return due to an  unlawful  relationship  she  had  before  she  was
    married to her present husband.  She explained that  her  cultural  and
    religious beliefs did not accept this kind of relationship.

4.   The respondent refused the claim and  the  appellant  appealed  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  Her appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge
    O R Williams in Manchester on 6th March, 2018.  The appellant's current
    solicitors were instructed previously by or on behalf of the  appellant
    in a letter dated 20th February, 2019.  Knightsbridge Solicitors  wrote
    to the Tribunal referring to the appellant saying:

         "We have received instruction [sic] this morning at 11.20 from  our
         client that she wishes to withdraw the matter.


         We kindly ask if you could withdraw the matter.


         Should you have any queries in regards  to  the  contents  of  this
         letter please do not hesitate to contact us".

    That letter was followed by a second dated 4th March, 2019 which  again
    referred to the appellant and her date of birth and said:

         "We write in respond [sic] to your Notice  of  Hearing  dated  27th
         January, 2017.


         Please note we have requested in our previous correspondence  dated
         20th February, 2019 for withdrawal of the matter [sic].


         We kindly request if you could proceed the hearing as withdrawal.


         Please find our previous letter and the latest Notice of Hearing.


         Should you have any further enquiries regarding the  matter  please
         do not hesitate to contact us".

5.   The judge recorded in his determination that as  a  preliminary  matter
    he had to decide whether to proceed with the  hearing  as  neither  the
    appellant's solicitors  nor  the  appellant  were  in  attendance.   He
    concluded  that  he  was  unsure  if  Knightsbridge   Solicitors   were
    withdrawing representation or  if  it  were  the  case  that  they  had
    instructions for the  appeal  itself  to  be  withdrawn.   He  was  not
    satisfied that the appeal had been properly and correctly withdrawn and
    did not therefore treat the appeal as withdrawn.

6.   The matter was slightly confused because on the day of the hearing  no-
    one was present at 10 a.m. and so the judge put the matter  back  until
    12 noon.  The Presenting Officer was present as appears from the Record
    of Proceedings.  At 12 noon the judge decided whether or not he  should
    proceed with the case.  It appears from his Record of Proceedings  that
    he decided that he would proceed because no reasons had been given  for
    withdrawal of the appeal.  He does not appear to have made any  request
    for submissions from the Home Office  Presenting  Officer.   The  judge
    allowed the asylum appeal which was challenged by the respondent.

7.   This morning Mr Holmes sought to persuade me that there was nothing  in
    the determination to show that the Presenting Officer had  in  any  way
    been taken surprise and it was open to him to submit whatever  evidence
    the Secretary of State  relied  upon.   The  grounds  suggest  that  in
    allowing the appeal the judge had given inadequate reasons for  setting
    credibility issues in the appellant's favour.  The credibility  of  the
    claim was expressly disputed in  the  refusal  letter  and  the  issues
    raised warranted it is suggested full consideration by the  judge.   Mr
    McVeety reminded me that the respondent was under the  impression  that
    this appeal had been withdrawn, and it does appear from the  Record  of
    Proceedings that there was certainly confusion not only in the mind  of
    the judge but also in the mind of the Presenting Officer as to  whether
    or not the appeal itself was being withdrawn or whether  representation
    was being withdrawn.  Mr McVeety told me that there  was  a  Presenting
    Officer but it had been anticipated that the appeal  itself  was  being
    withdrawn so no evidence was submitted and no submissions were made.

8.   In his determination the judge fails  to  identify  where  the  claimed
    risk was from.  The judge does deal with the question of honour killing
    and quotes from the Home Office Country Policy and Information paper of
    August, 2017 at paragraph 23 of  the  determination.   The  appellant's
    mother is now married to someone who  is  not  the  child's  biological
    father, so it is not clear now who  will  instigate  any  risk  to  the
    appellant's mother.  She is now living with her husband who is not  the
    father of the child and the lack  of  reasoning  in  the  determination
    means that it needs to be corrected.  The judge did not deal  with  the
    fact that the mother did not appear when applying for the visa.

9.   It was also suggested in the grounds that the way in  which  the  judge
    proceeded was procedurally unfair.  He proceeded with  the  hearing  of
    the appeal on the basis that there had been no reasons  given  for  the
    withdrawal of the appeal by the appellant's solicitors as  required  by
    Rule 17, if indeed it was the appeal that was being  withdrawn  and  it
    suggested that the judge failed to consider his discretion  under  Rule
    5(2).  There is no merit in that challenge and I did not seek Mr Holmes
    to address me on it.  It would have been  entirely  incorrect  for  the
    judge to have assumed that the appellant's solicitors had given  advice
    on the effect of withdrawal in the absence of  anything  from  them  to
    that effect.

10.  It is clear to me that at the  hearing  the  judge  understandably  was
    confused as to whether or not it was the appeal that had been withdrawn
    or  whether  it  was  the  representation  that  had  been   withdrawn,
    nevertheless he correctly concluded that he  should  proceed  with  the
    hearing of the appeal but in doing so appears not to have  invited  any
    submissions from the Presenting Officer.

11.  I concluded that the judge did materially err  in  law  in  failing  to
    have regard properly to the Secretary of State's  reasons  for  refusal
    and the  credibility  challenges  stated  therein  and  in  failing  to
    identify where the risk would be from now that the  appellant's  mother
    has remarried and is married to somebody  other  than  the  appellant's
    child's father.  I set the determination aside.   The  matter  will  be
    heard afresh by the First-tier  Tribunal.   A  Kurdish  Sorani  dialect
    interpreter will be required.  Three hours will  be  required  for  the
    hearing of the appeal.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Richard Chalkley

Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley



                                 Directions

Knightsbridge are within seven days of this decision being sent to them to
notify the First-tier Tribunal and the Home Office Presenting Officers'
Unit at P O Box 666, Salford, M5 0LZ that they are acting on behalf of the
appellant and put themselves on the record with the Tribunal.


Richard Chalkley

Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley

