
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10473/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 25 February 2020              |              On 20 April 2020   |
|                                 |                                 |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BLUNDELL


                                   Between

                               Tr (sri lanka)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms K Tobin, instructed by S Satha & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a Sri Lankan national who  was  born  on  23  November
    1993.  He appeals, with permission granted by a Designated Judge of the
    First-tier Tribunal, against a decision which was issued by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Kudhail, dismissing his appeal against the  respondent's
    refusal of his protection and human rights claims.


 2. The appellant entered the United  Kingdom  in  July  2018  and  claimed
    asylum on arrival.  His application having been refused, he appealed to
    the First-tier Tribunal, which accepted the following  aspects  of  his
    protection claim.  He was forcibly recruited by the LTTE  in  2009,  as
    the civil war was in its final phase: [42]-[43].  He was given  weapons
    training for two weeks: [44].  He was then stationed at a checkpoint as
    a sentry: [45].  The appellant attended the LTTE 'Martyrs Day' event in
    2017, and was arrested shortly thereafter: [54].  He was  told  by  the
    Sri Lankan authorities that his arrest was due to his  activities  with
    the LTTE: [54].  He was held at Joseph Camp for  three  months,  during
    which time he was tortured in various  ways,  including  being  whipped
    with electrical cables which left visible scarring on his  back.   That
    scarring was persuasively  attributed  to  the  type  of  ill-treatment
    alleged by the appellant in a report written by a consultant physician:
    [51].  The judge considered it likely  that  the  appellant's  time  in
    detention in 2017 had led to him experiencing mental health issues,  as
    described in a psychiatric report: [53].  The  appellant  was  able  to
    escape from the camp after his father paid a bribe: [55].


 3. The judge did not accept that the appellant had surrendered to, or  was
    arrested by, the Sri Lankan authorities at the end of the war  in  2009
    or that he was held at a camp named Manik in the aftermath of the  war:
    [46].  The judge also noted that the appellant's  family  continued  to
    live in Sri Lanka without being targeted by the SLA: [49].  If the  CID
    had been visiting the family house, as claimed, the  judge  noted  that
    the appellant's father had also attended Martyrs Day in 2017 and he had
    not faced any problems: [62].  The judge noted that the  appellant  had
    taken part in some diaspora activities in the UK, with the Transitional
    Government of Tamil Eelam, and  that  he  had  a  limited  and  low-key
    profile in these activities: [56].


 4. The judge observed that the situation in Sri Lanka  had  changed  since
    the election of  President  Gotabaya  Rajapaska  who  was  'part  of  a
    political family closely related to the many atrocities of the past  in
    Sri Lanka.: [57].  The judge did not have evidence  which  indicated  a
    crackdown on former LTTE members or supporters: [59].  The  appellant's
    diaspora activities would not invoke the interest of the current regime
    because he was not a leader and did not have a significant role in post-
    conflict separatism: [60].  The judge had very little evidence  of  the
    appellant's role in the TGTE but his involvement was  not  'significant
    enough' to give rise to a perception that he was a risk to the  unitary
    Sri Lankan state: [61].


 5. The judge resolved the appellant's separate claim  under  the  ECHR  at
    [65]-[67].  He accepted that the appellant suffered from PTSD, moderate
    depression and that he presented a moderate suicide  risk.   The  judge
    noted, however, that there was some treatment available  in  Sri  Lanka
    and that the respondent would take all reasonable steps to minimise the
    risk to the appellant.


 6. The grounds of appeal, which were settled by Ms Bayati of counsel  (who
    did not appear below) may be summarised as follows:


      i) The judge failed to apply paragraph 339K of the  Immigration  Rules
         in assessing the risk to the appellant.
     ii) The judge had failed to make a finding  on  the  appellant's  claim
         that he had  been  placed  on  reporting  conditions  when  he  was
         released from Joseph Camp.
    iii)  The  judge  had  failed  to  assess  the  risk  to  the  appellant
         holistically,  and  had  failed  in  particular  to  consider   the
         appellant's TGTE activities alongside his existing profile with the
         Sri Lankan authorities.
     iv) In respect of Article 3 ECHR, the judge failed  to  consider  there
         would be a risk of suicide after the appellant returned and failed,
         in particular, to consider whether the appellant would  be  willing
         to obtain treatment.

 7. Designated Judge Macdonald granted permission  to  appeal  on  each  of
    these grounds.


 8. At the outset of the hearing, I  expressed  my  provisional  view  that
    there was merit in at least the first of the grounds of appeal which  I
    have summarised above.  Mr Whitwell accepted that there was  no  answer
    to this ground of appeal.  That must be correct.  The judge found  that
    the appellant was arrested, detained and tortured for three  months  at
    Joseph Camp but he failed to turn his  mind  to  Article  4(4)  of  the
    Qualification Directive, as transposed into domestic law  by  paragraph
    339K of the Immigration Rules, which provides as follows:

         The fact that a person has already been subject to  persecution  or
         serious harm, or to direct threats  of  such  persecution  or  such
         harm, will be regarded as a serious indication of the person's well-
         founded fear of persecution or real risk of suffering serious harm,
         unless there are good reasons to consider that such persecution  or
         serious harm will not be repeated.

 9. Submissions followed regarding the appropriate disposal of the  appeal,
    it having been agreed on  all  sides  that  the  judge's  decision  was
    erroneous in law on this account.  Ms Tobin submitted that the findings
    I have summarised  above,  coupled  with  the  correct  application  of
    paragraph 339K of the Immigration Rules, must result in a  decision  in
    her client's favour.  There was therefore no need, in  her  submission,
    for there to be any further findings of fact made, whether in the Upper
    Tribunal or the FtT.


10. For the respondent, Mr Whitwell  submitted  that  there  needed  to  be
    additional findings of fact, particularly with respect to the  question
    of whether the appellant had been required to report to the Sri  Lankan
    authorities upon his release from Joseph  Camp.   Nor,  he  noted,  had
    there  been  any  real  findings  on  the  extent  of  the  appellant's
    participation in the TGTE, which was said on his membership card to  be
    limited to voluntary activities for the cricket team.  Mr Whitwell  did
    not accept that the findings of fact summarised above were  necessarily
    dispositive of the appeal in the appellant's favour.

11. Both representatives made reference to GJ (Sri Lanka) [2013]  UKUT  319
    (IAC), ME (Sri Lanka) [2018] EWCA Civ 1486 and the recent report by the
    Home Office following a fact finding mission to Sri  Lanka  which  took
    place between 28 September and 5 October ("the  FFM  report").   Having
    considered the authorities and the FFM  report  with  care,  I  do  not
    consider it necessary for there to be a further hearing in  this  case,
    whether before the Upper Tribunal or the FtT.  The proper course, in my
    judgment, is as suggested by Ms Tobin.  On the basis  of  the  existing
    findings of fact, and in light of the background situation which I will
    set out, the appropriate course is to set aside the decision of the FtT
    and to remake the decision  on  the  appeal,  allowing  the  appeal  on
    protection grounds.

12. It  is  appropriate  to  start  with  GJ  (Sri  Lanka).   Although  the
    background situation in Sri Lanka has changed to  an  extent  over  the
    ensuing seven years, neither advocate attempted to submit that I should
    depart from that country guidance decision.  Their focus was,  instead,
    on the question posed by (7)(a) of the headnote to that decision, which
    is whether the appellant is or is perceived to  be,  a  threat  to  the
    integrity of Sri Lanka as a single state because he is, or is perceived
    to  have  a  significant  role  in  relation  to  post-conflict   Tamil
    separatism within the diaspora and/or a renewal of  hostilities  within
    Sri Lanka.  In considering that decision, I obviously recall  what  was
    subsequently emphasised  by  the  Court  of  Appeal  (Underhill  LJ  in
    particular) in MP & NT (Sri Lanka) [2014] EWCA Civ 829: that there  may
    "be other cases ... where the evidence  shows  particular  grounds  for
    concluding that the Government might regard the applicant as  posing  a
    current threat to the integrity of Sri Lanka as a single state even  in
    the absence of evidence that he or she has been  involved  in  diaspora
    activism."


13. In her cogent submissions, Ms Tobin placed particular reliance  on  the
    judgment of Lewison LJ (with whom Flaux LJ agreed) in  ME  (Sri  Lanka)
    [2018] EWCA Civ 1486.  In that case, it had been accepted  by  the  FtT
    that the appellant had become involved with the LTTE in 2005.   Amongst
    other things, he worked as a driver for the LTTE and was aware  of  the
    location of arms caches as a result of his role.  He had been in the UK
    between 2014 and 2014, at which point he returned to Sri Lanka.  He had
    been arrested and ill-treated shortly after arrival, and had agreed  to
    show officers the location of  one  cache  of  weapons.   He  was  then
    released without charge or reporting conditions and was thought by  the
    FtT to be no longer of  interest.   He  then  left  Sri  Lanka  without
    difficulty and arrived again in the UK,  whereupon  he  did  not  claim
    asylum immediately but did so after his arrest.   There  had  been  two
    visits by the SLA to the family home,  both  of  which  were  in  2015,
    although no arrest warrant had been issued.  The judge in the  FtT  had
    taken careful account of the appellant's treatment in detention and her
    focus had been on whether there was a real risk of  the  recurrence  of
    that treatment.  In answering that question, the court considered there
    to have been a 'serious gap in the FtT's chain of reasoning'.   Lewison
    LJ explained at [16]-[17] what he considered that gap to be:


         [16] The following are, in my judgment, the pertinent points. ME's
         arrest took place long after the cessation of the conflict  in  Sri
         Lanka. That led (or ought to have led) to the  conclusion  that  he
         was perceived at that time as being of significant interest to  the
         authorities. He was therefore a person who had fallen into category
         (a) of the risk categories identified in GJ . It would have  needed
         an exceptionally strong case to persuade the FTT that  he  had  now
         ceased to be at risk. The mere fact that he  was  released  without
         charge and without reporting restrictions was not  enough,  because
         the authorities not only made two subsequent visits  to  his  home;
         but they also searched it. The conclusion that should be drawn from
         that is that ME was still a person  of  significant  interest;  and
         moreover, that the authorities perceived that he might have more to
         tell them. Mr Jolliffe, in support of the FTT's decision, submitted
         that ME was no longer a person of interest because the  authorities
         had got what they wanted from him. But that does not  explain  why,
         having obtained the information from ME about the location  of  one
         arms cache, the authorities nevertheless twice visited his home and
         searched it. Thus, the FTT was right to proceed on the  basis  that
         there was a real risk that the authorities would wish  to  question
         him further.

         [17] What, then, persuaded the FTT that there was no real  risk  of
         the questioning taking place in detention? It seems to me that  the
         FTT's conclusion is founded on its perception that ME had passed on
         the information that he had; and that if he had any more  he  would
         be willing to give it over.  The  parenthesis  in  [39]  is  not  a
         finding that ME had no more information. Rather  it  is  a  finding
         that he is willing to give over such information as he has. ME  may
         be truthful in saying that if he has  any  further  information  he
         will hand it over; and the FTT was no doubt justified in  believing
         him. But that is not, in my judgment, a complete answer.  The  real
         question is whether the Sri Lankan authorities would  believe  him;
         or perhaps to put it more accurately whether there was a real  risk
         that they would not. The FTT's finding could  only  be  a  complete
         answer if the FTT could have been satisfied  that  the  Sri  Lankan
         authorities would accept at face value, and without further beating
         or detention, the completeness of any further  revelation  that  ME
         might make.  The  FTT  does  not  confront  that  question.  As  Ms
         Jegarajah submitted, those who torture others do so for  a  variety
         of reasons, not all of them rational. The authorities  had  already
         had some success in extracting information from  ME  after  beating
         him; which shows that at least at that time they did not accept his
         account at face value. What had changed in the conduct of  the  Sri
         Lankan authorities? The FTT did not explain this. Where, as here, a
         person has been tortured for  alleged  participation  in  political
         crimes a heightened degree of scrutiny is required: R (Sivakumar) v
         Secretary of State for the Home Department [2003] UKHL 14, [2003] 1
         WLR 840 at [16].

14. Mr Whitwell emphasised that the facts of ME (Sri Lanka) were not on all
    fours with the facts in this appeal.  He drew attention, in particular,
    to the fact that the  interest  in  ME  (Sri  Lanka)  had  an  entirely
    different origin than the interest in this appellant.  ME  (Sri  Lanka)
    was a person with proven information about  LTTE  arms  caches  whereas
    this appellant had nothing approaching that profile.


15. Mr Whitwell is undoubtedly correct in that submission but the logic  of
    Lewsion LJ's approach in [16] nevertheless applies.  This appellant was
    arrested long after the civil war came to an  end.   He  was  held  and
    tortured for a long time.  Just as in ME  (Sri  Lanka),  therefore,  he
    must have been a person who fell into the GJ (Sri Lanka) risk  category
    to which I have already referred.  He fell into that  category  not  at
    some long-forgotten point in history but in late 2017 and  early  2018.
    He was only released on payment of a bribe (which is not indicative  of
    an absence of risk: GJ  (Sri  Lanka)  refers,  at  [275])  and  it  was
    accepted by the judge in the FtT that there have been subsequent visits
    to the family home.


16. Applying the approach mandated by Article 4(4) QD and ME (Sri Lanka), I
    must ask myself whether there are good reasons to believe that the harm
    which befell the appellant around two years ago will not  happen  again
    if he returns to Sri Lanka.  As submitted by Ms Tobin, there is nothing
    in the appellant's personal profile or in the background evidence which
    begins to provide such a reason.  On the contrary, the actions  of  the
    Sri Lankan authorities indicate an ongoing interest in  the  appellant,
    given that they have continued to visit the family home and have  taken
    no action against the  appellant's  family  members.   The  appellant's
    father states in terms that the authorities came to the family home 'in
    search of my son': [55] of his statement refers.   And  the  background
    situation has  not  improved,  whether  as  regards  the  human  rights
    situation generally or those suspected of LTTE  association,  since  GJ
    (Sri Lanka) was decided.


17. The procedure for the reception of failed asylum seekers at Bandranaike
    Airport has been reasonably well documented for some time.  At [20]  of
    KK (Sri Lanka) [2019] EWCA Civ 172, Sir  Stephen  Richards  (with  whom
    Floyd LJ agreed) cited a 2014 letter from the British  High  Commission
    in Colombo:


         6.10.3 ... The spokesperson from the DIE [Department of Immigration
         and Emigration] stated that returnees may be questioned on  arrival
         by immigration, CID, SIS and TID. They may be questioned about what
         they have been doing whilst out of  Sri  Lanka,  including  whether
         they have been involved with one of the Tamil Diaspora  groups.  He
         said that it was normal practice for returnees to  be  asked  about
         their activities in the country they were returning from.

18. The FFM report is to the same effect, at [4.1.1], and it is stated that
    those with links to the LTTE would likely face further questioning.   I
    accept Ms Tobin's submission about what  is  reasonably  likely  to  be
    revealed during that questioning.  (It  is  to  be  recalled  that  the
    appellant cannot be expected  to  lie  during  the  questioning.)   The
    appellant's profile, as summarised at [2] above will be  revealed.   It
    is reasonably likely that the ongoing interest will be known to the Sri
    Lankan authorities.  The appellant's activities for the proscribed TGTE
    will also become  known.   Even  accepting,  as  I  do,  Mr  Whitwell's
    submission that the appellant's TGTE activities are likely to be of the
    most limited kind, the fact remains that he is  a  man  with  a  recent
    history of detention and ill-treatment who has continued, in the United
    Kingdom, to involve himself with pro-Tamil  diaspora  activities.   The
    FFM report does not suggest that this would be viewed as a matter of no
    significance and, at [3.1.6], it is said that 'action would  be  taken'
    against those who were active in a proscribed group.


19. Drawing the threads together, I consider it reasonably likely that  the
    questioning to which the appellant would be subjected  at  the  airport
    would result in further questioning with the  associated  risk  of  ill
    treatment which is documented in GJ (Sri Lanka).  That risk stems  from
    his recent difficulties with the Sri Lankan  authorities;  the  ongoing
    interest which they have shown by visiting the family home; and,  to  a
    lesser extent, the appellant's limited activities with  the  TGTE.   In
    the circumstances, I do not consider it necessary for  there  to  be  a
    further fact-finding exercise in this case, directed to the question of
    whether the appellant was released on reporting conditions and  to  his
    precise role in the TGTE.  As Ms Tobin submitted, the findings made  by
    the FtT must result in the appeal being allowed on protection grounds.

Notice of Decision

The  First-tier  Tribunal  erred  materially  in  law  in   dismissing   the
appellant's appeal.  I set aside that decision and remake  the  decision  on
the appeal by allowing it on protection grounds.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.
                                    [pic]
                                MARK BLUNDELL
                      Judge of the Upper Tribunal (IAC)

                                24 March 2020


