
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10124/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 10th May 2019                         |On 24 May 2019                     |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                                    i j b
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Eaton of Counsel instructed by Fadiga & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Miss J Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant appealed against the decision of  Judge  BA  Morris  (the
    Judge) of the First-tier Tribunal (the FtT) promulgated on 4th  January
    2019.

 2. The Appellant is a female Gambian  citizen  who  appealed  against  the
    Respondent's  decision  dated  10th   August   2018   to   refuse   her
    international protection claim.  The claim was made on the  basis  that
    if returned to Gambia the Appellant's daughter would be at risk of FGM.
     The Appellant's daughter was born on 15th August 2015.

 3. The Judge heard the appeal on 10th December 2018  and  found  that  the
    Appellant had not proved a well-founded  fear  of  persecution  on  the
    basis of her membership of a particular social group as  a  parent  who
    opposes the procedure of FGM being performed on their child.  The Judge
    found that the Appellant had not shown that she would  be  at  risk  on
    return to the Gambia nor that her  daughter  would  be  at  risk.   The
    appeal was dismissed on all grounds.

 4. The Appellant applied for permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal.
    In brief summary this contended that the Judge had erred by failing  to
    reach a reasoned conclusion as  to  whether  the  Appellant's  daughter
    would be at risk of FGM.  In addition the Judge had erred by failing to
    consider a concession by the Respondent in the  refusal  decision  that
    their daughter was at risk of FGM and the judge had erred by failing to
    follow K (FGM) Gambia CG [2015] UKUT 62 (IAC).

 5. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Perkins in the
    following terms;

         "(1) The First-tier Tribunal Judge has found that  the  Appellant's
             daughter is not at risk of FGM because neither  the  Appellant
             nor her husband wanted it to happen.  However  the  Respondent
             accepted that the Appellant's daughter 'would be  expected  to
             undergo the procedure'.  Those findings are not  incompatible.
             It  may  be  that  there  are  those  who  would  expect   the
             Appellant's daughter to be  cut  but  the  Appellant  and  her
             husband would prevent it.  However it  is  arguable  that  the
             First-tier Tribunal wrongly went behind a  concession  by  the
             Respondent.

         (2)  It is also arguable that  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  finding
             that there would be effective protection is not sustainable in
             the absence of evidence of the law being enforced.  It may  be
             that any error about protection is not material.

         (3)  For the avoidance of doubt,  permission  is  granted  on  each
             ground."

Error of Law

 6. On 4th April 2019 I heard submissions from both parties in relation  to
    error of law.  On behalf of the Appellant reliance was placed upon  the
    grounds upon which permission to appeal had been granted.  On behalf of
    the Respondent it was contended  that  the  Judge  had  not  materially
    erred.  Full  details  of  the  application  for  permission,  and  the
    submissions made by both parties, are contained  in  my  error  of  law
    decision dated 4th April 2019, promulgated on 11th April 2019.   I  set
    out below paragraphs 8-16 of my error of law decision which contain  my
    reasons for concluding that the judge erred in law and the decision  of
    the FtT must be set aside;

         "8.  In my view the judge has  materially  erred  in  law  for  the
             following reasons.  The Respondent  at  paragraph  42  of  the
             refusal decision stated 'Considering your claim in  the  round
             and considering your external consistency of  traditions  with
             FGM, it is accepted that your daughter would  be  expected  to
             undergo the procedure due to tradition, but not that  she  has
             been directly threatened.'

         9.   At paragraph 43 which is a summary,  the  Respondent  recorded
             that the following facts are accepted, that the Appellant is a
             victim of FGM, and there is an FGM threat to her daughter.

         10.  I will refer to the Respondent's  acceptance,  rather  than  a
             concession, but this was not  considered  by  the  judge  when
             assessing risk.  In my view the judge  did  fail  to  reach  a
             reasoned conclusion as to whether the Appellant's daughter was
             at risk of FGM.  The judge at paragraph 24  records  that  the
             prevalence of FGM in the Fula tribe, which  is  the  tribe  to
             which the Appellant belongs, is said to be 30%, although  some
             estimates are as high as 84%.   The  judge  records  that  the
             Appellant and her husband oppose  FGM  on  their  3  year  old
             daughter.  The judge found  that  prevalence  of  FGM  in  the
             Appellant's  family  appears  to  be  high  which  carries  an
             increased risk for the daughter, but parental opposition and a
             family home in an urban  settlement  reduced  the  risk.   The
             judge then concludes, 'In the light of the above,  I  conclude
             that the  risk  of  infliction  of   FGM  on  the  Appellant's
             daughter against the will of the Appellant and her husband  is
             less than the rate of incidence of FGM in the Fula tribe.'

         11.  The judge has said that the prevalence  of  FGM  in  the  Fula
             tribe could be 30% or as high as 84%.  It is not clear whether
             the judge is referring to a risk of less than 30% or less than
             84%.  In my view these findings are not adequately reasoned.

         12.  The judge departed from the country guidance in K  and  Others
             because subsequent to publication of that case, there had been
             a change in the law in Gambia, and the Women's (Amendment) Act
             2015 had been implemented.  It is possible to  depart  from  a
             country guidance decision if  there  are  cogent  reasons  for
             doing so.

         13.  In this case I do not find that the judge has  given  adequate
             reasons for departing from the country guidance case.  This is
             because although there has a been a change in the law,  it  is
             acknowledged, and noted by the  judge  at  paragraph  27  that
             since the 2015 Act was adopted, records  show  that  only  two
             cases of FGM have been brought before the courts, and there is
             no  information  concerning  any   convictions.    The   judge
             therefore fails to set out on  what  basis  the  situation  in
             Gambia had actually materially changed, and does not take into
             account the Respondent's CPIN at  paragraph  2.4.1  which  was
             before the FtT, which  records  that  'FGM  remains  a  deeply
             entrenched practice and concerns have been expressed that  the
             criminalisation of FGM may force the practice underground,  or
             into neighbouring countries where it is not criminalised'.

         14.  For the reasons given above I conclude that the judge erred in
             law, and the decision of the FtT must be set aside.

         15.  It was suggested by the representatives  that  if  a  material
             error of law was found, it would  be  appropriate  to  have  a
             continuation hearing in the Upper Tribunal to consider risk on
             return, so that the parties could have the opportunity to make
             further submissions and supply updated background evidence.

         16.  In my view it is not appropriate or necessary  to  remit  this
             appeal back to the FtT.  I find it is appropriate for there to
             be a continuation hearing before the Upper Tribunal,  for  the
             purpose of considering risk on return in relation to FGM,  and
             the Appellant's daughter."

Re-Making the Decision

 7. At the resumed hearing the Appellant attended but  was  not  called  to
    give  oral  evidence.   I  ascertained  that   I   had   received   all
    documentation upon  which  the  parties  intended  to  rely,  and  this
    consisted of documentation that had been before the  FtT.   I  had  the
    Respondent's bundle with Annexes A-G, and the Appellant's bundle  which
    contained 16 pages of subjective evidence, and 138 pages  of  objective
    evidence, together with the Appellant's skeleton argument that had been
    before the  FtT.   Neither  party  submitted  any  further  documentary
    evidence.

 8. I heard oral submissions from the representatives which I have recorded
    in my Record of Proceedings and will summarise very briefly below.

 9. On behalf of the  Respondent  reliance  was  placed  upon  the  refusal
    decision dated 10th  August  2018.   I  was  asked  to  find  that  the
    situation in Gambia had changed since the country guidance decision was
    published.

10. I was asked to note that if the Appellant returned to Gambia, she would
    re-join her husband and they would live together as a family unit  with
    their three children.  Both parents opposed FGM.  I was asked  to  note
    that FGM has now been made illegal,  which  amounts  to  a  significant
    change in circumstances.  It was submitted that because FGM is illegal,
    there is now a sufficiency of protection in Gambia.  It  was  submitted
    that even if the country guidance case was followed, paragraph  122  of
    that decision indicates that the evidence falls short of  demonstrating
    that intact females in Gambia are, as such, at real risk of  FGM.   The
    assessment of risk of FGM is a fact-sensitive exercise, which is likely
    to involve the ethnic group, the  attitudes  of  parents,  husband  and
    wider family and socio-economic milieu.

11. At paragraph 118 of the country guidance decision it is stated that the
    evidence falls well short of demonstrating that young  females  in  the
    Gambia in general are at real  risk  of  FGM.   There  are  significant
    variables which affect the risk.

12. I was asked to dismiss the appeal.

13. On behalf of the  Appellant  reliance  was  placed  upon  the  skeleton
    argument.  I was asked to note that  the  Respondent  accepted  in  the
    refusal decision that the Appellant's daughter  would  be  expected  to
    undergo FGM.  At paragraph 45 it was accepted that  the  Appellant  had
    demonstrated a genuine subjective fear on return to Gambia.

14. I was asked to find that FGM is prevalent in the Fula  tribe  to  which
    the Appellant and  her  family  belong.   It  was  submitted  that  the
    starting point should be the country guidance decision on FGM and I was
    asked to find that although FGM had been  made  illegal  subsequent  to
    that decision being published, there was in practice not such a  change
    of circumstances to indicate that the country guidance decision  should
    not be followed.  The Appellant herself had been subjected to FGM,  and
    her family, with the exception of her husband, particularly her  mother
    and aunt had indicated that FGM should be carried out on her  daughter.
    The Appellant's evidence was that her father  had  contacted  her,  and
    told her to return from the UK to obey her mother's wishes in  relation
    to FGM being carried out upon her daughter.

15. I was asked to follow the  country  guidance  decision  and  allow  the
    appeal.  At the conclusion of oral submissions I reserved my decision.

My Conclusions and Reasons

16. I have considered the evidence in the round.  The burden of proof is on
    the Appellant, to the lower standard, that being a reasonable degree of
    likelihood.  I find that  the  Appellant  arrived  in  the  UK  on  5th
    February 2018 having been granted a visit visa.  She travelled with her
    husband and two children, her daughter born 15th August  2015  and  son
    born 4th August 2017.  The  couple  had  left  their  oldest  child  in
    Gambia.  On 5th March 2018 the  Appellant's  husband  left  the  UK  to
    return to Gambia and the Appellant remained in  the  UK  with  the  two
    younger children and made a claim for asylum.

17. The Respondent accepts  and  I  find  as  a  fact  that  the  Appellant
    underwent FGM when she was a child.  She and her family are members  of
    the Fula tribe.  The Respondent's Country Policy and  Information  Note
    on female genital mutilation in Gambia published in  December  2016  is
    contained within  the  Appellant's  bundle.   At  paragraph  6.4.2  the
    prevalence of FGM in the Fula/Tukulor/Lorobo ethnic group is said to be
    87.3%.  At paragraph 6.4.10 a report confirms that the Mandinka,  Fula,
    Sarahole  and  Djola  ethnic  groups  practise  FGM  extensively,  with
    prevalences in the range of 94.3% - 96.7%.  I do note however that that
    particular report is dated June 2013.  In the country guidance decision
    of K, the prevalence of FGM in the Fula tribe may be  as  low  as  30%,
    although some estimates are as high as 84%.

18. The Appellant's fear is of her mother  and  aunt,  and  the  Respondent
    accepted in the  refusal  decision  at  paragraph  41  that  FGM  is  a
    tradition in the Appellant's family, although direct  threats  had  not
    been substantiated, and the Respondent accepted  that  the  Appellant's
    daughter would be expected to under FGM  but  not  that  she  had  been
    directly  threatened.   It  was  accepted  that   the   Appellant   had
    demonstrated a genuine subjective fear on return to Gambia.

19. I must consider whether that fear is  well-founded.   The  most  recent
    country guidance decision is K,  and  that  therefore  is  my  starting
    point.  I must follow a country  guidance  decision  unless  there  are
    cogent reasons not to do so.

20. I accept that since K was published,  FGM  has  been  made  illegal  in
    Gambia by the Women's (Amendment) Act 2015.

21. K does not indicate that all females in Gambia  are  at  risk  of  FGM.
    Considering risk is a fact-sensitive exercise.

22. In my view the background evidence indicates that the prevalence of FGM
    in the Fula ethnic group to which the Appellant  belongs  is  high.   I
    also accept that FGM is  practised  within  the  Appellant's  immediate
    family and the Appellant when she was a child  was  a  victim  of  that
    practice.

23. I find that the Appellant and her husband oppose FGM which lessens  the
    risk, and in Gambia the Appellant moved from a rural  area  to  a  more
    urban area.  However my conclusion is  that  the  Appellant's  daughter
    would be at risk of being forced to undergo FGM from her own family  if
    she returned to Gambia, taking into account  it  has  been  established
    that that is the practice of the Appellant's family.

24. I must therefore consider whether there would be a sufficiency of state
    protection, and/or, a reasonable internal relocation option.

25. It was found in paragraph 8 of the head note to K, that  there  was  no
    reliable evidence to suggest that a female who may be at real  risk  of
    FGM can avail herself of effective state protection or that her  father
    or husband could invoke such protection on her  behalf.   That  however
    was before FGM was specifically criminalised.

26. I do not find that criminalisation  of  FGM  indicates  that  there  is
    effective  state  protection.   Both  representatives  referred  me  to
    background and objective evidence, and both  accepted  that  since  the
    criminalisation of FGM, there have only been recorded  two  arrests  in
    relation to individuals accused of carrying out FGM.  The evidence does
    not indicate that there have been any convictions.  I conclude that the
    lack of evidence of  arrests,  does  not  provide  cogent  reasons  for
    departing from the conclusion in K, that there is  no  effective  state
    protection in Gambia in relation to FGM.

27. Paragraph 9 of the head note in  K  relates  to  internal  flight,  and
    provides that as a general matter, an individual at real risk of FGM in
    her home area is unlikely to be  able  to  avail  herself  of  internal
    relocation, although this is always a question of fact.  Cogent reasons
    need to be given for a finding that the individual  would  be  able  to
    relocate safely, especially given the evidence that ethnic  groups  are
    thoroughly interspersed, the country is  small  and  ethnic  groups  in
    different parts of the country are highly  interconnected.   I  do  not
    find, following this guidance, that the Appellant and her family  would
    have a reasonable option of internal relocation within Gambia.   In  my
    view the evidence indicates that the Appellant's daughter would  be  at
    risk wherever she lived in the Gambia.

28. I therefore  find  that  the  Appellant's  subjective  fear,  which  is
    accepted by the Respondent, is  objectively  well-founded.   I  believe
    there is a real risk that the Appellant's daughter would  be  subjected
    to FGM if returned to Gambia.  I therefore conclude  the  Appellant  is
    entitled to a grant of asylum as the  member  of  a  particular  social
    group.

29. Because the Appellant is entitled to a  grant  of  asylum  she  is  not
    entitled to humanitarian protection.  For the same reasons  as  I  find
    that the Appellant is entitled to asylum, I find that there would be  a
    real risk of the treatment that would breach  Article  3  of  the  1950
    Convention if the Appellant and her children return to Gambia.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  on
a point of law and is set aside.  I substitute a fresh decision.

I allow the Appellant's appeal on asylum grounds.  Therefore  the  Appellant
is not entitled to humanitarian protection.

I allow the Appellant's appeal on human rights  grounds  with  reference  to
Article 3.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date: 17th May 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I do not make a fee award.  The appeal has been allowed because of  evidence
considered by the Tribunal which was not before the  initial  decisionmaker.



Signed                              Date: 17th May 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall


