



Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Numbers
PA/10504/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 22 June 2021                      |On 09 September 2021                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sills


                                   Between

                                     HB
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Royston, of counsel instructed by Broudie Jackson
Canter
For the Respondent:    Mr Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

     Introduction

    1. On 26 April 2019, the Upper Tribunal (UT) found an error of  law  in
       relation to the earlier decision of the First  Tier  Tribunal  (FTT)
       dated 3 October 2018.  UT Judge Coker found that the FTT  failed  to
       make a lawful determination of  the  question  of  whether  A  could
       obtain a Civil Status Identity Document (CSID).  This is  the  issue
       we must consider.

       Factual Background

    2. A is an Iraqi  national, born on 1 January 1990.  He arrived in  the
       UK on 22 July 2015 and claimed asylum.   The  basis  of  his  asylum
       claim was as follows.  He claimed his father  was  a  Major  in  the
       Ba'ath Party and involved in the Anfal Operation against Kurds.   He
       was killed in 2003.  He was granted asylum  in  Italy  in  2006  but
       returned to Iraq in 2010 on the promise that  someone  called  Sheik
       Abdullah Zubaidi was able to protect him.  When this  person  passed
       away A began to receive threats from groups including Asa'ib Ahl Al-
       Haq (AH).  He fled Jalawla in June 2014 on the approach of ISIS  and
       went to a camp in Jabara.  A was kidnapped by AH and  tortured.   He
       was able to flee Iraq in July 2014.  He feared return to Iraq due to
       his father's role in  the  Ba'ath  Party  and  as  someone  who  had
       converted to Christianity.

    3. The FTT found A's claims  to  have  been  targeted  because  of  his
       father's activities with the Ba'ath Party, to have been kidnapped by
       AH, and the manner of his departure, not to be  credible.   The  FTT
       also rejected his claims to be a Christian and not to  have  contact
       with his family.

    4. The FTT accepted that A was from Jalawla, which  is  in  the  Diyala
       Governate.  In line with the  applicable  country  guidance  at  the
       time, the FTT accepted that as Jalawla was a contested area, A would
       not be  safe  there  as  per  Article  15(c)  of  the  Qualification
       Directive.

    5. The FTT then  considered  the  matter  of  internal  relocation  and
       accepted that a CSID was essential for A to be able  to  survive  on
       return.  The FTT accepted that A did not presently have  a  CSID  in
       his possession and seemed to accept this had been taken by the agent
       who had facilitated his journey to Europe.  The FTT accepted that  A
       could not safely return to  Jalawla  to  renew  his  CSID.  The  FTT
       however found that A likely knew the relevant book and  page  number
       that would enable his civil registration details to  be  found,  and
       thus for a CSID to be obtained through the Iraqi Embassy in  London.
       The FTT found that he could alternatively obtain  a  CSID  by  proxy
       from Iraq with the assistance of his family  there.   A  could  thus
       obtain a CSID, and safely  and  reasonably  relocate  to  the  Iraqi
       Kurdish Region (IKR).

    6. A was granted permission to appeal  and  UT  Judge  Coker  found  as
       follows. The FTT had erred in its analysis of whether A could obtain
       a CSID through the Iraqi Embassy or in Iraq by use of a proxy.   The
       FTT had failed to take a material matter into  account,  namely  the
       uncontested evidence of Dr Fatah, accepted in the  country  guidance
       case of AAH (Iraqi Kurds - internal relocation) (CG  )  [2018]  UKUT
       212, about the difficulties of obtaining a CSID, in particular  from
       the embassy in London.     Judge  Coker  concluded  that  the  FTT's
       assessment on this point  was  thereby  flawed  and  set  aside  the
       decision insofar as it related to A's  ability  to  obtain  a  valid
       CSID.




       The Hearing

    7. I kept a detailed note in the hearing in the record of  proceedings.
       The parties agreed that events have moved  on  since  Judge  Coker's
       decision of 26 April 2019.  The current guidance case is SMO, KSP  &
       IM (Article 15(c); identity documents) Iraq  CG  [2019]  UKUT  00400
       (IAC).  The findings in that case indicated that A's home area is no
       longer contested, but also found that as a general  matter,  it  was
       necessary for an individual to  have  either  a  CSID  or  an  Iraqi
       Nationality Identity Document (INID) in order  to  live  and  travel
       within Iraq without encountering treatment or conditions  which  are
       contrary to Article 3 ECHR.  This meant that the first issue for the
       Tribunal to determine remained whether A could obtain a CSID or INID
       prior to return, and if not, whether his return would  result  in  a
       breach of his ECHR Article 3 rights.  If the Tribunal found that any
       absence of documents would not lead to a breach of his ECHR  Article
       3 rights, it was agreed that the Tribunal would need to revisit  the
       issue of generalised violence in his home area.

    8. Mr Bates applied for an adjournment on the basis that  there  was  a
       further country guidance case pending before the UT which will  once
       again consider the issue of the CSID and  the  INID  in  Iraq.   The
       Tribunal refused the application for the following reasons.   First,
       there has already been very significant delay in  A's  appeal.   The
       error of law hearing took place in April 2019, so over two years and
       two months ago. Second, the final hearing for the  country  guidance
       had not yet been listed. Hence, the date of promulgation was unclear
       and likely to be some months away.  Such further delay  was  not  in
       the interests of justice.

    9. A relied upon an additional bundle of 28 pages.  Mr  Royston  relied
       on written submissions and sought to rely on a  document  in  Arabic
       which appeared to be from  the  Iraqi  government  website.  It  was
       accompanied by some form of automated translation  which  he  stated
       showed that the INID system had been in operation in A's  home  area
       since 16 April 2019. If that were the case, it  would  mean  that  A
       would have to attend in person to obtain an INID. He  would  not  be
       able to obtain a replacement CSID.  Mr Bates understandably objected
       to the admission of this translation in the form  provided.  He  did
       not however object to a translation being carried out by a  suitably
       qualified professional after the hearing.  In the circumstances, the
       Tribunal directed that A file  and  serve  a  certified  translation
       within 14 days of the hearing, with the Respondent having a  further
       7 days after that to file and serve any response to the translation.
        A filed a two-page translation in compliance with  directions.   As
       far as the panel is aware, no further submissions were made  by  the
       Respondent.

   10. It was agreed that the following relevant findings from the FTT  had
       been preserved.  A's account  of  risk  arising  from  his  father's
       Ba'ath Party activities was not credible. A  was  from  Jalawla.   A
       knew the volume and page reference from the Family Book in Iraq.   A
       had given his CSID to the agent whilst travelling to the UK  and  so
       no longer had it. A's claim to have no contact with his  family  was
       not credible.

   11. We heard oral evidence from  A  principally  on  the  issue  of  his
       contact with his family in Iraq.   The  parties'  positions  can  be
       summarised as follows. Mr Bates accepted that to obtain an  INID,  A
       would have to attend in person.  He  submitted  that  A  was  not  a
       credible witness and was in contact with family in  Iraq  who  could
       assist him to obtain a CSID if they were still being issued  in  his
       home area.  In the alternative, while the Iraqi  Embassy  would  not
       issue a CSID,  with  his  family's  assistance  he  could  obtain  a
       Registration Document (1957) from the Embassy.  He could use this to
       travel through roadblocks to his home area and then obtain his  INID
       there.

   12. Mr Royston argued that the  additional  documents  submitted  showed
       that the INID was now operational in A's home area and  so  A  would
       need to attend in person to obtain an INID and would not be able  to
       obtain a CSID even if he had family assistance.  In the alternative,
       A had lost contact with his family in Iraq and so they would not  be
       able to assist him to obtain a replacement CSID in  Iraq.   R's  own
       CPIN accepted that A would not be able to obtain a replacement  CSID
       in the UK.  There was no evidence to suggest that A would be able to
       use a Registration Document (1957) to  travel  safely  to  his  home
       area.  Hence A could not obtain a CSID or INID prior to returning to
       his home area and could not safely travel to his home  area  without
       one of these documents.

   13. Both representatives relied  on  the  country  guidance  of  SMO  in
       relation to the risk of generalised violence in A's  home  area  and
       the issue of internal relocation to the IKR if it were to  be  found
       that  A  was  not  at  risk  on  return  due  to  the   absence   of
       documentation.

       Legal Framework

   14. The appeal before us now relates only to A's claim for  humanitarian
       protection.  Paragraph 339 of the Immigration  Rules  state  that  a
       person will be granted Humanitarian Protection if the provisions  of
       that paragraph apply. The burden of proof is upon the appellant. The
       standard of proof is the same as in an asylum  claim,  a  reasonable
       degree of likelihood, which can also be expressed  as  a  reasonable
       chance or a serious possibility.  In assessing whether an  applicant
       is a person entitled to Humanitarian Protection we  must  take  into
       consideration  the  relevant   provisions   of   the   Qualification
       Regulations and the Immigration Rules.

       Findings

   15. We consider first whether A could  obtain  a  CSID  from  the  Iraqi
       Embassy in the UK.  In view of  the  position  taken  by  R  in  the
       Country Policy and Information Note Iraq: Internal relocation, civil
       documentation and returns of June 2020 (CPIN) that  it  was  'highly
       unlikely' that an individual would be able to obtain a CSID from the
       Iraqi Embassy (para 2.6.16), we find that it  is  reasonably  likely
       that A would not be issued with a CSID by the Iraqi Embassy.

   16. We next consider whether A could obtain a CSID with  the  assistance
       of family in Iraq.  The first matter we must consider is whether the
       CSID has been replaced by the INID in A's home area.   The  headnote
       of SMO states:


             The likelihood of obtaining a replacement identity document by
             the use of a proxy, whether from the UK or on return to  Iraq,
             has reduced due to the introduction of the  INID  system.   In
             order to obtain an INID, an individual must attend their local
             CSA office in person  to  enrol  their  biometrics,  including
             fingerprints and iris scans.  The CSA offices  in  which  INID
             terminals have been installed are unlikely - as  a  result  of
             the phased replacement of the CSID system - to issue  a  CSID,
             whether to an individual  in  person  or  to  a  proxy.    The
             reducing number of CSA offices in which  INID  terminals  have
             not been installed will continue to issue CSIDs to individuals
             and  their  proxies   upon   production   of   the   necessary
             information.

   17. We have considered the documents filed and served  by  A  after  the
       hearing  in  accordance  with  directions.   They  consist  of   two
       translations by a suitably qualified translator. They both appear to
       be translations of pages from the  Iraqi  government  website.   The
       first document is titled 'The inauguration  National  Card  for  the
       Habhab Department of Status in Diyala province'. We  understand  the
       first document as stating that on 14 March 2018 the unified National
       Card terminal was opened within the Habhab Civil  Status  Department
       in Diyala governorate.  The original in Arabic does  not  appear  to
       have been provided at  the  hearing  or  subsequently.   The  second
       document is titled 'The  province  of  Diyala  commenced  using  the
       system of National Card in Jalawla  Civil  Status  Department'.   It
       clearly states that on 16 April 2019  the  'Department  of  National
       Card' was opened in  Jalawla,  Diyala  province  and  that  people's
       applications would now be processed according to electronic booking.
        We are satisfied  that  the  original  in  Arabic  of  this  second
       document was provided at the hearing as it contains reference to the
       same date, namely 16 April 2019.  We are satisfied that this  second
       document, that specifically refers to Jalawla, establishes that  the
       INID is now in operation in A's home area. As a  result,  we  accept
       that CSID's will no longer be issued in A's home area,  and  that  A
       can only obtain an INID by attending  the  'Department  of  National
       Card' in his home area in person.

   18. The guidance from SMO at para 11 of  the  headnote  is  that,  as  a
       general matter, it is necessary for an individual to have  either  a
       CSID or an INID in order to live  and  travel  within  Iraq  without
       encountering treatment or conditions which are contrary to Article 3
       ECHR.   As  noted,  Mr  Bates  submitted  that  A  could  obtain   a
       Registration Document (1957) from the Embassy in the UK and use this
       to travel to his home area and obtain an INID.  SMO does not suggest
       that the Registration Document (1957) can be used to  safely  travel
       through Iraq.  Mr Bates relied upon R's CPIN on civil  documentation
       referred to above.  We have considered what the  CPIN  states  about
       the Registration Document (1957).  It appears the Embassy will issue
       this document, and  this  can  then  be  used  to  apply  for  other
       documents (see 2.6.15 and Annex I).  The CPIN does not suggest  that
       the Registration Document (1957) would assist A in  passing  through
       checkpoints, or mean that A would be able to travel safely from  his
       point of return to his home area in Jalawla where he would  need  to
       apply for his INID.  We therefore find that as per SMO,  A  requires
       either a CSID or INID to travel safely from  his  point  of  return,
       whether Baghdad or the IKR, to his home area.   He  has  neither  of
       these documents at present.  As A cannot obtain a CSID, and can only
       obtain the INID in person in his home area, he  cannot  travel  from
       his point of return to his home area without a risk of serious  harm
       and a breach of his ECHR Article 3 rights.  We therefore  allow  his
       appeal on humanitarian protection grounds.

       Notice of Decision

       The Appellant's appeal against the refusal of his  protection  claim
       is allowed on humanitarian protection grounds.

       Signed     [pic]                      Date 31 August 2021

       Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sills







       Direction regarding anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
       (Upper Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2008

       Unless  and  until  a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
       Appellant is granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings
       shall directly or indirectly identify them or any  member  of  their
       family. This  direction  applies  both  to  the  Appellant  and  the
       Respondent.  Failure to comply with this  direction  could  lead  to
       contempt of Court proceedings.

       Signed     [pic]                      Date 31 August 2021

       Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sills
