
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10413/2019 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decision under Rule 34 Without a hearing  |Decision & Reason Promulgated    |
|24th June 2020                            |On 10th July 2020                |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER


                                   Between

                                     HA
                           (anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless  the  Upper  Tribunal  or  a
Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the  appellant  in
this determination identified as HA.  This  direction  applies  to,  amongst
others, all parties. Any failure to comply with this  direction  could  give
rise to contempt of court proceedings

      1. FtT Judge L Mensah dismissed HA's appeal against the refusal of his
         international protection and human rights claim for reasons set out
         in a decision promulgated on 8th January 2020. Permission to appeal
         was granted by FtT judge Osborne on 13th February 2020.  Directions
         for the further conduct  of  the  appeal  were  sent  and,  in  the
         circumstances surrounding COVID 19,  provision  was  made  for  the
         question of whether there was an error of law and if so whether the
         decision of the FtT Judge should be set aside to be  determined  on
         the papers.

      2. The appellant complied with directions; he had not been aware until
         the directions  were  sent  that  permission  to  appeal  had  been
         granted. He also sought to expand the grounds upon which he  relied
         to include reliance on  a  CG  case  reported  after  the  FtT  had
         promulgated her decision. I do not grant the application to  expand
         the grounds of appeal but, given my decision that there has been an
         error of law for the reasons below this is of no impact.

      3. The respondent has not responded to the applicant's grounds and nor
         has she sought an extension of time.

      4. I am satisfied that the submissions made on behalf of the appellant
         together with the papers before me are sufficient to enable  me  to
         be able to take a decision on whether there is an error of  law  in
         the decision of the FtT and if so whether the  decision  should  be
         set aside, on the papers and without hearing oral submissions.

         Error of law

      5. The FtT Judge in this appeal has referred to  the  appellant  in  a
         number of places as a person with a  wife  and  children.  Although
         substantial parts of the decision do  not  refer  to  this  and  do
         consider the core basis of his claim, it is unsafe to find that her
         findings with regard to those core elements  would  have  been  the
         same had she not thought, incorrectly,  that  he  had  a  wife  and
         child. This is  particularly  so  because  she  makes  findings  on
         documentation that flow from her adverse  credibility  findings  on
         his underlying claim.

      6. In these circumstances I am satisfied there is an error of  law  by
         the FtT such that I set aside the decision to be remade.

      7. Given the scale of the findings that have to be made, it  is  going
         to be necessary for the appellant to give evidence and for findings
         on the whole of his claim to be made afresh. In these circumstances
         and in accordance with the Practice Direction I  remit  the  appeal
         for hearing before the FtT.




    Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

    I set aside the decision and remit the appeal to the FtT  to  be  heard
    afresh, not before FtT Judge L Mensah.







    Anonymity

    The First-tier Tribunal made an  order  pursuant  to  rule  13  of  the
    Tribunal  Procedure  (First-tier  Tribunal)  (Immigration  and   Asylum
    Chamber) Rules 2014.

    I continue that order (pursuant to rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).


Jane Coker

Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
24th June 2020
