
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal   Appeal number: PA/10654/2019 (V)

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard Remotely at Manchester CJC              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 20 November 2020                           |On 9 December 2020            |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PICKUP



                                   Between

                                     JK

                            (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

                          DECISION AND REASONS (V)

For the appellant: Ms C  Johnrose,  instructed  by  Broudie  Jackson  Canter
Solicitors

For the Respondent: Mr C Bates, Senior Presenting Officer

This  has  been  a  remote  hearing  which  has   been   consented   to by
the parties. The form of remote hearing was video by Skype (V). A face to
face hearing was not held because it was  not  practicable  and  all  issues
could be determined in a remote hearing. At the conclusion of the hearing  I
reserved my decisions  and  reasons,  which  I  now  give.  The  order  made
is described at the end of these reasons.

1. The appellant, who is a national of  the  Democratic  Republic  of  Congo
   (DRC) with date of birth given as 18.8.95, has appealed  with  permission
   to the Upper Tribunal against the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
   (Judge Buckley)  promulgated  23.3.20,  dismissing  on  all  grounds  his
   appeal against the decision of the Secretary of State, dated 21.10.19, to
   refuse his claims for international protection and to remain in the UK on
   human  rights  grounds.   The  appellant  relies  on  asylum  grounds  of
   political opinion, on the basis that he would be at  risk  on  return  of
   being killed by the  DRC  authorities,  that  risk  arising  out  of  his
   father's role in the political opposition group RCDN, his own involvement
   in the UDPS, and his escape from prison after being tortured.




2. The First-tier Tribunal found that at the highest  the  appellant  was  a
   low-level supporter of the UDPS who had been arrested and mistreated  but
   escaped detention. The judge pointed  out  that  political  fortunes  had
   reversed since the appellant left the DRC  and  President  Tshisekedi  is
   leader of the UDPS , so that the appellant would not be returning with  a
   profile of opposition to the DRC authorities but in fact as  a  supporter
   of the President, who in March 2019, decreed a  presidential  pardon  for
   700 political prisoners and invited those in exile to return.  The  judge
   concluded that the appellant would not be of any adverse interest to  the
   DRC authorities on his return.



3. In summary, the grounds of application for permission to  appeal  are  as
   follows:



     i. That the judge erred by failing to follow Country Guidance;

    ii. That in  departing  from  Country  Guidance  the  judge  failed  to
        consider material evidence and that there was  insufficient  cogent
        evidence to justify doing so;

   iii. That the judge failed to adequately assess and determine article  8
        ECHR issues with particular regard to the appellant's physical  and
        moral integrity.

4. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was refused by the  First-tier
   Tribunal on 10.5.20. However, when the application  was  renewed  to  the
   Upper Tribunal, Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara granted permission on 3.8.20,
   considering it "at least arguable that the First-tier Tribunal  erred  in
   failing to follow the country guidance of R (on  the  application  of  MM
   (Lebanon) and Others) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2017]
   UKSC 10 (UDPS) members -Risk on  return)  Democratic  Republic  of  Congo
   Country Guidance [2007] UKAIT  00023  and  in  not  considering  material
   evidence when departing from that authority."

5. I have carefully considered the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  in
   the light of the submissions made to me, the grounds of  application  for
   permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal, and the documents now on  the
   Tribunal's case file.

6. There has been no cross-appeal  against  the  positive  findings  in  the
   appellant's favour. The judge found the appellant credible in respect  of
   his claimed past persecution in  the  DRC.  He  found  his  role  was  to
   distribute leaflets and mobilise youth. The  medical  evidence  was  also
   accepted, to the effect that the appellant is suffering  from  PTSD,  and
   that this corroborated the appellant's account  of  being  mistreated  in
   detention and the mechanism of his escape. As  explained  above,  it  was
   only because the judge found that the political climate in  the  DRC  had
   changed that it was concluded that the appellant was not at risk.

7. The Country Guidance held at headnote [3] that as  a  general  rule  mere
   rank and file UDPS members are unlikely to fall within  the  category  of
   those at risk. However, each case is fact sensitive. At [110]  the  Upper
   Tribunal referred to those with 'profile' as including those whose actual
   or perceived military or political activities or involvements are "likely
   to have brought them to the adverse attention of the Kabila regime." Mere
   membership of an opposition party will not demonstrate that a person  has
   such a profile. At [250]  the  Upper  Tribunal  accepted  that  had  that
   appellant been found credible, the Tribunal would have concluded  that  a
   person who had a role in the UDPS and who was known  to  the  authorities
   and who had been detained and  ill-treated  by  them  for  his  political
   opinion and who had escaped from detention , would arguably be at risk on
   return to the DRC. It is on this basis that the appellant's circumstances
   falls within this profile that Ms Johnrose submitted that on the findings
   of the First-tier Tribunal, the appeal should have been allowed.

8. Whilst the respondent's case remains that the political circumstances  on
   the ground have changed, Mr Bates  conceded  that  if  MM  remains  valid
   Country Guidance, on the facts as found,  the  asylum  claim  would  have
   succeeded at  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  He  accepted  that  there  were
   difficulties with the decision in that  in  departing  from  the  Country
   Guidance the judge referred to and relied only on the CPIN and appears to
   have taken no consideration of the key passages  index  provided  by  the
   appellant; there was no balancing assessment of  the  country  background
   material. Mr Bates agreed that the treatment of the  country  information
   was unfair. Mr Bates also confessed to being confused by what  the  judge
   intended to convey at [51] of the decision where it was stated, "The onus
   is on the appellant to demonstrate a risk of persecution or serious harm,
   and on the basis of his facts of his claim and the  change  in  political
   landscape - or even before the recent changes -  the  appellant  has  not
   demonstrated that he will (be) at risk on return..."

9. The fact is that MM remains on the Tribunal's list  of  Country  Guidance
   Determinations and the default position is that  it  should  be  followed
   unless strong and cogent evidence justifies departure. I  note,  however,
   that a reassessment of the risk for UDPS members is  pending  before  the
   Upper Tribunal in Country Guidance, but the case is  in  its  very  early
   stages and a conclusion may be several months away. In  the  premises,  I
   concluded that it would not be appropriate to stay this  case  until  the
   outcome of future Country Guidance.

10. Mr Bates accepted that  strong  and  cogent  evidence  is  necessary  to
   depart from the Country Guidance, as stated, it was his case  that  there
   was such a change, relying on the CPIN. However, for the reasons set  out
   below, I am not satisfied that there was sufficient  cogent  evidence  to
   justify the judge in departing from extant Country Guidance.

11. In summary, the respondent relies on the  fact  that  Felix  Tshisekedi,
   the leader of the UDPS,  is  now  president  of  the  DRC.  However,  the
   evidence relied on by the appellant  and  contained  in  his  bundle  put
   before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  appeal  hearing  indicates  that   the
   President is sharing power with the Common Front  for  Congo  (FCC),  the
   Kabila coalition party.  The  President's  partner  in  coalition,  Vital
   Kamerhe of the UNC, and the CPIN at 5.2.3  indicates  that  they  are  in
   coalition with the FCC in which the UDPS and UNC are allocated  23  seats
   out of 65 in total. The Prime Minister is from the FCC.  Effectively,  it
   is arguable that the Kabila party  or  its  proxies  still  control  both
   Parliament and the government, retaining the majority in the  Parliament,
   the Senate, and local and  provincial  governments,  despite  losing  the
   election overall.

12. It is unnecessary to rehearse all of the  considerable  evidence  relied
   on by the appellant, or to determine whether or not Tshisekedi or  Mabila
   hold overall control. Even if there is evidence on this issue going  both
   ways, I am not satisfied that the limited evidence that  was  before  the
   First-tier  Tribunal  was  sufficiently  clear  and  cogent  to   justify
   departure from the Country Guidance. Even though there has been a  change
   of President, it appears that Kabila factions  or  their  proxies  remain
   very much in control so that it cannot be said that it is  safe  for  the
   appellant to return to the DRC.


13. Accordingly, for the reasons  explained  above,  there  was  and  is  no
   justification for departing from extant Country Guidance  authority,  the
   effect of which is that on the  unchallenged  political  profile  of  the
   appellant as found by the judge, in particular one who has been  detained
   for UDPS political involvement, mistreated and escaped, the appellant has
   such a political profile that will be at risk on return on account of his
   prior active membership of the UDPS and hence his known adverse political
   profile as an opponent of a Kabila-led or Kabila-controlled government of
   the DRC.


14. In the circumstances and for the reasons set out above, I find  material
   error of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal so that  it  must
   be set aside and remade by allowing the appeal.


Decision

      I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

      I remake the decision in the appellant by allowing it.

      I make no order for costs.



Signed: DMW Pickup

Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

Date:       23 November 2020



Anonymity Direction

I am satisfied, having had  regard  to  the  guidance  in  the  Presidential
Guidance Note No 1 of 2013: Anonymity Orders, that it would  be  appropriate
to make an order in accordance with  Rules  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 in the following terms:

        "Unless and until  a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
        appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
        shall directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his
        family.  This  direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  both  the
        appellant and the respondent. Failure to comply with this direction
        could lead to contempt of court proceedings."

Signed: DMW Pickup

Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

Date:       23 November 2020





