
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10571/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 10 April 2019                             |On 1st May 2019               |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVIDGE

                                   Between

                                   MR JMK
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:      Ms Harper instructed by Duncan Lewis solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Kandola Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Order Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008


 2. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (S I 2008 front/269) I make an anonymity order.  Unless and  until
    a Tribunal or a Court  directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is  granted
    anonymity and no report of these proceedings or any form of publication
    thereof shall directly or indirectly identify  the  appellant  in  this
    determination identified  as  JMK.   The  order  applies  both  to  the
    Appellant and to the Respondent.  Failure  to  comply  with  the  order
    could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

 3. In a decision promulgated on 16 January 2019, First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Malcolm dismissed the appellant's appeal  against  a  decision  by  the
    respondent refusing his claim for international protection.

 4. Permission to appeal was sought on 3 grounds:

     i. The First-tier Tribunal judge had erred in law in  her  approach  to
        the  earlier  First-tier  tribunal's  decision  in   which   adverse
        credibility findings were made, failing to take into account the new
        medical evidence from Dr Lohawala of the appellant  suffering  post-
        traumatic stress disorder  as well  as  the  country  report  of  Dr
        Foxley to reach her own assessment of credibility of the  appellants
        account of  events in Afghanistan, but instead simply considered  if
        the reports  would  shift  the  earlier  finding,  contrary  to  the
        approach of Devaseelan, Mibanga and Djjebbar. The judge  has  failed
        to provide adequate reasons  for  maintaining  the  earlier  adverse
        credibility findings.

    ii. The First-tier Tribunal judge had erred in law in  failing  to  deal
        with  the  appellant's  mental  health  difficulties  in  terms   of
        reasonableness of return or relocation to Kabul as per AS (safety of
        Kabul) Afghanistan CG [2018] UKUT ooo118 (IAC)

   iii. The First -tier Judge failed to make a rounded assessment as per  AS
        when concluding the appellant  would  have  support  of  his  family
        because of the quality of the family support  available,  given  the
        evidence that the appellant's family were in  an  IDP  camp  on  the
        outskirts of Kabul and his brother has mental  health  difficulties,
        one of his two sisters is married but her husband is  only  a  fruit
        seller. Further in assessing his ability to integrate the judge  has
        failed to factor into account that the appellant has had  no  formal
        schooling or work experience.

 5. I find that ground 1 is made out. Whilst the  judge  acknowledges  that
    the earlier judicial decision is the starting  point,  in  the  reasons
    provided  there  is  no  specific  self-direction  in  respect  of  the
    guidelines of Devaseelan. This  was  a  case  where  the  new  evidence
    comprised medical evidence of Mental illness  including  Post-Traumatic
    Stress Disorder, and an expert report  which,  amongst  other  matters,
    comments on new documentary evidence of the appellant's  father  having
    been in the  police  force.  That  is  all  evidence  which  has  clear
    significance to an assessment of credibility.

 6. In brief reasoning the judge at paragraphs 61 to 65 dismisses  the  new
    evidence on the basis  of  the  earlier  judicial  adverse  credibility
    findings without any detailed consideration as to the impact of the new
    evidence in terms of an assessment of credibility in  deciding  if  the
    new evidence provides a  basis  upon  which  to  disturb  the  original
    adverse credibility findings.

 7. The failure to take a holistic approach does not accurately reflect the
    application of the guidelines of Devaseelan v  SSHD  [2003]  IMM  AR  1
    confirmed in the case of Djebbar: LD (Algeria) v SSHD [2004]  EWCA  Civ
    804 at paragraph 30 as follows:
         "Perhaps the most important feature of the guidance is that the
         fundamental obligation of every special adjudicator independently
         to decide each new application on its own individual merits was
         preserved. The guidance was expressly subject to this overriding
         principle.
          "The first adjudicator's determination ... is not binding on the
          second adjudicator; but, on the other hand, the second
          adjudicator is not hearing an appeal against it ... the outcome
          of the hearing before the second adjudicator may be quite
          different from what might have been expected from a reading of
          the first determination only. ... The second adjudicator must,
          however, be careful to recognise that the issue before him is not
          the issue before the first adjudicator. In particular, time has
          passed; and the situation at the time of the second adjudicator's
          determination may be shown to be different from that which was
          obtained previously. Appellants may want to ask the second
          adjudicator to consider arguments on issues that were - or could
          not be - raised before the first adjudicator; or evidence that
          was not - or could not have been - presented to the first
          adjudicator."
          The guidance concluded with similarly unequivocal language.
          Guideline 8 says in terms:
          "We do not suggest that, in the foregoing, we have covered every
          possibility. By covering the major categories into which second
          appeals fall, we intend to indicate the principles for dealing
          with such appeals. It will be for the second Adjudicator to
          decide which of them is or are appropriate in any given case."
          This is not the language of res judicata nor estoppel. And it is
          not open to be construed as such. In view of the argument, we
          must emphasise that in Devaseelan the IAT purported to do no more
          than provide guidance, and in our judgment, properly exercising
          its responsibilities, that indeed is what it did.

 8. The guidance about how to "consider arguments on issues that were -  or
    could not be - raised before the first adjudicator;  or  evidence  that
    was not - or could not have been - presented to the first  adjudicator"
    is set out at paragraph 39 of Devaseelan onwards as follows:

         "Subject always to the overriding  principles  already  identified,
         this reads:
             "39. In our view the second Adjudicator should treat such
             matters in the following way.
             (1) The first Adjudicator's determination should always be the
             starting-point. It is the authoritative assessment of the
             Appellant's status at the time it was made. In principle
             issues such as whether the Appellant was properly represented,
             or whether he gave evidence, are irrelevant to this.
             (2) Facts happening since the first Adjudicator's
             determination can always be taken into account by the second
             Adjudicator. If those facts lead the second Adjudicator to the
             conclusion that, at the date of his determination and on the
             material before him, the appellant makes his case, so be it.
             The previous decision, on the material before the first
             Adjudicator and at that date, is not inconsistent.
             (3) Facts happening before the first Adjudicator's
             determination but having no relevance to the issues before him
             can always be taken into account by the second Adjudicator.
             The first Adjudicator will not have been concerned with such
             facts, and his determination is not an assessment of them.
             40. We now pass to matters that could have been before the
             first Adjudicator but were not.
             (4) Facts personal to the Appellant that were not brought to
             the attention of the first Adjudicator, although they were
             relevant to the issues before him, should be treated by the
             second Adjudicator with the greatest circumspection. An
             Appellant who seeks, in a later appeal, to add to the
             available facts in an effort to obtain a more favourable
             outcome is properly regarded with suspicion from the point of
             view of credibility. (Although considerations of credibility
             will not be relevant in cases where the existence of the
             additional fact is beyond dispute.) It must also be borne in
             mind that the first Adjudicator's determination was made at a
             time closer to the events alleged and in terms of both fact-
             finding and general credibility assessment would tend to have
             the advantage. For this reason, the adduction of such facts
             should not usually lead to any reconsideration of the
             conclusions reached by the first Adjudicator.
             (5) Evidence of other facts - for example country evidence -
             may not suffer from the same concerns as to credibility, but
             should be treated with caution. The reason is different from
             that in (4). Evidence dating from before the determination of
             the first Adjudicator might well have been relevant if it had
             been tendered to him: but it was not, and he made his
             determination without it. The situation in the Appellant's own
             country at the time of that determination is very unlikely to
             be relevant in deciding whether the Appellant's removal at the
             time of the second Adjudicator's determination would breach
             his human rights. Those representing the Appellant would be
             better advised to assemble up-to-date evidence than to rely on
             material that is (ex hypothesi) now rather dated.
             41. The final major category of case is where the Appellant
             claims that his removal would breach Article 3 for the same
             reason that he claimed to be a refugee.
             (6) If before the second Adjudicator the Appellant relies on
             facts that are not materially different from those put to the
             first Adjudicator, and proposes to support the claim by what
             is in essence the same evidence as that available to the
             Appellant at that time, the second Adjudicator should regard
             the issues as settled by the first Adjudicator's determination
             and make his findings in line with that determination rather
             than allowing the matter to be re-litigated. We draw attention
             to the phrase 'the same evidence as that available to the
             Appellant' at the time of the first determination. We have
             chosen this phrase not only in order to accommodate guidelines
             (4) and (5) above, but also because, in respect of evidence
             that was available to the Appellant, he must be taken to have
             made his choices about how it should be presented. An
             Appellant cannot be expected to present evidence of which he
             has no knowledge: but if (for example) he chooses not to give
             oral evidence in his first appeal, that does not mean that the
             issues or the available evidence in the second appeal are
             rendered any different by his proposal to give oral evidence
             (of the same facts) on this occasion.

 9. For those reasons I find that the  approach  of  the  judge  failed  to
    follow the Devaseelan guidance and so  reveals  an  error  of  law.   I
    cannot say with certainty that the new evidence could not have made any
    difference to the assessment  of  credibility  so  that  the  error  is
    material.

10. The error goes to the root of the assessment of credibility and infects
    the entirety  of  the  decision.  In  those  circumstances  it  is  not
    necessary for me to deal with the remainder of the  grounds  in  detail
    because all matters need to be revisited.  I set aside the decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal to be remade.

11. When a decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside, section 12 (2)
    of the TCE a 2007 requires me to remit the case to the First-tier  with
    directions or remake it myself. In this case the  fundamental  findings
    of the First-tier Tribunal judge have been set  aside  -  she  has  not
    approached the evidence correctly, and none of the findings can  stand.
    The factual matrix of this appeal is  disputed;  I  conclude  that  the
    decision should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to determine the
    appeal de novo by a judge other than Judge Malcolm.  The  second  judge
    will have to be mindful of  the  obligation  to  take  account  of  all
    relevant material (Kananarakan 2003 All ER 449) IMM AR  122 271 CA.

Decision:

12. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

13. I set the decision  aside  and  remit  the  appeal  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, no findings preserved.

14. Anonymity

15. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45  (4)  (I)  of
    the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005. I  continue
    that order (pursuant to  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008).

16. No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


[pic]
Signed                              Date 29 April 2019
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davidge

