
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10088/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 14th January 2019                          |On 6th February 2019          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between

                          Abdul Hameed Hussainkhail
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the appellant's appeal against the decision  of  Judge  O'Neill
    made following a hearing at Bradford on 26th April 2018.

Background

 2. The appellant is a citizen of  Afghanistan.   His  date  of  birth  was
    disputed but the judge found  that  the  assessment  from  Kent  County
    Council Child Services was reliable and that he was over 18 at the time
    of the hearing.  There is no challenge to that decision.

 3. The appellant arrived in the UK in May 2016 having fled Afghanistan  in
    2015 and travelling via a number of European countries to get here.  He
    said that he would be at risk on return because he  was  threatened  by
    the local Taliban who had delivered night letters to  his  family  home
    stating that he had to join their ranks or be killed.  His  father  had
    worked as  a  bodyguard  for  a  leading  politician,  an  MP  who  was
    assassinated in 2012, and had subsequently disappeared.  In  2014   the
    appellant had been attacked by two men who had attempted to behead  him
    but he  had managed to escape.

 4. The judge rejected the appellant's account in its  entirety  and  found
    that the appellant was of no interest to the Taliban but in any  event,
    could reasonably relocate to Kabul.

 5. The appellant sought permission to appeal on a number of grounds  which
    he drafted himself because although he was represented  at  the  First-
    tier Tribunal he no longer had access to legal advice.   He  challenged
    the judge's conclusions that the letters  from  the  Taliban  were  not
    genuine.

 6. In a detailed decision, Designated Judge McCarthy rejected most of  the
    points made by the appellant but did grant permission  on  the  grounds
    that the judge had misdirected  himself  in  relation  to  the  Taliban
    letters.

 7. Judge McCarthy wrote:

         "The appellant begins by arguing that the three Taliban letters are
         real and Judge O'Neill was  wrong  to  conclude  otherwise.   Judge
         O'Neill examined the three letters and at paragraph  36  gave  good
         reasons for questioning their reliability.   He  decided  that  the
         pristine nature of the three letters was not  consistent  with  the
         appellant's account about how they were delivered to his  house  in
         Afghanistan, kept and sent to him.

         However, Judge O'Neill does not find the letters to be  unreliable.
         He goes much further and at paragraph  38  he  says  they  are  not
         genuine.   He  reaches  that  conclusion  based  on  a  balance  of
         probabilities.  This finding raises concerns that the judge  failed
         to apply the proper approach (see  Tanveer  Ahmed)  and  the  wrong
         standard of proof (which should have been the lower standard).   In
         addition, the judge appears to have forgotten the legal maxim,  'he
         who asserts must prove'.  The respondent had not alleged  that  the
         documents were not genuine and it is arguable the judge has changed
         the case the appellant was required to answer."

 8. On that basis he granted permission to appeal.

Submissions

 9.  Mr  Hussainkhail  was  of  course  hampered  by  a   lack   of   legal
    representation.  He did however say that there was no evidence that the
    letters were not genuine and that the respondent ought to have evidence
    to prove that they were false.

10. Mr Diwnycz accepted that the judge had erred and  initially  considered
    that the matter might have to be looked  at  again  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal but upon reflection submitted that any error was immaterial.

Consideration as to Whether there is a Material Error of Law

11. The judge wrote at paragraph 38:

         "I find that on the balance of probability these  are  not  genuine
         but are letters purchased in Afghanistan to bolster up  the  asylum
         claim."

12. Undoubtedly, for the reasons set out in the  grant  of  permission  the
    judge erred.  Nevertheless I conclude that the error is not material.

13. First, the judge was entirely correct to apply Section 8 of the  Asylum
    and Immigration (Treatment of Claimants, etc.) Act 2004 in relation  to
    the appellant, both in relation to his claims to be younger than he was
    and his failure to claim asylum at any of  the  numerous  countries  to
    which he travelled en route to the UK.

14. Second, the judge analysed the appellant's evidence in relation to  his
    escape from his attackers in 2014 in some detail and it was open to him
    to find that his account was implausible.  The appellant said  that  he
    sustained significant injuries during the attack and yet, despite being
    in a seated position and on his  own  was  able  to  escape  from  them
    running a considerable distance to the doorway of the family home.   At
    that point it appears that the attackers fled.  The judge was  entitled
    to find that his account was not  plausible.   Moreover,  he  made  the
    reasonable point that the  attack  took  place  in  2014  and  yet  the
    appellant did not leave Afghanistan for a further year.

15. The judge records that the assassination of the MP was  information  in
    the public domain.  There was no evidence, other than  the  appellant's
    evidence, which was unreliable, to connect his family with the MP.

16. He wrote:

         "I have inspected what are said to be the original  copies  of  the
         'night letters' and they are all  exactly  the  same  in  terms  of
         quality of paper and print.  They are  in  pristine  condition  and
         identical format.  There is no evidence that they have been  pushed
         under a door.  There is no sign of aging or any differences between
         them in terms of signs of aging.  There is absolutely  no  sign  of
         wear and tear  from  being  retained  by  the  uncle,  posted  from
         Afghanistan to  the  UK,  stored  by  the  cousin,  passed  to  the
         Appellant, stored by him until passed to the Home Office."

17. There was therefore ample evidence upon  which  the  judge  could  have
    concluded that the letters from the Taliban could not be relied upon to
    substantiate the appellant's claim.  Had he stopped at that point,  and
    not gone on to find that they were not genuine, he would  have  reached
    the same decision.  The error is therefore immaterial.



Notice of Decision

18. The original judge did not materially err in law.  His decision stands.
     The appellant's appeal is dismissed.

19. No anonymity direction is made.


[pic]
Signed                              Date 4 February 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor

