
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10669/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 7th January 2019                           |On 16th January 2019          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN


                                   Between

                                     FBS
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Rungasamy (Lawrence & Associates Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Ms K Pal (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer}


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  by  the  Appellant,  with
    permission, in relation to a Decision and  Reasons  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Feeney) promulgated on 19th October 2018.

 2. The Appellant is a national of Guinea born on 5th October 1987. She had
    appealed to the First-tier Tribunal against a decision by the Secretary
    of State, taken on 29th August 2018, to refuse her Protection claim.

 3. The Appellant came to the UK in 2008 with  leave  as  a  student  valid
    until  January  2011.  Her  asylum  application  based  on  her  sexual
    orientation, namely that she was a  lesbian,  was  submitted  in  March
    2018.

 4. The issue before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was  whether  or  not  the
    Appellant's claim to be lesbian was credible  and  if  so  whether  she
    would be at risk for that reason on return to Guinea.

 5. The First-tier Tribunal found the Appellant was not a lesbian; she  had
    not been disowned by her family because of her sexual  orientation  and
    she is free to establish contact with them on return if she chooses.

 6. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis it was arguable that  the
    Judge had erred in overlooking the Appellant's evidence of  an  earlier
    relationship,  detailed  in  her   witness   statement.   The   earlier
    relationship referred to was a relationship the  Appellant  claimed  to
    have had in Guinea before leaving.

 7. Before deciding whether or not the First-tier Tribunal made a  material
    error of law in its Decision and Reasons I need to decide a  timeliness
    issue. The deadline for submission of the application for permission to
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal was 2 November 2018  and  the  application
    was not in fact received until 9 November. That is a  period  of  seven
    days which is  a  significant  amount  of  time  given  that  the  time
    allowable for lodging an application is 14 days.

 8.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  consider  the  timeliness  issue;
    believing the application to have been in time when plainly it was not.

 9. The matter of whether or not the application should be  dealt  with  at
    all therefore falls to be decided by me.

10. The original application states that as a  result  of  the  Appellant's
    financial circumstances she could not instruct a  legal  representative
    to submit the appeal and the representatives  decided  to  prepare  the
    grounds on a pro bono basis.  It is said that the  Appellant  expresses
    her sincere apologies for the delay and  inconvenience  caused  to  the
    Tribunal and that the Tribunal is  urged  to  exercise  discretion  and
    admit the application.

11. Now that some time has passed since the grant  of  permission  and  the
    Appellant has clearly been under the impression that time was  extended
    it would, I find, be unjust at  this  stage  to  refuse  to  admit  the
    application.   The  Secretary  of  State  has  made  no  objection   on
    timeliness grounds. I therefore extend time.

12. So far as the grounds to the Upper Tribunal are  concerned,  the  first
    ground asserts that the Judge's finding that  there  is  no  reasonable
    explanation why the Appellant did not give a more detailed  account  at
    an earlier stage as to her lesbian relationships, ignores the fact that
    at the asylum interview the Appellant answered a number  of  questions.
    The Appellant's explanation was that she answered the questions she was
    asked and gave more detail in her statement.

13. It is  also  suggested  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  findings  in
    relation to her claim that she wanted her  parents  acceptance  of  her
    being a lesbian before she moved in with her partner were irrational.

14. Irrationality is a high hurdle for those making the assertion to  climb
    and I will deal with that as I deal with the overall findings.

15. The second ground refers to the fact that the First-tier  Tribunal  had
    indicated that it had taken into account the totality of  the  evidence
    before reaching a decision on the Appellant's credibility when  it  was
    clear that the First-tier  Tribunal  had  not  considered  her  claimed
    previous relationship in Guinea.

16. Before me Mr Rungasamy relied  on  those  grounds,  in  particular  the
    Judge's failure to deal with the relationship the Appellant claimed  to
    have had in Guinea.

17. From paragraph 13 of the Decision and Reasons the  First-tier  Tribunal
    set out the basis of the  Appellant's  claim.   It  set  out  that  the
    Appellant claimed to have developed  an  attraction  to  women  in  her
    teenage years and began a relationship with a childhood friend,  Yvonne
    Cisse who, she said, kissed her in a platonic  way  during  a  shopping
    trip. Thereafter, they decided to use their existing  friendship  as  a
    guise to continue their relationship.  That relationship ended amicably
    when the Appellant came to the UK to study.

18. It was then claimed that in 2009 the Appellant had a relationship  with
    another woman called Mariam Diallo. Marion was scared  of  being  found
    out and the relationship ended.

19. Then, in 2011, the Appellant met  Anna  on  a  bus  and  they  began  a
    relationship.  At that time the Appellant lived with  her  cousin.  She
    did not live with Anna as the Appellant did  not  want  her  family  or
    friends to find out.  In 2017 the Appellant found out Anna was cheating
    on her and the relationship ended acrimoniously.

20. The Appellant said that she decided to tell her parents that she was  a
    lesbian in October 2015 because there was constant pressure on  her  to
    get married. She was able to do so with Anna's support but her  parents
    disowned her. She attempted to reconcile with them to no avail.   After
    that she took the decision to  live  openly  in  the  UK,  particularly
    amongst the Guinean community.

21. The Judge then from paragraph 18 set out  the  Respondent's  case.  The
    Respondent relied on the fact that the Appellant  had  entered  the  UK
    with valid leave and following an unsuccessful attempt  to  extend  her
    stay in 2011 and she became appeal rights exhausted she overstayed. She
    only claimed asylum several years later

22. When asked when she became aware of  her  feelings  towards  women  her
    answers  had  been  vague  at  interview.   She  said  that  her  first
    relationship was with Yvonne. The fact  that  she  had  said  that  she
    reacted to Yvonne's disclosure normally is at odds with the  background
    information suggesting that being a lesbian in Guinea is taboo and that
    it is the least tolerant country in  Africa.  She  provided  no  detail
    about how she conducted her relationship with Yvonne in  secret  for  a
    year.

23. The Secretary of State noted the Appellant had given limited detail  as
    to how she felt having to forcibly hide her feelings in Guinea and  was
    unable to give an account of how she reconciled her sexual  orientation
    with her religion.

24. The Secretary of State said that  her  account  of  being  in  an  open
    relationship with Anna while in the UK was inconsistent.

25. The Secretary of State noted that there was no  record  of  a  bar  she
    claimed to have attended.

26. The  Secretary  of  State  noted  that  the  letters  in  support  were
    unreliable; in particular one stating that the Appellant was in love on
    a date when the Appellant was not in  a  relationship.  Another  letter
    indicating that the Appellant kept her sexual orientation secret was at
    odds with the Appellant's own claim that she lived openly.

27. The Judge's findings commence at paragraph 28. The Judge noted that the
    Appellant had been asked to provide information about  the  first  time
    she realised she was attracted to women and her  responses  were  brief
    and general. The Judge noted that she  provided  a  fuller  description
    later in her  witness  statement  but  there  had  been  no  reasonable
    explanation as to why the account was not given immediately. The  Judge
    rejected the Appellant's explanation that  she  had  not  realised  the
    Respondent wanted more detail. The Judge did so on the  basis  that  it
    was  clear  to  the  Appellant  that  the  asylum  interview  was   her
    opportunity to put forward her case in full. Also, the Judge noted that
    she was not a novice when it came to legal proceedings as she had  made
    applications to the Home Office and mounted  legal  challenges  in  the
    past.

28. Secondly, the Judge noted that when she was asked how she felt when her
    friend in Guinea had disclosed her own feelings to  her  the  Appellant
    said she had felt normal. The Judge found that inconsistent  with  what
    is known about the attitude to lesbians in Guinea and the fact that the
    Appellant claimed she concealed that relationship. The Judge noted  the
    Appellant had been brought up in a strict Muslim family  but  was  only
    able to describe the tension between  her  religion  and  sexuality  in
    general terms.  Her replies were vague.

29. The Judge noted that the Appellant claimed she had been open about  her
    relationship with Anna which the Judge did not  accept.  The  Appellant
    had provided limited evidence of the relationship with Anna despite  it
    having supposedly subsisted for seven years. The Appellant  claimed  to
    have disposed of all souvenirs of that relationship. The Judge did  not
    accept that this Appellant, realising she would be unable to return  to
    Guinea as a lesbian, would have disposed of all such evidence.

30.  Her witness's evidence was unsatisfactory about  the  relationship  in
    that she said that she had the impression that Anna was the Appellant's
    friend and she was unable to explain how or when she became aware  that
    in fact she was her partner. Nor did the witness  give  evidence  about
    how frequently Anna came to visit or about the interaction between Anna
    and the Appellant. The Judge noted that the  witness  would  have  been
    well placed to provide first-hand evidence to support  the  Appellant's
    claimed long-term relationship but that it was only addressed in a very
    brief paragraph in her statement.

31. The Judge also noted that the Appellant said she did not want  to  move
    in with Anna until her parents were aware  of  the  relationship.   The
    Judge found that to lack credibility as her family was a strict  Muslim
    family and she was  aware  of  the  prevailing  cultural  attitudes  in
    Guinea. If what the Appellant said about her family  was  correct  they
    were never going to accept the Appellant in  a  same-sex  relationship.
    The Appellant then nevertheless did not move in with  Anna  even  after
    disclosing the relationship to her family.

32. The Judge noted the Appellant claimed to have lived an  openly  lesbian
    lifestyle in the UK with Anna, especially among the Guinean  community.
    Notwithstanding that the Judge noted a  lack  of  supporting  evidence;
    there were no photographs to support her claim and no other witnesses.

33. So far as the club that the Secretary of State found not to exist,  the
    Judge accepted it did exist. However, the Appellant was unable to  give
    any information about events that took place at that club  whereas  the
    website gave details of a number of events such as karaoke  nights  and
    drag shows. The Judge found that had the Appellant attended the club as
    claimed, she would have been able to describe those kinds of events.

34. The Appellant had sought  to  distance  herself  from  difficulties  by
    saying the transcript of the interview was wrong but  the  Judge  noted
    she had never previously challenged the transcript of the interview.

35. The Judge noted that whilst engagement in  LGBT  activities  is  not  a
    requirement, she did note that the Appellant said she had not contacted
    LGBT groups because she was hiding and did not want to meet people  she
    knew would tell her parents.  That, the Judge found to be at odds  with
    her claim that she lived openly for some of her time in the UK.

36. The Judge noted that the timescales given  by  the  Appellant  did  not
    match and were inconsistent.

37. The Judge noted confusing evidence about the name of her partner in the
    UK particular being the same as the person named as her cousin.

38. The Judge noted the  three  letters  of  support  and  the  significant
    difficulties with those letters; in particular some of the contents did
    not tally with the Appellant's own claim.

39. Finally, the Judge looked at the issue of the  delay  in  her  claiming
    asylum and found that there had been no reasonable  explanation  as  to
    why she did not claim asylum at an earlier date.

40. It is quite clear that the Judge did take into  account  her  claim  to
    have had a relationship in Guinea, contrary to  the  assertion  in  the
    grounds. None of the Judge's findings are irrational  and  are  plainly
    based on the evidence, or lack of it, before the  Tribunal.  The  Judge
    did not say there had been no explanation for the  late  submission  of
    the asylum claim: rather the Judge did not accept the explanation given
    to be reasonable.

41. The Judge's findings are firmly based on the evidence and  plainly  not
    irrational.

42. I find that there is no material error of law in the Judge's  reasoning
    or conclusions.

43. There having been no anonymity direction previously and no  application
    for one before me I do not make one.

Decision

44. I extend time and admit the application for permission to appeal.

45. The Decision and Reasons of the First-tier Tribunal  does  not  contain
    any material errors of law and the appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  is
    dismissed.

46. The First-tier Tribunal made an anonymity direction. I also make one.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed [pic]                            Date 7th January 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Martin

