
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10294/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated           |
|On 25 October 2018                       |On 22 November 2018                      |
|                                         |                                         |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JORDAN


                                   Between

                             mr nahim ali saeed
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M. Mohzan, Twinwood Law Practice
For the Respondent:    Mr L. Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen of  Iraq  who  was  interviewed  in  Kurdish
    Sorani.  The material issue with  which  the  judge  had  to  deal  was
    whether or not a person could obtain a CSID, being the appropriate form
    of identity document necessary for him to return.  The  judge  recorded
    that the appellant's village was a town some  47  kilometres  south  of
    Kirkuk and it was at  this  checkpoint  that  identity  documents  were
    required to enter Kirkuk.  The issue that the judge had  to  deal  with
    was whether members of the Popular Mobilisation Unit  (otherwise  known
    as the PMU, although sometimes referred to by the judge in his decision
    as the MPU) were in control.  The evidence was that the appellant comes
    from an area which was not taken over by the Popular Mobilisation Unit.
     That area of control was limited to that part of Kirkuk which had been
    the subject of a referendum.

 2. In dealing with the appeal the judge had before  him  the  decision  of
    Amin R (on the application of)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2017] EWHC 2417 (Admin), a decision of Sir  Ross  Cranston,
    sitting as a judge of the High  Court.   This  was  a  judicial  review
    application  seeking  permission  to  pursue   judicial   review.    It
    considered the issue of whether the guidance provided  in  the  Country
    Guidance set out in AA still held good in relation to  those  parts  of
    the decision which dealt with  the  provision  of  a  CSID.   Sir  Ross
    Cranston considered the Country Guidance in AA and quoted in  paragraph
    39 the material parts of the headnote.  He then  went  on  to  deal  in
    paragraph 56 with the challenge that was made to the  approach  adopted
    by the Secretary of State in the refusal letter.  In particular, it was
    said that it was unlawful for the Secretary of State to depart from the
    guidance provided in AA and specifically whether the  submissions  made
    in relation to  the  identity  documents  required  had  been  properly
    considered by the  Secretary  of  State  in  the  light  of  additional
    background material.  The issue is then recapitulated in  paragraph  58
    of the judgment in Amin where the judge says:-

         "Mr Jones  continued  that  the  CSID,  contrary  to  the  position
         advanced by the Secretary of State, would not be readily obtainable
         on the basis  of  the  laissez-passer.  The  Secretary  of  State's
         assertion in the letter of 2 May that there was nothing to suggest
         that the claimant could not  obtain  a CSID  from  Kirkuk's  Civil
         Affairs Office was contrary to what was  stated  in  AA:  that  for
         persons from contested territories such as Kirkuk access to a CSID
         would be severely hampered. It was unlawful for  the  Secretary  of
         State to ignore what had been stated in AA given that a First-tier
         Tribunal judge would be bound to apply it."

 3. That  submission  was  expressly  rejected  by  Sir  Ross  Cranston  in
    paragraph 63 of the judgment in Amin.  He said:-

         "As far as the position in Kirkuk is concerned, and the requirement
         for the claimant to return there to obtain a CSID, the Secretary of
         State was entitled to take the realities on the ground  there  into
         account.  Kirkuk is no longer  a contested  area.    In  my  view,
         country guidance cases must give way  to  the  realities,  a point
         recognised by the Court of Appeal in SG (Iraq) v Secretary of State
         for the Home Department [201] EWCA Civ 940 at para 47.   There  are
         apparently still dangers there, but nothing like  the  position  as
         when AA was decided. That being  the  case,  I cannot  regard  the
         passages  in  the  Secretary  of  State's  letter  as  regards  the
         claimant's ability to obtain a CSID as being flawed."

 4. That particular passage was made the  subject  of  an  application  for
    permission to seek an appeal to the Court of Appeal.  That appears from
    the last paragraph on page 13 of the decision (page 13 of 15).  It  was
    said by Mr Jones on behalf of the  applicant  seeking  judicial  review
    that the conclusion  reached  by  His  Lordship  was  contrary  to  the
    evidence contained in the documentation before the Administrative Court
    and to which he had been referred.  Consequently, it was repeated  that
    the Country Guidance should be followed and that none  of  the  further
    reports, including the Country of Origin Information  Report  of  March
    2017 should  be  relied  upon.   The  response  by  the  judge  in  the
    Administrative Court was to refuse the application to appeal.   He  was
    quite satisfied therefore that the points advanced in relation to  that
    additional background material had not been made out by the applicant's
    representative and therefore without further ado  he  was  entitled  to
    refuse permission.

 5. That was a case placed before the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  in  the
    appeal which is now before me.  It is perhaps regrettable that  in  the
    course of this hearing neither side had a copy of Amin which they  were
    able to offer me, and neither party  made  any  submission  as  to  the
    contents of that decision.  It was for me  to  obtain  copies  of  that
    decision circulated to the parties and reach my decision  on  what  the
    judge in the Administrative Court had said there.

 6. I am satisfied that the Administrative Court judge, Sir Ross  Cranston,
    was entitled to make a finding of fact on the material before him  that
    AA could no longer be relied upon insofar as it dealt  with  Kirkuk  as
    being a contested area.  He said in terms, as a finding of  fact,  that
    Kirkuk is no longer a contested area and  he  reiterated  that  Country
    Guidance must give way to the realities which, in the circumstances  of
    this case, must mean that Country Guidance is never set  in  stone  and
    when there is evidence to establish that there has  been  a  change  in
    circumstances  the  Tribunal  is  bound  to  follow  that   change   in
    circumstances.  I am therefore satisfied that  it  was  not  Wednesbury
    unreasonable for the judge to refer to that case and to use that  as  a
    reason for departing from what had earlier been said in the decision of
    AA.

 7. The grounds of appeal suggest that the judge was bound to follow AA.  I
    do not agree with  that.   Country  guidance  stands  unless  there  is
    material which can properly replace it and the decision in the case  of
    Amin was a decision in the Administrative Court dealing with the  issue
    of whether Kirkuk was a contested area and the judge  was  entitled  to
    rely upon it as a change in  circumstances.   The  judge  therefore  is
    entitled to conclude that one could not  regard  the  passages  in  the
    Secretary of State's letter regarding the claimant's ability to  obtain
    a CSID as being flawed.  It follows from this that  the  determination,
    insofar as it relies upon the decision in Amin, is not  itself  flawed.
    There are other complaints that are made.

 8. The first is the judge's conclusion in paragraph 76  of  the  decision.
    In this case he was referring to the influence that a gentleman  called
    Bour was able to have upon his ability to trace the appellant  wherever
    he might be.  The background to a consideration of the role  played  by
    Bour was that the appellant was one of those in charge of looking after
    a cache of arms which was held by the  lawful  forces.   Bour,  it  was
    said, had broken into the storage and had stolen the arms and had  said
    that he would kill the appellant and his colleagues  if  they  informed
    upon him.  The issue therefore  arose  as  to  whether  this  gentleman
    called Bour had the capacity to pursue the appellant  wherever  he  may
    be.  The judge recorded that there  was  no  background  material  with
    regard to Bour.  Although he accepted the threat that had been made  by
    that gentleman to the appellant, there was no reason  to  believe  that
    Bour has the capacity to pursue the appellant wherever he may  be.   In
    the course of argument, I invited Mr Mohzan on behalf of the  appellant
    to tell me the mechanics by which, if the appellant were to be returned
    to Iraq, Bour would be able to ascertain his presence on  a  flight  to
    Iraq, would be able to ascertain his whereabouts upon arrival and would
    be able therefore to pursue him wherever he may be.   In  my  judgement
    that was an almost impossible  task  for  the  appellant  to  establish
    without any evidence to support it.  We do not know who Bour  was.   We
    are not in a position to say that he had the influence in every part of
    Iraq.  Accordingly it was perfectly open to the judge to make the point
    that, since there is no evidence to support  his  claimed  position  of
    influence, it could not be for the appellant merely to  say  that  this
    gentleman had the influence that he claimed to  exert.   There  was  no
    supporting material for  him  to  suggest  this,  nor  to  suggest  the
    mechanism by which Bour would now be able to trace him.

 9. Accordingly, the challenge  which  is  made  to  paragraph  76  of  the
    determination is not made out.  It is said in the  grounds  of  appeal,
    that this was mere speculation on the part of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge, but I am satisfied it was  not  speculation,  it  was  a  simple
    matter of fact that the appellant had not adduced the material to  show
    that the gentleman called Bour had the reach or the capacity to  pursue
    the appellant as he had claimed.

10.  The  next  element  which  requires  consideration  is  paragraph  78.
    Paragraph 78 goes in tandem with paragraph 77.   The  thinking  of  the
    judge in relation to this element is that the  appellant  had  asserted
    that he had not been in touch with his family.  He did not  know  where
    they were and that they had fled because of the activities of  the  PMU
    who, he says, had burned his village.  But the difficulty the appellant
    faced was that he was not in a position to mention  this  in  interview
    because, by that stage, the PMU had not undertaken  the  activities  he
    claimed at the time the interview took place.  The appellant's evidence
    was not credible  because  it  did  not  take  proper  account  of  the
    chronology which the appellant could have known of.  This was a finding
    that was open to the judge and paragraph 77 is a sustainable  one.   In
    essence, he found that there was nothing to suggest that  the  PMU  had
    influence in that area of the Kirkuk region from  which  the  appellant
    came.  That area was part of  an  area  which  was  the  subject  of  a
    referendum.  It was quite clear that the appellant's  village  was  not
    part of that area or the area occupied by the PMU and, as a  result  of
    that, the appellant's claim in relation to this element fell apart.

11. Paragraph 79 is also challenged in the grounds of appeal.  It reasserts
    that the findings in relation to Amin were based on  speculation.   For
    the reasons that I have already said, that is not the case.

12. Finally, challenge is made to paragraph 81 and the judge's finding that
    he was not satisfied, even to the lower standard,  that  Bour  has  the
    influence or ability to carry out the threats the appellant claims  had
    been made.  It is said, once again, this was speculation.  For  reasons
    I have said already, it was not a matter  of  speculation.   It  was  a
    matter of considering the evidence and whether or not the appellant had
    established that Bour had the influence that he claimed.

NOTICE OF DECISION

13. For these reasons I am satisfied that the judge reached  a  sustainable
    determination and his decision shall stand.

    No anonymity direction is made.

                                                               ANDREW JORDAN
                                          DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
Date:  15 November 2018

