
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10202/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 18th March 2020                            |On 20th April 2020            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                                     MA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Barhey of Counsel instructed by Fadiga Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant appeals against a decision of Judge Minhas (the judge) of
    the First-tier Tribunal (the FtT) promulgated on 11 December 2019,  who
    dismissed the Appellant's asylum and human rights appeal.

 2. The Appellant is a male Iraqi citizen  of  Kurdish  ethnicity  born  in
    January 1990.

 3. He arrived in the  UK  on  25th  September  2015  and  claimed  asylum.
    Following refusal of his asylum claim his appeal was dismissed by Judge
    O'Brien of the FtT in a decision promulgated  on  6th  September  2016.
    The Upper Tribunal considered Judge O'Brien's decision and found  in  a
    decision promulgated on 21st March 2017 that it contained no  error  of
    law.

 4. The Appellant submitted further submissions on 6th  August  2019  which
    were accepted by the Respondent as a fresh claim  and  refused  on  1st
    October 2019.

 5. The judge heard the  appeal  on  21st  November  2019.   The  Appellant
    claimed to be at risk as he originates from Mosul,  and  he  could  not
    return there because it had  been  occupied  by  ISIS.   There  was  no
    reasonable internal relocation option anywhere else in  Iraq.   He  did
    not have a CSID and therefore would not be able to find  employment  if
    he returned to Iraq, and he would be destitute.  He claimed that he had
    lost contact with his family in Mosul.

 6. The judge took as a starting point the findings made by Judge  O'Brien.
    The judge did not find that evidence had been  submitted  to  undermine
    those findings, and confirmed the finding made by Judge  O'Brien,  that
    the Appellant chose to leave Iraq without any identity  documents  with
    the intention of making it more difficult for him to be  returned,  and
    he claimed not to be in touch with his family to place further barriers
    in the way of his return.  The judge noted that the Appellant  had  not
    pursued the appeal in relation to his father's claimed involvement with
    the Ba'ath Party, which had been pursued before Judge O'Brien.

 7. The judge found that the Appellant would not be at risk from the Ba'ath
    Party.  The judge found that the Appellant would  not  be  at  risk  if
    returned to Iraq.  It was found that the Appellant could obtain a  CSID
    in Baghdad and the Appellant's family would  be  able  to  provide  him
    either with the CSID that he left behind in Iraq, or the page reference
    of the Family Book that he requires to obtain a new CSID.

 8. It was found that the Appellant could relocate  to  the  Iraqi  Kurdish
    Region, or Baghdad.  The appeal was dismissed on all grounds.

The Application for Permission to Appeal

 9. Reliance was placed upon five grounds.

10. Firstly, it was contended that the judge had erred in  law  by  finding
    that the Appellant could contact his family in Iraq and obtain his  old
    CSID or ascertain sufficient family details to obtain a new CSID if  he
    were returned to Iraq.

11. It was submitted that the judge erred  by  placing  significant  weight
    upon the fact that the Appellant did not contact the British Red  Cross
    to  assist  in  searching  for  his  family,  and  not  accepting   the
    Appellant's explanation that his friends, including  his  witness,  AK,
    had been told by the Red Cross that Mosul,  from  where  the  Appellant
    originates, was  still  too  dangerous  and  the  Red  Cross  were  not
    operating there or searching for people there.  It was  submitted  that
    the expert report prepared by Sheri Laizer confirmed that  this  was  a
    reasonable and plausible explanation for not contacting the Red Cross.

12. The judge, it was submitted, had erred by failing to give  reasons  why
    AK's evidence  was  not  credible.   His  evidence  confirmed  that  he
    attended the Iraqi Embassy in the UK together with the  Appellant,  and
    the Appellant had been unsuccessful  in  obtaining  a  CSID  from  that
    embassy, and the Appellant had lost contact with his  family.   It  was
    submitted that the  judge  had  not  taken  adequate  account  of  this
    evidence.

13. The judge had erred by finding that  because  Ms  Laizer  was  able  to
    travel to Mosul in May 2009, meant that the  British  Red  Cross  would
    also be able to travel to Mosul.

14. The second ground was that the judge had  not  given  full  and  proper
    reasons for rejecting the independent expert evidence  provided  by  Ms
    Laizer.  The expert report was  the  most  recent  document  about  the
    current situation in Iraq but the  judge  had  preferred  the  evidence
    contained  in  the  Home  Office  CPIN  dated  February  2019   without
    explaining the reasons for this.

15. Thirdly, the judge had erred in finding that  the  Appellant  would  be
    able to obtain a CSID in Baghdad within a reasonable  period.   It  was
    submitted that the judge  had  departed  from  the  applicable  country
    guidance case of AAH CG [2018] UKUT 212 (IAC) and the  finding  by  the
    Court of Appeal in AA (Iraq) [2017] EWCA Civ 944 at paragraph 13.   The
    judge had relied upon two letters referred to in the February 2019 CPIN
    (at paragraphs 20-22) but the expert evidence states the  position  was
    much worse in practice than those letters suggested.  Given the  expert
    report, this was an insufficient  basis  to  depart  from  two  binding
    country guidance cases.

16. Fourthly, the judge failed at paragraph 27 to deal with the finding  in
    BA Iraq CG [2017]  UKUT  18  (IAC)  that  Sunni  Muslims  such  as  the
    Appellant were at risk in Baghdad and the Shia dominated government  is
    unwilling to protect them, a point which was emphasised still to be  in
    issue by Ms Laizer.

17. Fifthly, the judge erred at paragraph 26 by finding the Appellant could
    internally relocate within Iraq, relying upon the case of Amin  v  SSHD
    [2017] EWHC 2417.  This case was successfully appealed to the Court  of
    Appeal, and therefore the  judge  erred  in  law  by  relying  upon  an
    overturned decision.

The Grant of Permission to Appeal

18. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Appleyard of the FtT  in  the
    following terms;

         "2.  The grounds assert, amongst other things, that the judge erred
             in failing to give due weight  to  expert  evidence  and  give
             proper reasons  for  rejecting  independent  expert  evidence.
             That evidence is briefly referred to by the judge at paragraph
             17 of the decision.   Having  considered  the  decision  as  a
             whole, I find it arguable that the judge  has  erred  for  the
             reasons  given.   There  are  three  further   grounds   which
             likewise, for the avoidance of doubt are arguable.

         3.   There is here an arguable error of law".

19. Directions were issued that there should be an oral hearing before  the
    Upper Tribunal to ascertain whether the FtT decision contained an error
    of law such that it must be set aside.

My Analysis and Conclusions

20. At the oral hearing Ms Barhey made submissions at length,  relying  and
    expanding upon the grounds upon which permission  to  appeal  had  been
    granted.  I have recorded those submissions in my Record of Proceedings
    and it is not necessary to reiterate them here.

21. Mr Tufan made the point that the decision made by the  judge  was  made
    prior to the publication of the most up-to-date country guidance,  that
    being SMO (Iraq) CG [2019] UKUT 00400 (IAC).  The  Respondent  accepted
    that there were some errors of law in the FtT  decision,  for  example,
    the judge had relied upon the Appellant being granted a laissez passer,
    and it was found in SMO that such a document would be of no  assistance
    in the absence of a CSID or Iraqi national identity card (INID)  and  a
    laissez passer would be  confiscated  upon  arrival,  contrary  to  the
    finding made by the judge.

22. In addition, contrary to the  judge's  finding,  paragraph  15  of  the
    headnote in SMO confirms that an individual returnee not from  Baghdad,
    is not likely to be able to obtain a replacement  document  there,  and
    certainly not within a reasonable time.

23. It was however submitted that the judge had not erred in  finding  that
    the Appellant could contact his family if he wished,  and  it  followed
    from that finding that the Appellant could in fact obtain a  CSID  from
    the Iraq Embassy in the United Kingdom.

24. Dealing with  the  first  ground  I  find  no  material  error  of  law
    disclosed.  The judge was correct to adopt  as  a  starting  point  the
    findings made by Judge O'Brien in the previous appeal.  Those  findings
    were not successfully challenged.  The judge adopted  a  correct  legal
    approach at paragraph 14, by recording the  earlier  findings  of  fact
    were a starting point but were not determinative.  At paragraph 15  the
    judge recorded the findings made by Judge O'Brien, that  the  Appellant
    chose to leave Iraq without any ID  documents  with  the  intention  of
    making it more difficult for him  to  be  returned,  and  that  he  was
    claiming not to be in touch with his family to place  further  barriers
    in the way of return.

25. With reference to the British Red Cross, the judge took into account at
    paragraph 17 the claim by the Appellant that  his  friends  claimed  to
    have been told by the British  Red  Cross,  that  Mosul  is  still  too
    dangerous to progress the search for their families.  The  judge  makes
    the point that it was unclear when the Appellant's friends  made  their
    enquiries.  The judge points  out  that  the  situation  in  Mosul  has
    changed following the defeat of ISIS, and there is no error of  law  in
    that finding.

26. The judge was entitled to find it relevant that Ms Laizer travelled  to
    Iraq and travelled by road to Mosul.  In my view the judge did not  err
    in law, in finding that agencies such as  the  British  Red  Cross  are
    likely to be able to travel to Mosul if Ms Laizer was able to do so.

27. The judge was entitled to conclude that  no  credible  explanation  had
    been given as to why the Appellant  had  failed  to  initiate  his  own
    enquiries with the British Red Cross, if he had genuinely lost  contact
    with his family, rather than simply rely upon assertions from friends.

28. With reference to the evidence of AK, this related  to  visits  to  the
    Iraqi Embassy in the UK with the Appellant.  I do  not  find  that  the
    judge rejected this evidence.  The judge  at  paragraph  18  placed  no
    weight on the visits to the embassy, having accepted the concession  by
    the Respondent, that the Appellant was unlikely to be able to obtain ID
    documents in the UK.  It appears from SMO, that the judge was wrong  to
    accept this concession.

29. In my view  the  judge  was  wrong  at  paragraph  18  to  accept  that
    concession  as  the  judge  had  found  (see  paragraph  24)  that  the
    Appellant's family would be able to provide him either  with  the  CSID
    card he had left behind in Iraq, or the page reference he  requires  to
    obtain a replacement card.

30. On this point guidance is given in AAH at paragraph 101, which referred
    to expert evidence given in AA (Iraq)  CG  [2015]  UKUT  544  (IAC)  at
    paragraph 177.  The expert evidence, which was accepted, was that it is
    possible for an Iraqi national living  in  the  UK  to  obtain  a  CSID
    through the consular section of the Iraqi Embassy in London if  such  a
    person is able to produce a current or expired passport and/or the book
    and page number for their family registration details.

31. The Upper Tribunal in SMO (paragraph 13 of the headnote, and paragraphs
    391-392 of the  decision)  found  that  it  is  possible  to  obtain  a
    replacement CSID in the UK if the volume  and  page  reference  of  the
    entry in the Family Book in Iraq is known.   Given  the  importance  of
    that information most Iraqi citizens will recall it.  That  information
    may also be obtained from family members.  The  opinion  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal was that the number of individuals who do not know  and  could
    not ascertain their volume and page reference  would  be  quite  small,
    this information is of significance to the individual and their  family
    from the moment of their birth.  It was considered  that  it  would  be
    very much the exception that an individual would be unaware of a matter
    so fundamental to their own identity and that of their family.  It  was
    accepted that most Iraqis would be  able  to  obtain  this  information
    easily.

32. The judge did not err in finding that the Appellant would  be  returned
    to Baghdad.  The error was in finding that he would be returned without
    a CSID, taking into account the judge's finding that he previously  had
    a  CSID,  and  could  contact  his  family  and  obtain  the   relevant
    information from them.

33. Therefore the error made by the judge in relying upon a laissez passer,
    and the finding that the Appellant could obtain a CSID  in  Baghdad  is
    not a material error of law.

34. The judge did not err in law in finding at  paragraph  24  that  having
    arrived in Baghdad,  the  Appellant  could  thereafter  travel  without
    significant difficulty, to the IKR.  This is confirmed in  AAH  (Iraq),
    and SMO (Iraq).

35. SMO confirms the situation in Mosul has now changed in that Mosul is no
    longer a contested area.  The situation in the formerly contested areas
    is that as a general matter  there  are  not  substantial  grounds  for
    believing any  civilian  returned  there,  solely  on  account  of  his
    presence there, faces a real risk of being subjected to  indiscriminate
    violence amounting to serious harm within the scope of Article 15(c) of
    the Qualification Directive.

36. Referring to the second ground of appeal, the judge does  give  reasons
    at paragraph 25 for not accepting the expert opinion that a Sponsor  or
    political contact would be needed for the Appellant to enter  the  IKR.
    The judge was perfectly entitled to rely upon the guidance in AAH which
    indicated that was not the case.

37. With reference to the third ground, the judge was wrong in law to  find
    that the Appellant would be able to obtain a CSID in Baghdad, but  that
    is not a material error, given the  findings  by  the  judge  that  the
    Appellant maintained contact with his family.  Therefore,  the  country
    guidance in both AAH and SMO indicates that the Appellant would be able
    to obtain the relevant information from his family  so  that  he  could
    obtain a CSID from the Iraqi Embassy in London.  The Appellant chose to
    attend the Iraqi Embassy without that information.

38. With reference to the fourth ground, BA (Iraq)  CG  [2017]  UKUT  00018
    (IAC) provides at paragraph 98 that it was agreed that evidence did not
    show that a person would be at real risk of  serious  harm  in  Baghdad
    solely on account of his or her religious identity.  At  paragraph  100
    it was found that a statistical analysis did not give rise  to  a  real
    risk solely on account of Sunni identity.  The majority of  Sunnis  are
    likely to be able to lead a relatively normal life in Baghdad but it is
    not without risk.  At paragraph 101 it was found that the  Respondent's
    most recent policy statement recognises that Sunnis  may  face  a  real
    risk of persecution or serious harm from Shia militias in Baghdad,  and
    the increasing levels of sectarian  violence  in  Baghdad,  albeit  not
    sufficient if taken alone, are likely to be an important  consideration
    in   assessing   whether   a   person   can   demonstrate    individual
    characteristics that would place him or her at  real  risk  of  serious
    harm.  It is not therefore the case that the Appellant would be at risk
    simply because he is a Sunni Muslim.  I do  not  find  that  the  judge
    materially erred in law on this point, and in any event the error would
    not be material, in view of the  judge's  finding  that  the  Appellant
    could  travel  to  the  IKR.   The  situation  has  now   changed,   as
    demonstrated in SMO, and the Appellant's  home  area  in  Mosul  is  no
    longer a contested area.

39. With reference to the fifth ground of appeal, I would accept  that  the
    judge erred in law in relying upon Amin v SSHD [2017] EWHC 2417, but in
    view of the other findings made by the judge, this is  not  a  material
    error.

40. In conclusion, there are some errors of law contained  within  the  FtT
    decision, as  conceded  by  the  Respondent,  and  referred  to  above.
    However, those errors are not material bearing in mind the finding that
    the Appellant has not lost contact with his family,  and  could  obtain
    from his family the necessary information to obtain a replacement CSID.
     There was no error of law in that finding, and although the judge  was
    wrong to find that the CSID replacement could be obtained  in  Baghdad,
    that error is not material, because country guidance case law indicates
    that the CSID could actually be obtained in the UK.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the FtT does not disclose a  material  error  of  law.   The
appeal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead  to  contempt  of  court  proceedings.   This
direction is made because the Appellant has made a claim  for  international
protection.


Signed                              Date         24th March 2020
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal is dismissed.  There is no fee award.


Signed                              Date         24th March 2020
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall
