
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10961/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 31 October 2019                            |On 20 November 2019           |
|Decision given orally at hearing              |                              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     THE HON. MR JUSTICE LANE, PRESIDENT
                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT

                                   Between

                                     BO
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr C Holmes, Counsel, Citizens Advice Bureau
(Bolton)
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. We find, for the reasons elucidated by Underhill LJ in the decision  of
    the Court of Appeal, that the decision of Judge  Davies  is  flawed  in
    law.  That decision was characterised by the Court of  Appeal  as  very
    poorly reasoned.  We would, with respect, concur with that  view.   The
    judge made a  number  of  problematic  findings,  not  least  that  the
    appellant  had  got  certain  documentation,  which  remains   entirely
    unexplained.  The judge also failed to find where  the  appellant  came
    from.

 2. The issue for us is whether or not any part of Judge  Davies'  findings
    should stand.  Given that there has been a material failure in the fact-
    finding exercise I have just indicated, there would  need  to  be  good
    reasons shown for preserving any part of the findings of  fact  of  the
    judge; in particular his findings on credibility.  We do  not  consider
    that any good reasons have been demonstrated.

 3. Accordingly, we set aside Judge Davies's decision and we remit the case
    to be re-heard in its entirety in the First-tier Tribunal  by  a  judge
    other than Judge Davies.  For the avoidance of doubt,  no  findings  of
    fact are preserved.  The decision to remit rather than to hold the case
    in the Upper Tribunal is predicated on the extent  and  nature  of  the
    fact-finding exercise, which is going to be necessary.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






                      Signed                     Date: 20 November 2019






                      The Hon. Mr Justice Lane
                      President of the Upper Tribunal
                      Immigration and Asylum Chamber

