
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10658/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5 April and 12 August 2019        |On 22nd August 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

                                 EA (GHANA)
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Agata Patyna, Counsel instructed by J M Wilson
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S. Whitwell (05.04.19) and Mr L. Tarlow
                    (12.08.19), Senior Home Office Presenting Officers


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals from the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Obhi sitting at Birmingham on 7 November  2018)  dismissing  his
    appeal against the decision of the Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department ("the Department") made on 21  August  2018  to  refuse  his
    refugee and human rights claims in which he maintained that  he  had  a
    well-founded fear of persecution in his home country, having  come  out
    in the UK as a bisexual.

Relevant Background

 2. The appellant, whose date of birth is 31 December 1984, arrived in  the
    UK as a student in August 2013, and overstayed from November  2014.  He
    claimed asylum in February 2018.

 3. In the RFRL of 21 August 2018, the Department accepted at [39] that the
    appellant was bisexual, and that he had had gay  relationships  in  the
    UK. The Department  also  accepted  at  [46]  that  he  had  a  genuine
    subjective fear on return to Ghana of persecution as a bisexual man and
    at [53] that he had concealed his sexuality prior to coming to the  UK.
    However, at [47] to [53] the Department  advanced  the  case  that  gay
    people in Ghana who live openly as gay are not liable  to  persecution,
    but only to discrimination.

The Hearing Before, and the Decision of, the First-tier Tribunal

 4.  At  the  hearing  before  Judge  Obhi,  both  parties   were   legally
    represented.  The Judge received oral evidence from the  appellant  and
    his partner, Matthew James. In his closing submissions on behalf of the
    Department, the PO submitted that there was a large LGBT  community  in
    Accra and Kumasi and people  could  frequent  gay  bars  there  without
    retribution. Also, the appellant had concealed his sexuality in the  UK
    through choice, so he was likely to conceal it in Ghana.

 5. In his subsequent decision, the Judge found that the appellant had  not
    experienced any problems in Ghana "despite his sexual orientation";  he
    had lived discreetly in Ghana and in the UK, and whilst he stated  that
    he would now have to live openly, this was what not what  he  had  done
    previously; he had not disclosed his sexuality in the UK until claiming
    asylum; whilst there was a high level  of  discrimination  against  the
    LGBT community in Ghana, there were areas  where  they  lived  and  had
    access to social clubs and gatherings. The Judge concluded at [32}:

         "I am therefore satisfied that the appellant will not be at risk of
         persecution on return to Ghana as it is unlikely that he would live
         openly, not through fear of being attacked but because he has  been
         discreet even in the UK."

The Application for Permission to Appeal

 6. The appellant's solicitors submitted that on a  correct  interpretation
    of the evidence he had openly followed a bisexual lifestyle in the  UK;
    and the only reason that he was discreet in Ghana was  in  response  to
    social pressures and the fear of persecution.  The  objective  evidence
    confirmed that same-sex activity was illegal in Ghana,  and  that  LGBT
    people had been arrested and harassed by the police. So,  he  qualified
    for asylum under HJ Iran.

The Reasons for the Grant of Permission to Appeal

 7.  On  27  December  2018  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Blundell  granted
    permission as it was arguable that the Judge should have  reflected  on
    the details given in the witness statement evidence  of  the  appellant
    and Mr James as to their lifestyle and  as  to  whether  these  details
    amounted to the appellant having chosen an open lifestyle in the UK  in
    preference to the discreet lifestyle he previously had; and  thus  that
    the finding reached in relation to the fourth  stage  of  the  HJ  Iran
    [2011] 1 AC 596 enquiry was not open to Judge Obhi.

The Rule 24 Response

 8. On 17 January 2019, Stefan Kotas of the Specialist Appeals Team  served
    a Rule 24 response opposing the appeal. Given that  the  appellant  had
    not suffered any persecutory treatment in the past,  coupled  with  the
    Judge's consideration of the  objective  material  at  [27]-[29]  which
    disclosed that  there  was  a  gay  community  in  Ghana  and  the  law
    prohibiting homosexuality did not appear to be enforced, and that there
    were pockets of the country which were quite liberal  -  as  the  Judge
    held at [31] - the appellant could not demonstrate an objectively well-
    founded fear of persecutory treatment. Any error of law  was  therefore
    immaterial.

The Error of Law Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

 9. At the hearing before me to determine whether an error of law was  made
    out, Ms Patyna, who did not  appear  below,  took  me  through  various
    passages in the evidence in support of the submission that it  had  not
    been open to the Judge to find that the  appellant  had  been  discreet
    about his sexuality in the UK. Following the hearing, she sent an email
    to me and Mr Whitwell in which she highlighted  the  acknowledgment  at
    [39] of the RFRL of the production by the appellant of  several  photos
    of him attending a Gay Pride event.

10. At the hearing Mr Whitwell adopted his colleague's  Rule  24  Response,
    and in response to Ms Patyna's email he conceded that the  photographic
    evidence was capable of undermining the Judge's reasoning.

Reasons for Finding an Error of Law

11. Although this is not a point taken in the permission application, Judge
    Obhi fell into error by not taking as his starting  point  the  factual
    concession made in the  RFRL  that  the  appellant  had  concealed  his
    sexuality in Ghana (whereas he had come out as a bisexual in  the  UK);
    and that he had a genuine subjective fear of persecution on  return  to
    Ghana if he lived there openly as a bisexual.  Given  this  concession,
    the fourth question in HJ Iran could realistically only be answered  in
    one way: a material reason why the appellant would  be  discreet  about
    his sexuality on return to Ghana would be because, as in the  past,  he
    would have a genuine fear of persecution if he did not conceal it.

12. The fact that the appellant  had  at  times  been  discreet  about  his
    sexuality in the UK for reasons clearly  unconnected  with  a  fear  of
    persecution did not in itself import that the reasons for the appellant
    continuing to be discreet on return to Ghana would also be  unconnected
    with a fear of persecution, given the concession made in the RFRL.

13. In addition, the Court of Appeal in LC (Albania) v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ
    351 at [29] has given the following pertinent guidance:

         "As exemplified by SW (Jamaica) (see paragraph 25 above)  "behaving
         with discretion" or "living discreetly" on  return  does  not  mean
         simply avoiding certain overt behaviour by which the characteristic
         which defines the relevant group might be  recognised,  or  wishing
         and/or trying to live in such a way as  not  to  be  identified  or
         perceived as having that characteristic. Rather,  it  includes  the
         individual behaving in such a way that he will not in  fact  be  so
         identified  or  perceived.  Similarly,  "living  openly"   is   not
         restricted to circumstances in which the relevant  person  exhibits
         overt behaviour from which it is likely that he will be  identified
         as being gay: it involves the individual behaving  in  such  a  way
         that there is in fact a real risk that he  will  be  identified  or
         perceived as having that characteristic."

14. I consider that much of the evidence about the appellant's lifestyle in
    the UK, such as him  not  cohabiting  with  his  current  partner,  was
    reasonably characterised by the Judge as  evincing  a  discreet  rather
    than an openly gay lifestyle.  However,  having  regard  to  the  above
    guidance, I do not consider that the Judge gave  adequate  reasons  for
    finding in effect that the way in which the appellant had led his  life
    as a bisexual in the UK was no less discreet than the way in  which  he
    had led it in Ghana. For example, while his attendance at a  Gay  Pride
    event in the UK did not prove he was gay, it was nonetheless a form  of
    overt behaviour from which he was  likely  to  be  identified  as  gay.
    Similarly, the fact that the appellant had met his current gay  partner
    at a pub, and that they went out to pubs  and  parks  together  several
    times per  week,  was  also  indicative  of  the  appellant  leading  a
    relatively open gay lifestyle here in contradistinction to  his  former
    highly discreet lifestyle in Ghana, where (as accepted in the RFRL) out
    of a fear of persecution he had completely abstained from  seeking  out
    or openly socialising with male sexual partners.

15. For the above reasons, an error  of  law  is  made  out  in  the  terms
    identified by  Judge  Blundell  when  granting  permission.  Given  the
    concession made in the RFRL and the undisputed  evidence  which  showed
    that the appellant had, on analysis,  recently  led  an  open  bisexual
    lifestyle in the UK in comparison to that which he had  previously  led
    in Ghana, it was not open to the Judge to  find  that  the  appellant's
    fear of persecution would not be a material reason  for  the  appellant
    being discreet about his sexuality on return.

16. The Judge's erroneous approach to answering the fourth question  in  HJ
    Iran is only material if the second question falls to  be  answered  in
    favour of the appellant. The Judge's findings at  [28]  point  in  this
    direction, while his findings at [31] indicate the  contrary.  However,
    his conclusion at [32] is squarely based on an  answer  to  the  fourth
    question, and not on a clear answer to the second question.

17. I do not consider that it is obvious from the background material  that
    the second question should be answered in favour of the Department  (as
    contended in the Rule 24 Response) nor is it obvious that it should  be
    answered in favour of the appellant (as contended by  Ms  Patyna).  So,
    the Judge's failure to make a  clear  finding  on  this  crucial  issue
    constitutes a further material error.

18. The upshot is that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal is  vitiated
    by a material error of law, such that it must be set aside and remade.

19. I consider that this is an appropriate case for retention by the  Upper
    Tribunal, as the only remaining live issue arising under the protection
    claim is how the second question in  the  HJ  Iran  enquiry  should  be
    answered. If it should be answered in  the  appellant's  favour,  then,
    given the concession in the RFRL discussed  earlier,  it  would  follow
    from that concession, and also from the  undisputed  evidence  deployed
    before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  that  a  material  reason  for  the
    appellant being discreet about his sexuality on return would be a well-
    founded fear of persecution if he lived openly as a bisexual.

Discussion and Findings on Remaking

20. As envisaged by the directions I made at the error of law hearing,  the
    resumed hearing on 12 August 2019 to remake the decision  proceeded  by
    way of submissions only.

21. The relevant material before me comprises the documentary evidence that
    was relied  on  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  and  the  following
    additional material filed by the appellant's solicitors for the resumed
    hearing: (a) an expert report from Dr Mattia Fumanti,  Senior  Lecturer
    in Social Anthropology at the University of St Andrews,  in  which  she
    opines that, based on his knowledge of Ghana, there is a real risk that
    the appellant could face persecution on the ground of his sexuality and
    the Ghanaian police would not be able to  offer  sufficient  protection
    against such a  threat;  (b)  an  article  dated  20  May  2019  headed
    "Returnee attacked at  beach  for  having  gay  relations  with  jailed
    colleague in US"; and (c) an article dated 13 January 2019 headed  "Men
    suspected of being gay robbed,  stripped  and  blackmailed  in  Ghana",
    which is cited by Dr Fumanti in her report.

22. In the latter article, the author, a LGBTI advocate at a  human  rights
    organisation in Ghana called "Human  Rights  Defender  Ghana",  reports
    that on 5 January a group of gay men were lured via social media  to  a
    suburb of Accra where they were allegedly robbed of their phones, money
    and other valuables. In  addition,  they  were  stripped,  videoed  and
    photographed.  The assailants forced the victims  to  kiss  and  caress
    while they took videos and photos of them, and later posted the  videos
    on social media.  The victims reported the incident to the  police  who
    had arrested two of the perpetrators.

23. The author also refers to an earlier incident in September 2018 when  a
    mob of young people in Tafo seized two lesbians allegedly having fun in
    their own bedroom and tried lynching them, "but luckily a police patrol
    team managed to save them."

24. The author comments that homophobes  have  continued  their  aggravated
    attacks on people they believed to be gay or lesbian in Ghana; and that
    the phenomenon of lawless attacks on perceived LGBTI persons has  taken
    a new twist as such people continue to face widespread violence.

25. The above article, which was carried in "Gay Star News" is illustrative
    of the conundrum identified by Judge Obhi in his decision at [28] where
    he said: "There is some contradiction in the reports as to  whether  an
    individual will be at risk or not."  For the article tends to undermine
    the proposition that there is no effective protection  for  openly  gay
    people afforded by the Ghanaian police, and it does not in itself prove
    that the risk of violence or ill-treatment from non-state agents is  of
    such  severity  and  frequency  as  to  disclose  a  general  risk   of
    persecution for openly gay people. On the other hand, the article  also
    shows  that  openly  gay  people  are  as  vulnerable  to   crime   and
    exploitation in Accra as they are in more socially  conservative  parts
    of the country.

26. In the CPIN on "Ghana: Sexual orientation and gender identity", version
    1.0, dated February 2016, the following is stated at 2.3.11: "There is,
    however, limited information of how openly LGBT people are  treated  by
    the state and society generally in Ghana, although there is evidence of
    the LGBT community existing.   Same-sex  activities  are  criminalised,
    prosecutions are rare, and very few  charges  abroad,  whilst  societal
    intolerance  is  widespread.   However,  in  general   the   level   of
    discrimination and abuse faced by LGBT persons  is  not  such  that  it
    would reach the level of being  persecutory  or  otherwise  inhuman  or
    degrading treatment."

27. This is reiterated in the Policy Summary at 3.1.1,  where  it  is  said
    that, "although LGBT persons face intolerance  and  discrimination,  in
    general the level of intolerance and discrimination is not such that it
    would reach the level of being  persecutory  or  otherwise  inhuman  or
    degrading treatment.  However, an asylum claim for an LGBT  person  may
    succeed if it can be demonstrated that they  face  an  accumulation  of
    measures which are sufficiently serious by their nature and  repetition
    that they constitute persecution."

28. The CPIN also draws  a  distinction  between  different  parts  of  the
    country in terms of the level of hostility faced by openly gay  people.
    At paragraph 2.5.2,  it  is  said  that  where  LGBT  people  encounter
    hostility from non-state actors they may  be  able  to  avoid  this  by
    moving elsewhere in Ghana, but only if the risk is  not  present  there
    and it is not unduly harsh to  expect  them  to  do  so.   Taking  into
    account their personal  circumstances,  decision  makers  must  explore
    whether a person could relocate to those parts of Ghana that  are  more
    tolerant towards LGBT persons, such as parts of Accra and Kumasi.

29. On the topic of where there is a gay scene or community in  Ghana,  the
    CPIN at 7.2 contains a response  from  the  Australian  Refugee  Review
    Tribunal in 2010 which stated that there are  some  gay-friendly  bars,
    restaurants and other meeting places in Accra.   These  venues  do  not
    publicly advertise their gay or gay-friendly status.  In  a  Ghana  web
    article dated August 2014, it was observed that Ghana had been known as
    the African  country  with  the  most  registered  homosexual  hopefuls
    seeking expatriate partners.  However, the FCO's travel advice  for  UK
    nationals, not Ghanaians, dated August  2015,  observed  that  although
    there was a small gay community, there was no "scene".

30. In summary, the respondent's  policy  as  of  February  2016  was  that
    incidents of violence against  gay  people  in  Ghana  were  infrequent
    and/or they were geographically localised such that there  was  not  in
    general a risk of persecution throughout the  country  for  individuals
    who are openly gay.  This is also the position taken in the RFRL.

31. However, a significant theme in the evidence relied on by the appellant
    is that violence  against  LGBT  people  in  Ghana  "has  been  getting
    steadily worse", as stated in  an  article  in  the  Independent  on  8
    January 2018 headed "Ghana:  Campaigners  demand  decriminalisation  of
    homosexuality after spike in anti-LGBT violence". Dr Fumanti's  opinion
    is that a hostile attitude towards LGBT people has increased in  recent
    years with the increased prominence  of  religious  leaders  denouncing
    homosexuality.  In addition, a Human Rights Watch report of  8  January
    2018 highlighted the fact that in February  2017  the  Speaker  of  the
    Ghanaian Parliament referred to homosexuality  as  an  abomination  and
    called for stricter laws against same-sex conduct.  As a result of this
    hardening of attitudes towards gay people, Dr Fumanti's opinion is that
    the level of homophobia and the number of attacks against LGBT  persons
    in Ghana "makes the country very unsafe for a man that  wants  to  live
    his bisexuality openly."

32. Neither in Dr Fumanti's report or elsewhere  is  there  a  quantitative
    analysis of the number of reported incidents of  violence  against  gay
    people since February 2016 (the date of publication  of  the  CPIN)  as
    against earlier years, such as to  demonstrate  clearly  that  violence
    against gay people is getting steadily worse to the point such that  it
    can be said that being openly gay anywhere in Ghana  gives  rise  to  a
    real risk of persecutory harm.  But as was pointed out by Ms Patyna  in
    her closing submissions, Mr  Tarlow  did  not  challenge  Dr  Fumanti's
    credentials or seek to persuade me that her opinion was based on flawed
    evidence, but he simply relied on the  RFRL.  Despite  the  RFRL  being
    issued on 21 August 2018, the background evidence relied  upon  in  the
    RFRL all pre-dates the CPIN of February 2016.

33. Recent FCO advice fortifies the appellant's case. In the FCO advice  of
    December 2017, travellers to Ghana are warned that  there  is  "a  zero
    tolerance towards lesbian, gay,  bisexual  and  transgender  people  in
    Ghana" and that "Anti LGBT rhetoric/hate speech  by  religious  leaders
    and government officials and a local media that tends to sensationalise
    homosexuality can incite homophobia against the  LGBT  community".  The
    FCO also reiterates its earlier advice of 2015 that there  is  no  LGBT
    scene in Ghana.

34. Accordingly, having considered  the  evidence  in  the  round  and  the
    arguments presented by both parties, I find that the appellant has made
    out his case to the lower standard of  proof.   There  are  substantial
    grounds for believing that if he lived openly as a gay or bisexual  man
    in his former home area of Accra, or anywhere else in Ghana,  he  would
    face a real risk of persecution.

35. The appellant would not live openly as a gay or bisexual man in  Ghana,
    and a material reason for him doing so would be a well-founded fear  of
    persecution.  Accordingly, the appellant qualifies for recognition as a
    refugee.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  contained  an  error  of  law,  and
accordingly  the  decision  is  set  aside  and   the   following   decision
substituted:

The appellant's appeal is allowed on asylum grounds.


Direction Regarding Anonymity

Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 15 August 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed this appeal on remaking, I have given consideration as  to
whether to make a fee award in respect of any fee which has been paid or  is
payable, and I have decided to make no fee award as the appellant needed  to
bring forward evidence by way of appeal in order to succeed in his appeal.


Signed                              Date 15 August 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson

