
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal   Appeal number: PA/10906/2019 (V)

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard Remotely at Manchester CJC              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 9 December 2020                            |On 31 December 2020           |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PICKUP



                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and



                                     MA

                            (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)

                                                                  Respondent

                          DECISION AND REASONS (V)



For the Appellant: Mr D Clarke, Senior Presenting Officer

For the Respondent: Ms L Barton  of  counsel,  instructed  by  Oakmount  Law
Solicitors



This  has  been  a  remote  hearing  which  has   been   consented   to by
the parties. The form of remote hearing was video by Skype (V). A face-to-
face hearing was not held because it was not  practicable,  and  all  issues
could be determined in a remote hearing. At the conclusion of  the  hearing,
I reserved my decisions and reasons,  which  I  now  give.  The  order  made
is described at the end of these reasons.

1. Although the Secretary  of  State  has  brought  this  appeal,  to  avoid
   confusion, for the purpose of this appeal I have referred  below  to  the
   parties as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.




2. The appellant, who is a national of Iraq of Kurdish ethnicity  and  Sunni
   Muslim religion, with date of birth given as 6.4.89,  has  appealed  with
   permission to the Upper Tribunal against the decision of  the  First-tier
   Tribunal promulgated 16.12.20 (Judge Herbert), dismissing on all  grounds
   his appeal  against  the  decision  of  the  Secretary  of  State,  dated
   29.10.19, to refuse his fresh claim in support  of  his  application  for
   international protection.




Relevant Background & Chronology



3. The relevant background can  be  summarised  as  follows.  The  appellant
   asserts that he arrived clandestinely in the UK  in  September  2007.  He
   claimed asylum on 21.9.07. The respondent refused the  claim  on  23.6.08
   and his subsequent appeal was dismissed by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  on
   20.8.08 (Judge Gladstone). He became Appeal  Rights  Exhausted  (ARE)  on
   7.10.08.



4. Further submissions made in 2008 and  again  in  2016  were  refused.  In
   February 2017 he applied for Leave to Remain in the UK on  the  basis  of
   his relationship with an  EEA  national,  which  was  also  refused.  The
   appellant then made the further representations on 16.6.17,  the  refusal
   of which on 29.10.19 was the subject matter of the appeal to  the  First-
   tier Tribunal and the impugned decision of Judge Herbert.



5. The  protection  claim  was  based  on  alleged  fear  of  Article  15(c)
   indiscriminate violence on return to Tikrit,  within  the  Salah  ad  Din
   Governorate, because of the security situation in Iraq.  He  also  feared
   serious harm or death on the basis  that  his  father  and  brother  were
   killed in 2007 in an apparent revenge attack for having  worked  for  the
   Ba'ath Party, a fact accepted by the respondent. He also claimed  article
   8 private and family life with  his  EEA  national  (Czech)  partner  and
   children.

The First-tier Tribunal Decision

6. Judge Gladstone found  the  appellant's  account  of  being  at  risk  of
   persecution not credible. Whilst the killing of the father and brother in
   revenge attacks for their Ba'ath  Party  involvement  was  accepted,  the
   judge, pointing out that he had remained in the same house for some  time
   before leaving, did not accept that he had come to the UK because of this
   history but the evidence rather suggested his motive was to study in  the
   UK. His asylum claim was found not credible  for  the  extensive  reasons
   carefully set out in Judge Gladstone's decision.



7. Taking the decision of Judge Gladstone as the Devaseelan starting  point,
   Judge Herbert went on to reject the appellant's asylum claim, finding  at
   [15] of the decision that he would not  be  at  risk  of  persecution  on
   return to Iraq. Neither was it accepted that there was an  article  15(c)
   risk of indiscriminate violence. However, from [24]  onwards,  the  judge
   found "overwhelming evidence" that the appellant does  not  have  a  CSID
   identity document and had taken all  reasonable  steps  to  procure  such
   identification, so that he would be unable to fly from Baghdad to the IKR
   and there was, therefore, a  real  risk  that  he  would  be  subject  to
   detention and possibly unlawful or inhuman treatment if he were to try to
   negotiate the overland route to his home area.



8. The judge also found that the appellant had lived with his partner  since
   2014 and she and their two children have permanent  residence  status  in
   the UK so that it "would not be reasonable to expect the appellant to  be
   separated from his children and removed to  Iraq."  In  consequence,  the
   First-tier Tribunal allowed the appeal on  article  8  grounds.  Although
   there was not an EEA application or decision to appeal,  the  judge  also
   purported to allow the appeal under the EEA Regulations.

Grounds of Appeal

9. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal on  grounds  that  the
   First-tier Tribunal failed to follow the Country Guidance of SMO,  KSP  &
   IM (Article 15(c); identity documents) Iraq CG [2019] UKUT 004100  (IAC),
   promulgated on 20.12.19, after the First-tier Tribunal appeal hearing  on
   17.12.19 but before  its  promulgation  on  16.1.20.   The  grounds  also
   alleged a failure to provide adequate reasons for  findings  on  material
   matters, including: (a) that the appellant had taken all reasonable steps
   to procure identity documentation which would  allow  him  to  return  to
   Iraq; (b) that it would not be reasonable for him to relocate to Iraq and
   apply from there for entry clearance; and (c) failed to provide reasoning
   for allowing  the  appeal  under  both  the  Immigration  Rules  and  the
   Immigration (EEA) Regulations. Complaint was also  made  that  the  judge
   told the representatives of the two parties to the  appeal  that  he  had
   already made up his mind and for that  reason  curtailed  the  Presenting
   Officer's cross examination of the appellant.



10. On 14.2.20, the First-tier Tribunal granted permission to appeal to  the
   Upper Tribunal, considering it arguable that in  the  light  of  SMO  the
   judge had erred in his extremely brief findings and in giving no  reasons
   for allowing the appeal under the EEA Regulations.



11. On 30.4.20 the Upper Tribunal issued directions proposing  to  determine
   the error of law issue without a hearing, providing the  opportunity  for
   written objection to this course of action  and  further  submissions  in
   respect of the alleged errors of law.



12. In response to those directions, the Secretary of State  relied  on  the
   grounds seeking permission and made no further  submissions.  On  20.5.20
   the  appellant  submitted  lengthy  grounds  purporting  to  oppose   the
   permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal. It was  argued  that  despite
   SMO, there was no material  error  in  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
   Tribunal. Neither  party  objected  to  the  error  of  law  issue  being
   determined without a hearing.

The Error of Law Decision

13. On 29.6.20, the Upper Tribunal promulgated Upper Tribunal Judge  Coker's
   error of law decision, made on the papers and without  an  oral  hearing,
   pursuant to Rule 34. Judge Coker found that the judge ought not  to  have
   curtailed either party's involvement in the appeal hearing,  and  thereby
   erred in law. Judge Coker also pointed out that  Judge  Herbert  made  no
   reference to the impact Judge Gladstone's  adverse  credibility  findings
   may or may not have had on the assessment of credibility of the claim  to
   not have access to a CSID and his account of attempts to do so. There was
   no analysis of the evidence in accordance with the  previous  credibility
   findings or in the context of the guidance in SMO that individuals can be
   expected to know identity information or of the ability  to  obtain  that
   information. This error was  compounded  by  the  curtailment  of  cross-
   examination.



14. In relation to article 8 ECHR, Judge  Coker  found  that  Judge  Herbert
   failed  to  undertake  a   structured   analysis   of   the   appellant's
   circumstances and the  relationships  he  claims  to  have.  No  adequate
   reasoning was provided as  to  why  applying  for  entry  clearance  from
   outside the UK would be unreasonable. Neither was it clear why the appeal
   was allowed under the EEA Regulations when the appellant is  not  married
   to his partner and there was no consideration  of  Regulation  17.  Judge
   Coker concluded, "Overall the decision by the judge to allow  the  appeal
   on article 8, under the Immigration Rules and under the  EEA  regulations
   has not been a structured decision with reasoned findings. The  decisions
   taken by the judge are fraught with errors of law."



15. Judge Coker also found that in relation to the claim  for  international
   protection, "the judge has failed not only to take  account  of  relevant
   country guidance but has failed to have adequate regard to  any  previous
   findings made; a simple acceptance of (the appellant's) written  evidence
   with no cross examination and no  consideration  of  a  previous  adverse
   tribunal decision is inadequate and of such consequence  that  I  set  it
   aside." Judge Coker retained the decision  to  be  remade  in  the  Upper
   Tribunal in accordance with directions set out at the conclusion  of  her
   decision.



16. In response to those directions, on 20.7.20 the Upper Tribunal  received
   the  respondent's  skeleton  argument.  On  6.8.20,  the  Upper  Tribunal
   received the appellant's further witness statement, dated 5.8.20, and  on
   24.8.20 the undated and unsigned witness  statement  of  the  appellant's
   partner, Ms SC. A signed copy of this statement, dated 23.11.20, is  with
   the appellant's consolidated bundle lodged with  the  Upper  Tribunal  on
   30.11.20.



17. There does not appear to have been  any  compliance  by  the  respondent
   with the directions of Judge Coker to "file  and  serve  a  supplementary
   decision, if so advised, taking full account of the evidence relied  upon
   by (the appellant) and his partner in their witness statements as  relied
   upon before the FtT." However, this  is  addressed  in  the  respondent's
   skeleton argument. At [18] of her decision, Judge Coker observed that  it
   was difficult understand on what basis the Secretary of  State  made  her
   decision finding that the appellant's partner was not settled in the  UK,
   given that she had been granted permanent residence by the  date  of  the
   refusal decision.

Challenge to the Error of Law Decision

18. Notice of the remote hearing  for  the  remaking  of  the  decision  was
   issued to the parties by the Tribunal on  3.11.20.  However,  very  late,
   only the day before the hearing the appellant's representatives wrote  to
   the Tribunal as a matter of urgency stating, "As you  are  aware  of  the
   decision of those matters that were heard on paper  during  the  Covid-19
   pandemic are held to be illegal, Does the  Secretary  of  State  and  the
   Court  agree  that  our  client's  matter  should  be  regard   for   the
   reconsideration. Can the Court please kindly  confirm  whether  a  matter
   tomorrow,  as  per  our  client's  hearing  will  go  ahead  as  a   full
   reconsideration,  or  in  conjunction  with  the  current  case  law   on
   judgements without the client's presence during the Covid-19 period  that
   the matter would be adjourned."




19.  In  response,  I  directed  the  Tribunal  to  advise  the  appellant's
   representatives that if they wished to pursue this point, I would take it
   as a preliminary issue at the outset of the appeal hearing  and  directed
   the submissions in support to be set out in a skeleton argument.  I  have
   not received any such skeleton argument.




20. Although the email message of 8.12.20 is  garbled  and  poorly  drafted,
   the sense was clear. However, the central proposition that all  decisions
   made on paper during the Covid-19 pandemic were held to  be  illegal,  is
   entirely inaccurate. Notwithstanding the decision of the High Court in  R
   (JCWI) v President UTIAC [2020] EWHC 3103 (Admin), Judges were and remain
   entitled to decide matters on the papers in the light  of  Rule  34,  the
   Senior President's  Practice  Direction,  and  taking  into  account  the
   overriding objective to deal with cases fairly and justly. As noted above
   the directions proposing the error of  law  decision  should  be  decided
   without a hearing invited any objection to that course of action.  Whilst
   the appellant's  representatives  responded,  opposing  the  respondent's
   error of law argument, they did not object to the error of law  issue  to
   be decided on the papers.



21. I raised this issue with Ms Barton at the  outset  of  the  hearing,  in
   response to which she indicated that she did  not  have  instructions  to
   pursue the point. I proceed, therefore, on the basis  that  there  is  no
   challenge to the error of law decision.

Remaking of the Decision

22.   Judge Coker set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal "in  its
   entirety" to be remade in the Upper Tribunal. The  matter  has  now  been
   transferred to me, pursuant to the Principal  Resident  Judge's  Transfer
   Order dated 29.10.20.

23. In addition to the skeleton arguments and further witness statements  of
   the appellant and  his  partner  referred  to  above,  the  Tribunal  has
   received the respondent's bundle, and  the  appellant's  original  bundle
   (AB1) and supplementary bundle (AB2). The other documents referred to  in
   the representative's email of 30.11.20 include the more recent  decisions
   and directions of the Upper Tribunal. I confirm that all of this evidence
   and these submissions have  been  carefully  considered  and  taken  into
   account, along with the oral submissions  made  at  the  remote  hearing,
   before making any findings or reaching any conclusions.  Whether  or  not
   specific documents or evidence or submissions are referenced  below,  all
   have been considered in the round. Whilst I  have  necessarily  addressed
   issues sequentially, this is purely for the purpose of presentation in an
   intelligible form and I confirm that  all  issues  have  been  considered
   together before findings were made, notwithstanding any particular order.





24. I also confirm that I have applied the lower standard of  proof  to  the
   protection claim and borne in mind that in  respect  of  the  family  and
   private life claim  outside  the  Rules,  it  is  for  the  appellant  to
   demonstrate on the balance of probabilities that article 8 is engaged but
   for the respondent to show that the impugned decision of the Home  Office
   is proportionate.

Summary of the Appellant's Case

25. At the outset of the hearing Ms  Barton  confirmed  that  the  appellant
   continued to maintain risks on return arising from  his  family's  Ba'ath
   Party affiliation, his ethnicity and religion, an Article 15 (c) risk  of
   indiscriminate violence, as well as the article 8 and EEA claims.

26. The appellant states that he was born and raised in Tikrit, as  a  Sunni
   Muslim of Kurdish ethnicity. He was last in school in 2000  after  either
   two or three years' study between the ages of 6  and  8,  and  thereafter
   stayed at home and was unemployed. His father and brother were killed  in
   Tikrit in either July or August 2007, in an apparent revenge  attack  for
   his father's Ba'ath Party involvement. He wasn't sure precisely what  his
   father's role was but said that he wore a military  uniform.  His  mother
   told him his father worked for Saddam Hussein and had done a lot  of  bad
   things, arresting people and involved in a lot of violence. He said  that
   5-6 months after the fall of the regime, a lot of letters  threating  his
   father were thrown into the house. The house was never attacked, and  the
   appellant never threatened or attacked personally. In the  month  between
   his father's and brother's deaths and leaving Iraq, he remained living in
   the family home in Tikrit.

27. He feared return to Iraq for the same reason his father and brother  had
   been killed. Because he feared being killed by terrorists  or  insurgents
   in Tikrit, and/or enemies of his father, he was assisted by his  paternal
   uncle and at the expense of his mother in the sum  of  $10,000  to  leave
   Iraq, travelling via Turkey to the UK. He said he last saw his mother  in
   July 2007; she told him he had to go to Europe and/or to go to school  in
   the UK.  His mother went to  live  with  his  uncle  in  Kirkuk.  He  now
   maintains that he last had contact with his family in 2014 and  that  all
   attempts to re-establish contact have failed.

28. The appellant claimed to have been born on  6.4.91,  so  that  he  would
   have been a minor when  arriving  in  the  UK  in  2007.  The  respondent
   disputed this,  based  on  his  appearance  of  being  older,  and  on  a
   subsequent age assessment which determined he was over the age of 18.

29. When interviewed he said he was told not to  bring  any  documents  with
   him but that he expected some documents, including his  ID  card,  to  be
   sent to him from Iraq which he had telephoned his uncle to ask for. These
   documents were considered by the respondent and by  Judge  Gladstone  but
   have not been put before the Upper Tribunal.

30. Having entered the  UK  clandestinely,  the  appellant  entered  into  a
   relationship with a Czech citizen. They now have two children born in the
   UK, also Czech citizens. Recently,  the  appellant's  partner  and  their
   children were granted settled status under the EU Settlement  Scheme.  He
   relies on family life with his partner and children.

Summary of the Respondent's Case

31. The respondent's skeleton argument maintains the  refusal  decision  and
   relies on SMO, submitting that the level of  indiscriminate  violence  in
   the appellant's home area of Tikrit is not  such  as  to  engage  article
   15(c) of the Qualification Directive, so that the appellant could  safely
   return there or, alternatively, relocate to the IKR as a Sunni Kurd.

32. It is submitted that as the  appellant  has  been  found  not  to  be  a
   witness of the truth, he cannot be believed when claiming  to  have  lost
   all contract with his family in Iraq and  that  he  would  be  unable  to
   obtain a replacement CSID card or other identity  document  necessary  to
   enable him to be returned to Iraq and make his way to  either  Tikrit  or
   the IKR. Reliance is made on [391] and [392]  of  SMO,  where  the  Upper
   Tribunal held that the number of individuals who do not  know  and  could
   not ascertain the volume and page reference  of  the  civil  register  is
   likely to be quite small, as these details appear  on  numerous  official
   documents and, given the significance to the individual and  the  family,
   most people will know or be able to easily obtain this information.

33. In relation to the human rights article 8  ECHR  claim,  the  respondent
   now accepts that the appellant's partner and children have  now  acquired
   settled status in the EU Settlement Scheme and that he enjoys  a  genuine
   and subsisting relationship with his partner and children. However, it is
   pointed out that the partner and  children  are  not  British  but  Czech
   citizens and can return there, so there are no  insurmountable  obstacles
   to family life continuing outside the UK with an application from Iraq to
   join them there, if they do not wish to accompany him to Iraq. Whilst the
   children have settled status, neither meets the 7-year requirement to  be
   a qualifying child under either Appendix FM EX1 or paragraph 117B(6).  It
   follows that the Rules cannot be met as a parent or partner.

34. The respondent asserted that fraudulent identity documents  were  easily
   obtainable and pointed out that those the appellant claimed were sent  to
   him from Iraq purported to have been issued in 2002, at  which  time  the
   appellant would have been 11 years of age, but the photographs were clear
   of an older person, not those of an 11-year-old. In evidence  before  me,
   the appellant said he had no reason to suggest that these documents  were
   anything but genuine but did not know whether  they  were  fraudulent  or
   not. He had submitted them at the First-tier Tribunal appeal  hearing  in
   2008 in the believe they were genuine.

35. Importantly, the respondent also points out that if  the  appellant  was
   able to obtain replacement identity documents, it would be open to him to
   use them to support his own application for Leave to Remain under the  EU
   Settlement Scheme from within the UK.

36. Finally, the respondent points out that  as  the  partner's  status  was
   obtained under the EU  Settlement  Scheme,  this  is  not  equivalent  to
   exercising Treaty rights in the UK. If he  believes  he  is  entitled  to
   settlement under the Immigration (EEA) Regulations, it is open to him  to
   make such an application, which he has not done.

The 2008 First-tier Tribunal Decision

37. Whilst judge Gladstone accepted that the appellant's father and  brother
   were killed in revenge  for  their  Ba'ath  Party  involvement,  for  the
   comprehensive reasons set out from [46] onwards of  her  decision,  Judge
   Gladstone found the appellant not credible in all other  aspects  of  his
   claim.




38. The more relevant findings of Judge Gladstone can be briefly  summarised
   as follows. However, reference should be made to the  full  decision  for
   the detail, which I have carefully read and taken into  account  in  line
   with the Devaseelan principle:



     a. In his various accounts, the appellant was vague about his age  and
        inconsistent about the number of years he attended school. The  age
        assessment concluded that he was over the age of  18,  pointing  to
        the fact he was well-developed with a  strong  beard  and  stubble,
        despite first presenting himself as clean-shaven. In the  premises,
        the judge rejected the appellant's claim to be a minor, which false
        claim undermined his credibility.

     b. The core claim was found not credible; his story was  not  believed
        as  it  contained  numerous  contradictions,  inconsistencies,  and
        discrepancies which he had failed to explain either satisfactorily,
        or at all.

     c. Whilst the  judge  considered  herself  reluctantly  bound  by  the
        respondent's acceptance that his father and brother had been killed
        in 2007 in an apparent revenge attack for their work for the Ba'ath
        Party, there were discrepancies in  the  various  versions  of  his
        account so that the judge concluded that whilst they may have  been
        killed, that event did not cause the appellant to leave  Iraq.  The
        judge also found that the killing happened some time before he left
        Iraq. On  consideration  of  the  various  inconsistent  dates  the
        appellant had given for that event, the judge  concluded  that  the
        deaths were either in late June or early July 2007. The judge noted
        that when the discrepancies were put to him,  he  claimed  to  feel
        unwell and disorientated.

     d. The judge rejected the appellant's claim to  be  illiterate,  which
        was a claim the judge concluded was made to try to avoid  answering
        pertinent questions. Nor was it accepted that he is innumerate, and
        the judge found that his claim not to  know  dates  was  false  and
        advanced to avoid  answering  significant  questions,  or  head-off
        alleged discrepancies or inconsistencies. He was also found  to  be
        evasive in answering questions.

     e. The account of  receiving  threatening  letters  was  found  to  be
        inconsistent and rejected as not credible.

     f. There was no good reason  for  the  appellant  to  fail  to  remain
        consistent and the judge concluded he  was  unable  to  maintain  a
        consistent account because it was  not  true.   He  was  unable  to
        provide a consistent account of the chronology  generally,  of  the
        claimed receipt of threatening letters, of the immediate  aftermath
        of the killings. At [56] the judge concluded that the  killings  of
        his father and brother did not take place shortly  before  he  left
        Iraq or that they were the reason for his departure. "Rather  there
        was emphasis on coming to the UK to study."

     g. The judge also found at [57] that the appellant's brother  had  not
        been deliberately targeted but only killed because he was with  his
        father. The appellant was inconsistent as to  whether  his  brother
        worked for the Ba'ath Party. "Thus I find that  the  appellant,  as
        the son of a former Ba'athist, is not at any  real  risk  of  being
        specifically targeted, particularly as there were no direct threats
        to him in the past, and therefore the appellant is not in  need  of
        international protection."

     h. At [58] the judge repeated that she did not find the  appellant  to
        be credible and did not accept his story,  "other  than  having  to
        accept that his father and brother were shot at some stage. I  find
        that there was no Geneva Convention reason  for  the  appellant  to
        leave Iraq, and he will suffer no serious problems on return."



39. Pursuant to  Devaseelan  (Second  Appeals  -  ECHR  -  Extra-territorial
   Effect) Sri Lanka [2002] UKAIT 00702, those findings and reasons are  the
   starting point for my  consideration.  I  found  the  decision  of  Judge
   Gladstone careful  and  well-reasoned.  In  her  submissions,  Ms  Barton
   submitted that  Devaseelan  was  not  a  straight-jacket  and  that  this
   Tribunal needed to make an overall assessment of the  facts.  She  argued
   that it was not reasonable that what  she  described  as  a  "13-year-old
   decision" should stand and the evidence  be  reconsidered.   However,  no
   specific error in that decision was identified, and  Ms  Barton  has  not
   advanced any specific reason to depart from any of those findings. In the
   hearing before me, as Mr Clarke pointed out in his  submissions,  neither
   the appellant in his new witness statement  nor  Ms  Barton  specifically
   addressed any of the adverse findings of Judge Gladstone. Nevertheless, I
   have given careful consideration to the evidence as  a  whole,  including
   the more recent evidence since that decision was promulgated, and made an
   overall assessment of the appellant's credibility. Whilst the core claims
   were not abandoned, it is clear that in submissions to  me  the  emphasis
   was now being placed on article 15(c), risk on return and relocation, and
   the feasibility of return without identity documentation. However,  given
   the failure to address those  findings,  and  in  the  light  of  my  own
   findings, I can find no basis on which to depart  from  them.  Given  the
   serious concerns in relation to the appellant's more recent  written  and
   oral evidence, set out below, I find  even  greater  reason  to  conclude
   that, apart from being  bound  by  the  respondent's  concession  as  the
   killing of his father and brother, the appellant's core  account  remains
   unreliable and incredible.




40. An interpreter attended to assist the  appellant  to  give  evidence  in
   Kurdish Sorani. However, he insisted on answering  questions  in  English
   saying he didn't need the interpreter.  She  was  kept  on  hand  and  it
   transpired that although his English was reasonable,  there  were  a  few
   questions for which he needed translation assistance.  With  Ms  Barton's
   consent, the interpreter was released on conclusion  of  the  appellant's
   oral evidence.




41. In evidence, I found the appellant a poor and unreliable witness in  his
   own cause. He was frequently argumentative or evasive in his  answers  to
   questions, deliberately failing to provide a straight answer to  straight
   questions asked of him. I concluded that he was  deliberately  untruthful
   and evasive.

42. In his own evidence, the appellant relied on his witness  statements  of
   12.12.19 and 5.8.20. That of 12.12.19 was  prepared  for  the  First-tier
   Tribunal appeal hearing in December 2019 and  purported  to  replace  the
   earlier witness statement  from  March  2019  (AB1p48).  There  was  some
   questioning of the appellant about paragraph 5 of the earliest  of  these
   three statements. Curiously, this had been deleted in its  entirety  from
   the December 2019 statement. However, as originally drafted and signed by
   him, the appellant purported in that paragraph to  correct  an  assertion
   that he had resigned from the army. He maintained in paragraph 5 that  he
   left the army without consent so that return  to  Iraq  would  cause  him
   problems and punishment for being an absconder and may even be seen as  a
   collaborator. This is peculiar, given that he came to the UK, in my  view
   falsely, claiming to be a minor, a claim which he did not actively pursue
   before me. In evidence, he denied ever asserting that he had been in  the
   army but was either unable or unwilling to explain why he  had  signed  a
   statement with that corrective paragraph in it  suggesting  that  he  had
   left the army and would be at risk on return for that reason. I  consider
   this aspect of the appellant's case undermining  of  his  credibility.  I
   have considered  the  possibility  that  the  statement  was  incorrectly
   drafted by the appellant's  current  legal  representatives  based  on  a
   statement for a different client, but as he signed the statement  and  as
   no evidence has been adduced from  the  representatives  to  admit  of  a
   'clerical' error, I must assume that the statement as originally  drafted
   was based on the appellant's explicit instructions and, therefore, signed
   by him. The revised statement did not appear until several months  later,
   just before the First-tier Tribunal appeal hearing before Judge Herbert.

43. In evidence before me, the appellant maintained  that  he  had  entirely
   told the truth in his evidence to the Tribunal in 2008. When asked if  he
   had relied at that hearing on Iraqi identity documents, including  an  ID
   card and an Iraqi National Identity Certificate, to demonstrate  how  old
   he was, he didn't directly answer that question, stating instead that  he
   didn't know if the documents were genuine or not. He said  he  had  asked
   for them and his mother had sent them. It was suggested that if they  are
   genuine, they would enable him to return to Iraq.  He  repeated  that  he
   didn't know if they were genuine or not. However, he  could  not  explain
   why his mother would send fraudulent documents from  Iraq  if  she  could
   send him the genuine articles. Ms Barton intervened to complain about the
   line of questioning when there was no evidence that  the  documents  were
   fraudulent. However, it was in fact the appellant and not Mr  Clarke  who
   raised the question as to whether they were fraudulent.

44. It was pointed out to the appellant that in interview, as noted at  [17]
   of her decision, he claimed his uncle not his mother sent the  documents.
   Varying his account again, he then said that they sent him the  documents
   together. Asked again  why  they  would  send  fraudulent  documents,  he
   repeated he didn't know if they were genuine or false, as he didn't  have
   that power. He said he didn't have the identity  documents  and  believed
   that the Home Office had them. However, he had never asked for them back.
   I pointed out to the representatives, that Judge Gladstone noted  in  her
   decision that the originals together with translations had been handed in
   to the Tribunal in 2008 and were retained on file. In the  circumstances,
   they were not held by the Home Office. The appellant admitted that he had
   not made any attempt to obtain them for the purpose of this  hearing,  or
   indeed when purportedly asking the Red Cross to help locate his family in
   Iraq, a request that on the evidence was  only  made  as  late  as  2019.
   Neither  had  any  request  been  made  of   the   appellant's   previous
   representatives to see if they  had  retained  a  copy  of  the  identity
   documents on the case file. Neither had  he  requested  their  return  to
   provide to the Iraqi consulate when purportedly seeking their  assistance
   for identity documentation. When pressed on the matter, he said he feared
   that he might be arrested and detained by  the  embassy  if  he  produced
   fraudulent identity documents to  them  but  could  not  explain  why  he
   thought they might be fraudulent. He denied Mr Clarke's  suggestion  that
   he didn't produce the documents to the Iraqi  consulate  because  he  was
   intent on frustrating his removal to Iraq. Asked if  the  documents  were
   genuine during re-examination by Ms Barton, he said he didn't know but if
   he had known they were not genuine he certainly  wouldn't  have  provided
   them to the Tribunal.

45. Similarly, he was questioned about what details he had given to the  Red
   Cross. He was entirely vague in answer to these questions and  unable  to
   satisfactorily explain why he did not make contact  with  the  Red  Cross
   before 2019, when he claimed to have lost  contact  with  his  family  in
   2014. When pressed, he suggested that  it  was  because  he  didn't  have
   support at that time. However, he evidently had had the benefit of  legal
   representation  from  the  Immigration  Advisory  Service  in  2008.   In
   response, he claimed to have contacted the Red Cross "a couple of  times"
   before 2019, without success, but was unable to  produce  any  supporting
   evidence of such earlier contact. He admitted that  he  did  not  provide
   them the telephone number of his uncle in  Iraq,  stating  that  he  lost
   contact and that number was switched off in 2014.

46. In oral evidence the appellant maintained that he lost contact with  his
   family in 2014. However, it was pointed out that in 2008 he said  he  had
   already lost contact with his mother by that date and told  the  Tribunal
   he did not regain contact with her. This put him  in  some  difficulties,
   which he was unable to satisfactorily explain as  he  maintained  he  had
   contact by telephone with his uncle throughout from when he left Iraq  to
   2014.  He did not explain why, therefore, he did not  also  have  contact
   with his mother at least until 2014. When  questioned  about  what  other
   paternal or maternal family he had  in  Iraq,  the  appellant  was  again
   evasive and apparently reluctant to answer directly, maintaining that  he
   didn't know much about either side of  the  family  because  he  was  not
   interested. He was also vague about what details of  his  family  he  had
   given to the Red Cross. He denied deliberately attempting to mislead  the
   Tribunal and stated later that he could not remember dates of birth as he
   didn't even know his uncle's family having only met them once, but  I  am
   satisfied that was exactly what the appellant was  doing  in  respect  of
   this issue and much of his evidence, attempting to mislead the Tribunal.

47. I concluded that  the  appellant  was  being  deliberately  evasive  and
   dishonest about the identity documents and why  he  had  no  interest  in
   seeking their return. It is clear that he no longer  wished  to  rely  on
   these documents which had originally been produced to confirm  he  was  a
   minor on entering the UK. I am satisfied that that age  claim  was  false
   and that he has not sought the return of these documents  either  because
   he believes that they are not genuine and knew or believed that fact when
   they were submitted to the First-tier Tribunal, or because he fears  they
   might assist his return to Iraq,  which  he  clearly  does  not  want  to
   happen. I am satisfied that if he provided any  information  to  the  Red
   Cross about his family, he was not been truthful  or  frank  about  those
   details and did not provide them with all that he knows, because he  does
   not genuinely seek the assistance of the Red Cross to locate his  family.
   I am also satisfied on the evidence that he has no  genuine  interest  in
   obtaining replacement identity documents from the Iraqi consulate because
   he has no wish to return to Iraq. His attendance there was effectively  a
   self-serving exercise designed to fail. In summary, I am  satisfied  that
   the  appellant  was  evasive,  deliberately  vague,   inconsistent,   and
   untruthful in his oral evidence. All of  this  seriously  undermines  his
   credibility.

48. In the premises, I find that  little  reliance  can  be  placed  on  any
   factual assertion by the appellant, nor the support for his claims  about
   contact with family and attempts to  document  himself  provided  by  his
   partner's witness statement. He was found not credible by Judge Gladstone
   and, even though the appeal was allowed, Judge Herbert also rejected  his
   claim to be at risk of persecution or ill-treatment on  return  to  Iraq.
   Whilst it was not disputed that the appellant's father  and  brother  had
   been killed in 2007 in an apparent revenge attack for having  worked  for
   the Ba'ath Party,  Judge  Gladstone  relied  on  the  country  background
   information that relatives of former Ba'ath party members are not at  any
   real risk of being targeted  themselves,  which  remains  the  background
   information. It was  also  pointed  out  that  he  did  not  consider  it
   necessary to flee Iraq immediately and remained living in the same  house
   after the claimed dates of the killings, with the judge finding that  the
   deaths  took  place  earlier  than  the  appellant  had  claimed.  Having
   considered the evidence for myself, I can find no reason to  depart  from
   the findings of Judge Gladstone and adopt them, rejecting all aspects  of
   the appellant's factual claim apart from the respondent's  concession  as
   to the death of his father and brother. In the  premises,  I  reject  his
   claim to be at any real risk of persecution or serious harm on any ground
   on return to Tikrit. Similarly, I do not accept that there is any article
   15(c) risk on return to Tikrit.

49. Whilst there has been correspondence with the Red Cross  and  the  Iraqi
   Consulate in Manchester, which I accept, I find that  the  appellant  has
   been deliberately evasive about the information provided to those  bodies
   and that he failed to provide all the information he could have  done  to
   help locate his family. He has not sought the ID documentation he  relied
   on in 2008, perhaps because he believes it to be  false.  However,  I  am
   also satisfied that the appellant has not lost touch with his  family  in
   Iraq and that he has invented this assertion in an attempt  to  frustrate
   his removal to Iraq. For the same reason, I do not  accept  he  has  been
   truthful in his contact with either the Red Cross or the Iraqi Consulate.



50. I am driven to the clear conclusion that the appellant has not done  all
   he could to obtain his Iraqi documentation. Further, I am satisfied  that
   he does have effective access to his identity  documents.  I  reach  that
   conclusion, taking account of the fact he has previously been  found  not
   credible, and my own adverse assessment of the  appellant's  credibility,
   the country background information  set  out  in  the  bundles,  and  the
   country guidance of SMO. I entirely reject his  claim  to  not  know  the
   details of his CSID or that he would not in  any  event  be  able  to  be
   provided with those details by his family members in  Iraq,  so  that  he
   will be able to obtain a  replacement  CSID  to  render  return  to  Iraq
   feasible. I have considered this further, as set out below.

Return to Tikrit

51. In relation to return to Tikrit, within the Salah  al  Din  Governorate,
   this was formerly but is no longer a 'contested area'.  The  respondent's
   case is that given the change in  the  country  security  situation,  the
   level  of  indiscriminate  violence  does  not  meet  the  Article  15(c)
   threshold anywhere in Iraq and that return to  Tikrit  is  now  possible.
   Applying the Country Guidance of SMO, in general terms "the intensity  of
   that  conflict  is  not  such  that,  as  a  general  matter,  there  are
   substantial grounds for believing that any  civilian  returned  to  Iraq,
   solely on account of his presence there,  faces  a  real  risk  of  being
   subjected to indiscriminate violence amounting to serious harm within the
   scope of Article 15(c) QD." Only a small area of Salah al-Din which  does
   not include Tikrit is an exception to the general conclusion. However,

      "3. The situation in the Formerly Contested Areas (the governorates of
      Anbar,  Diyala,  Kirkuk,  Ninewah  and  Salah  Al-Din)   is   complex,
      encompassing ethnic, political and humanitarian issues which differ by
      region. Whether the return of an individual to such an area  would  be
      contrary to Article 15(c) requires a fact-sensitive,  "sliding  scale"
      assessment to which the following matters are relevant.

      "4. Those with an actual or perceived association with ISIL are likely
      to be at enhanced risk throughout Iraq. In those areas in  which  ISIL
      retains  an  active  presence,  those  who  have  a  current  personal
      association  with  local  or  national  government  or  the   security
      apparatus are likely to be at enhanced risk.

      "5.  The  impact  of  any  of  the  personal  characteristics   listed
      immediately below must be carefully assessed against the situation  in
      the area to which return is contemplated, with particular reference to
      the extent of ongoing ISIL activity and the behaviour of the  security
      actors in control of that  area.  Within  the  framework  of  such  an
      analysis, the other personal  characteristics  which  are  capable  of
      being relevant, individually and cumulatively, to  the  sliding  scale
      analysis required by Article 15(c) are as follows:
        (  Opposition to or criticism of the GOI, the KRG or local security
        actors;
        (  Membership of a national, ethnic or  religious  group  which  is
        either in the minority in the area in question, or not in de  facto
        control of that area;
        (  LGBTI individuals, those not conforming  to  Islamic  mores  and
        wealthy or Westernised individuals;
        (  Humanitarian or medical staff and those associated with  Western
        organisations or security forces;
        (  Women and children without genuine family support; and
        (  Individuals with disabilities.
      "6. The living conditions in Iraq as a whole, including  the  Formerly
      Contested Areas, are unlikely to give rise to a breach  of  Article  3
      ECHR or (therefore) to necessitate subsidiary protection under Article
      15(b) QD. Where it is asserted that return to  a  particular  part  of
      Iraq would give rise to such a breach, however, it is to  be  recalled
      that the minimum level of severity required is relative, according  to
      the personal circumstances  of  the  individual  concerned.  Any  such
      circumstances require individualised assessment in the context of  the
      conditions of the area in question."
52. In the light of my findings, and applying a sliding-scale assessment,  I
   have considered whether the appellant has  any  personal  characteristics
   capable of being relevant to the Article 15(c) risk. He is the son  of  a
   former Ba'ath Party member or official. However, the  country  background
   information suggests that family members of former Ba'ath  Party  members
   are not at risk of being targeted. Judge  Gladstone  concluded  that  the
   appellant's brother was only killed because he was with his  father,  not
   because of any role in the Ba'ath Party, about which issue the  appellant
   was vague. He was able to remain at home for a considerable period  after
   the attack and was never personally threatened. The account of  receiving
   threatening letters was rejected as being inconsistent and not  credible.
   I take into account his claim not to speak Arabic and that he is a  Sunni
   Kurd. However, the area is Sunni  dominated  and  whilst  Arabs  are  the
   predominant ethnic group, many Kurds also live there. The  appellant  has
   no former or current political profile or interest. He does not have  any
   former or current association with the security apparatus, or with  ISIL,
   and was relatively young, although not a minor, when he left Iraq. In the
   premises,  I  am  not  satisfied  that  these  factors  individually   or
   cumulatively present any real risk of being targeted on return.

53. It follows from the above that, in theory, there is no article 15(c)  or
   Convention or humanitarian protection reason  why  the  appellant  cannot
   return to his hometown of Tikrit. The next question is whether return  to
   Iraq and Tikrit is feasible, which turns on the availability of  identity
   documentation. Applying the Country  Guidance,  the  appellant  would  be
   returned to Baghdad and would have to make his way to Tikrit from  there,
   some two hours drive north.

Documentation

54. Applying SMO, before return to Iraq  can  be  considered  feasible,  the
   appellant will need at  least  either  a  passport,  expired  passprt  or
   Laissez Passer. With one of those documents, he will be  at  no  risk  of
   serious harm at the point of return. Even if return is  not  feasible  at
   the present time, he cannot succeed  on  that  basis  in  his  protection
   claim.

55. However, to travel onwards from Baghdad, a CSID or the new INID will  be
   required. Although  it  was  not  raised  before  me,  I  understand  the
   respondent's position to be as set out in the CPIN of June 2020  that  at
   the present time obtaining a CSID from the Iraqi embassy  in  the  UK  is
   highly unlikely. Despite, in my view, his deliberately designed  to  fail
   attempt to re-certify himself through the Iraqi Consulate, I am satisfied
   that in the light of my credibility  findings  and  the  importance  this
   document has for Iraqi's it is  more  than  reasonably  likely  that  the
   appellant left Iraq with his CSID and has retained it. At the very least,
   he either has access to it or the  information  on  which  it  is  based,
   including the page and volume of his family registration details.

56. In assessing this issue, I note that at [391] of SMO, the Upper
   Tribunal stated,
      "We consider the number of individuals who do not know and  could  not
      ascertain their volume  and  page  reference  would  be  quite  small,
      however.  It  is  impossible  to  overstate  the  importance   of   an
      individual's volume and page reference in the  civil  register.  These
      details appear on numerous  official  documents,  including  an  Iraqi
      passport, wedding certificate and birth certificate, as  well  as  the
      CSID. It was suggested  in  a  report  from  the  British  Embassy  in
      Baghdad, quoted at 6.1.9 of the Internal Relocation CPIN  of  February
      2019, that "[a]ll Iraqi nationals will  know  or  be  able  to  easily
      obtain this  information".  We  find  the  former  assertion  entirely
      unsurprising. The volume and page reference in the civil register is a
      piece of information which is of significance to  the  individual  and
      their family from the moment of their birth. It is entered on  various
      documents and is ever present in that person's life."
57. The Upper Tribunal  accepted  that  there  are  some  in  Iraq  who  are
   undocumented, but that  is  not  this  appellant's  case.  At  [392]  the
   Tribunal added:

      "There will of course be those who can plausibly  claim  not  to  know
      these details. Those who left Iraq at a particularly young age,  those
      who are mentally unwell and those who have  issues  with  literacy  or
      numeracy may all be able  to  make  such  a  claim  plausibly  but  we
      consider that it will be very much the exception  that  an  individual
      would be unaware of a matter so fundamental to their own identity  and
      that of their family. The letter from the Embassy also suggested  that
      most Iraqis would be able to obtain this  information  easily.  Again,
      that assertion is unsurprising when viewed in its proper context."
58. There is no plausible reason why the  appellant  would  not  know  these
   details. His claim to be  illiterate  and  innumerate  has  been  soundly
   rejected. Neither does he have any memory  problems  nor  is  he  unwell.
   Applying the Country Guidance in the light of my findings on credibility,
   I reject the appellant's claim not to have his CSID available to him.

59. In the alternative,  I  am  satisfied  that  it  will  be  open  to  the
   appellant to either seek the return of the Identity documents  he  relied
   on in 2008 or obtain the assistance of his family to redocument  himself,
   if not already in possession of his documentation. On  my  findings  that
   the appellant remains in contact with  his  family  in  Iraq  and  either
   already has access  to  identity  documents  or  information  or  can  be
   provided by his family with sufficient identity information, he  will  be
   able to obtain a CSID before leaving the UK by having it sent to  him  if
   he does not already have it. I am also satisfied that he  will  know  his
   book and page number, and that this can, if necessary, be provided to him
   by his family. In light of my findings, I  do  not  accept  that  a  CSID
   document is not available to the appellant in one way or another. In  the
   premises, return is feasible.

60. Given his minority religion and ethnicity  and  the  absence  of  family
   there, I  do  not  consider  relocation  to  Baghdad  realistic  for  the
   appellant. Further, it is not necessary to  consider  relocation  to  the
   IKR, but on the basis of SMO, I am satisfied in the alternative that as a
   Kurd the appellant would gain entry there. He could not be returned there
   directly, as he does not come from the IKR. However, with a valid CISD or
   INID, he can make the journey  overland  from  Baghdad  without  risk  of
   serious harm or ill-treatment. He can also fly to Erbil  or  Sulaymaniah.
   However, he does not have family there to assist him. However, he has  an
   uncle in Kirkuk, which is not far from the IKR and given that his  family
   was able to fund his travel to the UK,  I  am  satisfied  that  financial
   assistance will be available to him so that he will not need to access  a
   critical shelter or IDP  camp.  He  is  single,  unencumbered  by  family
   responsibilities, fit and healthy, and able to work. With his CSID he has
   every prospect of being able to seek employment to provide  for  himself.
   In the premises, relocation to the IKR is a viable alternative.

Article 8 Private and Family Life

61. In considering private and family life within and outside the  Rules,  I
   have taken account of  all  of  the  information  now  available  to  the
   Tribunal as to the circumstances of the appellant and his family.  It  is
   accepted that the appellant is in a genuine and  subsisting  relationship
   with his Czech partner and their two young children, all  three  of  whom
   have acquired settled status under the EU Settlement Scheme.

62. In addition to the appellant's oral evidence,  his  partner  gave  brief
   oral evidence relying on her witness statement of 23.11.20. Asked why the
   appellant could not go to live with his wife and children  in  the  Czech
   Republic, the appellant relied on the absence of identity  documentation,
   that his partner has a business in the UK, and  that  his  children  only
   speak English. He  denied  working  illegally  in  the  UK  but  admitted
   occasionally helping out his wife in her hairdressing salon. In the light
   of my findings as to the appellant's overall credibility, I do not accept
   his claim not to have worked illegally in the UK. However, that is not  a
   significant factor in the article 8 consideration.

63. The partner's statement asserts that they met in August  2013  and  have
   been together for over two years. Which is peculiar since she also states
   that they started to live together in 2014, which is  6  years  ago.  The
   documentation available confirms that she is registered as  self-employed
   and she told the Tribunal that she rents a  hair  salon  in  Bolton.  She
   obtained permanent residence status in April 2018, and  now  has  settled
   status under the EU Settlement Scheme.  She stated that she could not  go
   to live in Iraq because of the instability  and  danger.  The  respondent
   accepts it would not be reasonable to expect the partner or children, now
   2 and 5 years old, to relocate with the appellant to Iraq. She said  they
   could not go to the Czech Republic because of  absence  of  his  identity
   documentation and because they are settled in  the  UK.  She  claimed  it
   would be hard for the family to adapt to life there and she was used  now
   to life in the UK. She confirmed  in  evidence  that  when  she  met  the
   appellant she was fully aware of his immigration status but denied making
   any contingency plans should he fail in his protection and  human  rights
   claims. I am not satisfied that the fact that the partner works as a self-
   employed hairdresser in premises she rents is sufficient reason to render
   continuing family life outside the  UK  an  insurmountable  obstacle,  or
   unreasonable. She has family support in the Czech  Republic,  speaks  the
   language, and remains in regular contact with parents, siblings and other
   family members,  all  of  whom  will  be  able  to  assist  the  family's
   integration, should she choose to continue family life with the appellant
   there.

64. Balanced against the difficulties with the appellant's  credibility  set
   out above, I reject the partner's claims as to the  appellant's  lack  of
   contact with his family in Iraq and attempts to redocument himself within
   the UK. She stated that  when  attending  the  Czech  embassy  to  obtain
   passports for herself and her children, she was told that valid ID  would
   be needed for  the  appellant  before  the  children  could  be  given  a
   passport. In the light of my findings, I am satisfied that such  identity
   information is or will be available, so that the children will be able to
   obtain Czech passports and the appellant will be able to apply for  entry
   as the partner and father of Cech citizens. In the premises,  I  find  it
   has not been shown that the family could not continue family life in  the
   Czech Republic. The  partner  admitted  in  evidence  that  the  children
   understand some Czech and that they have a  good  relationship  with  her
   wider family in the Czech Republic who sometimes speak to the children in
   Czech.

65. It was not contended by Ms Barton that  the  appellant  could  meet  the
   requirements of the Immigration Rules for leave to remain on the basis of
   either his relationship with his partner or as a father. On  my  findings
   set out above, neither can the  appellant  demonstrate  very  significant
   obstacles to his own integration in Iraq pursuant  to  paragraph  276ADE.
   That he cannot meet the requirements of the Rules is highly  relevant  to
   the article 8 proportionality balancing exercise outside the Rules.

66. It is also open to the appellant to return to Iraq and make  application
   for entry clearance from there as a parent and partner.  This  is  not  a
   Chikwamba v SSHD [2008] UKHL 40 situation as it is far from clear whether
   the appellant will be able to meet the  various  requirements  for  entry
   clearance.

67. It would also appear  that  given  his  partner's  settled  status,  the
   appellant may be able to apply as  a  partner  under  the  EU  Settlement
   Scheme. However, this was not raised in the arguments before me and I  am
   unable to address it further within this decision.

68.  Applying  the  Razgar  stepped  approach,  the  crucial  issue  is  the
   proportionality balancing exercise between on the  one  hand  the  public
   interest in removing the appellant as an illegal entrant and on the other
   the de facto family life that has been  established  during  his  illegal
   presence with his Czech partner and their  two  children.  I  accept  the
   family circumstances are as outlined above, with genuine  and  subsisting
   relationships.

69. Pursuant to section 117B of the 2002 Act,  little  weight  falls  to  be
   accorded to family life with his Czech partner, as his immigration status
   was illegal, a fact she  well  knew  before  deciding  to  enter  into  a
   relationship with him. He has no entitlement to remain in the UK. Neither
   is any weight to  be  accorded  to  his  private  life,  given  that  was
   developed whilst he was illegally present and his status was precarious.

70. Article 8 is not a shortcut to compliance with the Rules  and  there  is
   not entitled to continue family life in the UK just because that is their
   desire.  Although they  have  settled  status  under  the  EU  Settlement
   Scheme, the partner and children are not British, and  the  children  are
   not qualifying children under either EX1 or s117B of the 2002 Act. It was
   not argued that 'settled status' under the EU Settlement Scheme  has  the
   same meaning as 'settled' in Appendix FM.

71. Whilst the best interests of the children are to be taken  into  account
   under Section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 and
   are a  primary  consideration,  they  are  not  the  only  consideration.
   Clearly, the best interests are to have the appellant influence in  their
   lives as their father. They are not  to  be  blamed  for  their  father's
   illegal entrance to the UK. However, I am not satisfied that  their  best
   interests are necessarily to remain in the  UK.  The  children  are  very
   young, the eldest only recently commenced schooling. I am satisfied  that
   their primary focus is on their parents and they  can  have  but  limited
   private or family life outside the immediate family unit.  They  have  no
   wider family or associates in the UK but are  young  enough  to  relocate
   without difficulty, will have greater access to their mother's  extensive
   family in the Czech Republic, with whom they are familiar, and have  some
   basic understand of Czech words. With their parents' support, integration
   is more than feasible. It follows that the appellant has not demonstrated
   that there would be insurmountable obstacles to  continuing  family  life
   outside the UK.

72.  In  all  the  circumstances,  taking  everything  into  account,  I  am
   satisfied that the respondent's decision was proportionate to the  family
   and private life of the  appellant  and  his  family  members,  including
   partner and children. There are routes  available  to  them  to  continue
   family life outside the UK or for him to apply  for  entry  clearance  on
   immigration grounds. However, even  if  family  life  is  interrupted  or
   interfered with by the separation, perhaps temporary,  of  the  appellant
   from his partner and children, I remain satisfied that on  the  facts  of
   this case there are not compelling  circumstances  which,  exceptionally,
   would render the decision unjustifiably  harsh.  It  follows  that  I  am
   driven to the conclusion that the decision was entirely proportionate  to
   the article 8 ECHR rights.

EEA Regulations

73. I am not satisfied that there is any valid appeal  in  relation  to  EEA
   Regulations. Ms Barton accepted that there was no application the refusal
   of which was appealable to the First-tier Tribunal. It  remains  open  to
   the appellant to make such application. That fact is also relevant to the
   article 8 proportionality balancing exercise  considered  above.  In  any
   event, whilst some limited information has been provided as to her  self-
   employment and tax registration, settled status under the  EU  Settlement
   Scheme is not equivalent to exercising Treaty rights in  the  UK,  as  it
   gives no consideration to whether Treaty  rights  were  being  exercised.
   There would have to be a specific EEA application,  which  has  not  been
   made.

Conclusion

74. In the circumstances and for the  reasons  set  out  above,  the  appeal
   cannot succeed on any grounds.



Decision

      The appeal of the appellant is dismissed on all grounds.

      I make no order for costs.



Signed: DMW Pickup

Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

Date:       9 December 2020





Anonymity Direction

I am satisfied, having had  regard  to  the  guidance  in  the  Presidential
Guidance Note No 1 of 2013: Anonymity Orders, that it would  be  appropriate
to make an order in accordance with  Rules  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 in the following terms:

        "Unless and until  a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
        appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
        shall directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his
        family.  This  direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  both  the
        appellant and the respondent. Failure to comply with this direction
        could lead to contempt of court proceedings."



Signed: DMW Pickup

Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

Date:       9 December 2020





