
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10334/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 16 October 2020                   |On 1 December 2020                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                                    Y H R
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Childs of Counsel, instructed by Duncan Lewis &
                    Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules
       2008 I make an order prohibiting the disclosure or publication of
       any matter likely to lead members of the public to identify the
       Appellant. Breach of this order can be punished as a contempt of
       court. I make this order because the Appellant is an asylum seeker
       and so entitled to anonymity. I am also concerned because she is
       vulnerable.

    2. The Appellant is a citizen of China.  She appeals against a decision
       of the First-tier Tribunal dismissing her appeal against a decision
       of the Secretary of State that she is not a refugee or otherwise in
       need of international protection.

    3. It is an important feature of the case that the Appellant is a
       victim of trafficking.  This has been established to the
       satisfaction of Competent Authority.  She is a victim of sex
       trafficking.  She was persuaded to think that she was obtaining a
       job as a hairdresser and found out that services of a very different
       kind were required.  The matter came to light during a police raid
       in the United Kingdom when she had the confidence to tell the police
       what had been happening. Unsurprisingly, on this occasion the police
       authorities behaved as they ought to do and immediately provided the
       Appellant with protection which got her away from the place where
       she was harmed and opened up the possibility of her being recognised
       as a victim and indeed claiming asylum.

    4. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is careful and in many ways
       thorough.  Permission to appeal was given by Upper Tribunal Judge
       Gill, who made two points.  The first is that the Appellant arguably
       was not treated as a vulnerable witness and secondly the judge had
       misapprehended or overlooked certain evidence.  The vulnerability
       point is made out clearly.  The Appellant almost certainly is a
       vulnerable witness; there is psychiatric evidence about many of her
       difficulties.

    5. Ms Childs, who prepared the grounds of appeal, made it absolutely
       plain that it is not suggested that the judge misconducted the
       hearing in a way that was bullying or oppressive, this is not the
       complaint. The problem is that the judge did not show conspicuously
       in her reasoning that any of the inconsistencies or adverse
       credibility findings or difficulties in the case at least might have
       been attributable to the difficulties experienced by somebody who is
       vulnerable and did not indicate how that possibility affected her
       findings of fact.  I am persuaded that this is important.  The Court
       of Appeal has made plain the respect that should be given to
       vulnerable witnesses. Tribunal has produced Joint Presidential
       Guidance and whilst it may have been in the judge's mind, it is not
       in the judge's Decision and Reasons and that omission is always
       risky.

    6. It is not going to be plain sailing for the Appellant.  Her case is
       that she cannot return anywhere in China, which is a vast country.
       This is a point properly picked up by Mr Tufan in his submissions
       and indeed by Mr Avery, who produced the Rule 24 notice that I have
       read.

    7. There are two difficulties with this from the Secretary of State's
       point of view.

    8. First, it is the Appellant's case that she will not be able to
       settle into China easily because of her mental health problems.
       These must not be exaggerated.  She is a person who is getting some
       treatment from which she is benefiting.  She is not a person with
       suicidal ideation but the judge has not explained clearly how she
       could establish herself in China.  There is reference in the grounds
       to new procedures about people moving within China.  It is not
       suggested it cannot be done but it takes time, it brings with it at
       least an interruption in medical treatment and the consequences have
       just not been considered in the way that the case required.

    9. Second, there is the alleged power of the oppressor.  I think it is
       right that the person directly involved in sex traffic in the United
       Kingdom is not known to have obvious links with China but I accept
       Ms Childs' submission that it might all be linked. The prostitution
       was taking place in Chinatown, it is a Chinese case.  There is
       evidence in the background material of widespread corruption in
       China.  Particularly important is evidence in the U.S. State
       Department Report on trafficking that China is in the lowest
       category of countries providing effective protection to traffickers.
        The contention that she could not go to her home area because of
       the risk of being traced there is one which I find has not been
       investigated properly by the First-tier Tribunal Judge.

   10. The problem in part is that the Appellant did state at early stages
       and throughout her case that she feared a person who was powerful
       but was not always consistent in the way she described that person.
       Certainly, the word "Triad" is used at some point but, as Ms Childs
       has accepted, properly, that is itself an imprecise term. This is
       not a case where there is clear reference to corrupt officials.
       However, I am satisfied there is sufficient evidence of general
       corruption in China and of poor protection for victims of
       trafficking, to find that the judge has not investigated or made
       proper findings on the risk of return, especially as the judge has
       not conspicuously factored-in the Appellant's vulnerability when she
       has made her findings.

   11. The consequence of all this is that although the Decision and
       Reasons has obviously been done carefully it is wrong and I have to
       set it aside.  In doing this I have thought carefully about Mr
       Tufan's submissions about whether the points are material.  I am
       persuaded that they are.  The case has to be heard again.  The
       Appellant has not had a proper hearing because the things that
       matter to her have not been investigated.  It is not a case of a
       "repair job". The appeal needs to be reheard and I find that the
       proper place to do it is in the First-tier Tribunal, so I set aside
       the decision and I direct the case be heard again in the First-tier
       Tribunal.

   12. Ms Childs has asked me to make plain that no findings are preserved.
        They are not.  The case has to be reheard on all matters.



Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed. The First-tier Tribunal erred in  law.  I  set  aside
its decisions and direct that the case be  heard  again  in  the  First-tier
Tribunal.


                              Jonathan Perkins
|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 20 November 2020               |

