
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10771/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice Centre      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 19 September 2018                          |On 26 October 2018            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

                                 NATNAEL [T]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Karnik, Counsel, instructed by Duncan Lewis &
                    Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A Tan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant, a national of Eritrea, has permission to  challenge  the
    decision of Judge Devlin of the First-tier Tribunal (FtT)  sent  on  13
    October 2017 dismissing his appeal against the  decision  made  by  the
    respondent on 13 October 2017 refusing his protection claim.

2.   The grounds contend that the judge's adverse credibility findings  were
    wrong in law.  It was  submitted  that  the  judge  wrongly  classified
    certain aspects of the appellant's claim as inconsistencies and wrongly
    dealt with the appellant's documentation.

3.   I express my gratitude  to  both  representatives  for  their  succinct
    submissions.

4.   I am persuaded that the grounds are made out.

5.    I  would  observe  at  the  outset  that  the  judge's   decision   is
    exceptionally detailed.  He properly based his approach  to  assessment
    of the credibility of the appellant on a structured approach  utilising
    a set of credibility indicators as recommended by the Upper Tribunal in
    KB and AH [2017] UKUT 491 (IAC).  The judge also  correctly  considered
    that having  considered  the  appellant's  account  under  the  various
    credibility indicators of sufficiency of detail; internal  consistency;
    external consistency; and plausibility, it was  necessary  to  consider
    everything in the round.

6.   However, there are several difficulties with his  analysis.   First  of
    all, even though as regards internal consistency, the judge  identified
    more  than  one  discrepancy,  he  remained  of  the  view  that   "the
    Appellant's account  has  remained  consistent  in  focus  and  outline
    throughout" (paragraphs 47 and 136).  If by this phraseology  he  meant
    to draw a distinction between consistency in outline and consistency of
    detail, that is not easily squared with his assessment  of  sufficiency
    of detail at 46 which, whilst a mixed finding, does  not  indicate  any
    lack of detail in relation to the key matters regarding which the judge
    found inconsistent.

7.   There is also  a  discord  between  the  detailed  analysis  the  judge
    conducts of external consistency at paragraphs 92-115 (which notes that
    his  initial  account  was   inconsistent   with   background   country
    information (paragraph 106) and the judge's conclusion at paragraph 136
    that the appellant's account "is congruent with the country  background
    information - at least, up to the point that he  made  the  application
    for the Eritrean passport".

8.    The  fact  that  despite  these  conclusions  the  judge   finds   the
    appellant's evidence not credible gives rise  to  a  concern  that  the
    judge has not applied (although he stated more than once that  he  had)
    the lower standard of proof.

9.   My concern is added to by the importance  the  judge  attaches  to  the
    lack of plausibility in the appellant's account of seeking to obtain an
    Eritrean passport from the Eritrean Embassy in Sudan.   For  the  judge
    this seemingly negated the fact that the appellant's account up to that
    point in time "must be regarded as entirely  plausible"  (this  account
    included his claims that he had been detained and ill-treated whilst in
    military service, escaping from prison and crossing to Sudan  and  that
    he was a Pentecostal Christian).  It seems that for the  judge  it  was
    quite implausible that if the appellant had fled Eritrea he would go to
    the Eritrean Embassy in Sudan  and  apply  for  an  Eritrean  passport.
    Indeed, the judge goes so far as to say at paragraph 131 that:

         "I am not satisfied  that  the  UNHCR  would  have  made  the  same
         decision [to issue the appellant with a refugee card  granting  him
         refugee status] had it  been  aware  that  the  Appellant  was  (a)
         willing to approach the Eritrean Embassy in order to enable him  to
         study  abroad;  and  (b)  able  to  obtain  an  Eritrean  passport,
         apparently without signing a letter of apology".

    However, this analysis depends on it being a rarity  for  Eritreans  in
    Sudan (certainly those of military age) to apply to and obtain Eritrean
    passports from the Eritrean  Embassy  there,  which  is  not  something
    immediately  discernible  from  the  background  country   information.
    Further, it is unclear why the appellant's perceived implausibility  on
    this issue should negate the positive weight  to  be  attached  to  his
    plausibility regarding everything that had gone before. Viewed  in  the
    context  of  problematic  conclusions  on  sufficiency  of  detail  and
    internal and external consistency, I consider the judge's assessment of
    plausibility lacks any clear evidential foundation.

10.  For the above reasons,  although  there  is  much  to  commend  in  the
    judge's approach to the evidence and his detailed  examination  of  the
    particulars of the case, the way  he  formed  his  conclusions  reveals
    errors that render his adverse credibility  findings  unsafe.   I  also
    bear in mind that this was a case brought by a national of  Eritrea  of
    draft age and in this  context,  it  was  incumbent  on  the  judge  to
    consider whether perceived lies in the appellant's account had the same
    negative pull as they might in a case where the country  concerned  did
    not disclose a significant number of risk categories: see MA  (Somalia)
    [2010[ UKSC 49.

11.  For the above reasons I set aside the decision of  the  FtT  Judge  for
    material error of law and see no alternative to remitting the  case  to
    the FtT to be heard de novo (not before Judge Devlin).

12.  No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date: 20 October 2018

             [pic]
Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

