
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number PA/10458/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Heard at Field House   Decision and Reasons Promulgated
On 25th April 2018     On 14th May 2018


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PARKES


                                   Between

                              HAFIZ JAWAD AHMED
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant applied for asylum on the basis that he is gay  and  that
    he would face persecution in Pakistan. The application was refused  for
    the reasons given in the Refusal Letter of the 3rd of October 2017. The
    Appellant's appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Beg at Taylor
    House on the 15th of November 2017 and dismissed for the reasons  given
    in the decision promulgated on the 29th of November 2017. The Appellant
    sought permission to appeal which was granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Hollingworth on the 22nd of February 2018.

 2. In the decision after setting out the Appellant's immigration  history,
    the basis of his claim, the evidence received at the hearing  from  the
    Appellant and 2 witnesses the judge  discussed  the  evidence  and  the
    findings made. The Judge had regard to the time that the Appellant  had
    spent in the UK, the delays in his claiming asylum, the evidence of the
    supporting witnesses and the Appellant's own  account  of  events.  The
    Judge placed weight on the apparent delay in the Appellant's claim  and
    that he would have been  aware  of  the  tolerant  nature  of  society,
    particularly in London where he was living.

 3. Although the Judge accepted the evidence of the witnesses called by the
    Appellant he found that that did not show that the Appellant  was  gay.
    He accepted that the Appellant was familiar with  relevant  terminology
    and sexual references and also that he mixed with gay men but that this
    was not by conviction but to assist his claim for asylum rather than  a
    reflection of his genuine nature.

 4. The grounds of application note that the Judge found Asifa Lahore to be
    a credible witness but did not take into account the evidence she  gave
    about believing the Appellant was gay and  why  she  believed  it.  Her
    evidence was that was transsexual and formerly identified as a gay  man
    from Pakistan and had seen and observed the Appellant in  a  number  of
    relevant settings. There were similar  considerations  with  the  other
    witness Mr Farukh and it had not been explained how 2 people  could  be
    so easily fooled. It is also complained that the Judge speculated,  for
    example that the Appellant would have asked  his  father  knew  of  his
    sexuality.

 5. In the grant of permission First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Hollingworth  he
    found that it was arguable that the Judge had given too much weight  to
    the factors that discounted the evidence of  the  supporting  witnesses
    and that a dispassionate analysis was lacking. It was arguable that the
    Judge had not set out a sufficient analysis of the consideration of the
    Appellant's  personal  perceptions  in  relation  to   the   witnesses'
    evidence.

 6. On the day of the hearing before the Upper  Tribunal  on  the  25th  of
    April 2018 the Appellant did not attend and there was no attendance  by
    any representatives on his behalf. The case was last in the list  which
    and the appeals were taken in the order provided  for.  Towards  midday
    the representatives on the Upper Tribunal file were  contacted  by  the
    clerk at may request, they explained that they were  no  longer  acting
    for the Appellant and that he may have new representatives.

 7. The Tribunal file show an address for the Appellant  in  NW4  and  that
    notice of hearing was sent to the Appellant by first class post on  the
    20th of March 2018. There had been no contact by the Appellant or  from
    any representatives on his behalf. If the Appellant had not received  a
    notice of hearing I would have expected him to  have  been  in  contact
    with the Upper Tribunal to ascertain the progress of his case.  I  note
    that in the grounds of application for  permission  to  appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal the Appellant gave a different address and that  on  the
    Upper Tribunal file has been updated so the Appellant is aware  of  the
    proceedings and means needed to maintain contact.

 8. I am satisfied that the Appellant has been given adequate notice of the
    hearing and has had the opportunity to attend and instruct  lawyers  or
    other representatives on his behalf. I find that the Appellant had  had
    notice of the hearing and has not taken the opportunity to  attend  the
    hearing of his appeal. The Appellant  has  experience  of  the  appeals
    system and will be aware of the  need  to  maintain  contact  with  the
    Tribunal and to attend hearings that are listed. In  the  circumstances
    and having regard to the overriding objective I am satisfied  that  the
    appeal could properly be heard and so heard submissions from  the  Home
    Office, these are set out in the Record of Proceedings.

 9. The grounds appear to proceed on the basis that as the witnesses  found
    the Appellant's claims credible then the Judge should have done so too.
    Given the nature of their contact with the Appellant the witnesses  are
    treated in the Grounds of Application as being in the nature of experts
    of a sort. There is no specific advantage to giving  evidence  in  that
    capacity and no special  weight  to  such  evidence  which  has  to  be
    considered in the light of the guidance below.

10. I bear in mind the guidance on experts which is relevant. In  the  case
    of Re M-W (Care proceedings: Expert Evidence) [2010]  EWCA  Civ  12  in
    paragraph  39  Wall  LJ  stated  "I  regard  the  following  as   trite
    propositions of law: (1) Experts do not decide  cases  Judges  do.  The
    expert's function is to advise  the  Judge;  (2)  The  Judge  is  fully
    entitled to accept or reject expert opinion; (3) If the  Judge  decides
    to reject an expert's advice, he or she: a Must have a sound  basis  on
    which to do so; and b. Must explain why that advice is being  rejected;
    (4) Similar considerations arise when  a  Judge  prefers  one  expert's
    evidence to that of another. Judges must explain why  they  prefer  the
    evidence of A to that of B."

11. The fact that credibility  is  not  to  be  assessed  by  witnesses  is
    reinforced by the observations in the case of MOJ [2014 UKUT 442 (IAC).
    It is the duty of an expert to advise the Judge and there are a  number
    of  jurisdictions  where  opinions  on   credibility   are   explicitly
    prohibited. Although there was no claim to expertise as  such  in  this
    case the witnesses' position was analogous to that of  an  expert.  The
    point is that the final decision was that of the Judge who would be  in
    a position to take a wider view with more information overall than  the
    witnesses whose contact with the Appellant was in a particular context.

12. In the decision the Judge did not doubt the beliefs  of  the  witnesses
    but that was only one part of the evidence that had to  be  considered.
    The Judge was assessing the Appellant's case  in  the  context  of  his
    immigration history including the delay in claiming,  that  he  hadmade
    other applications to remain in the UK without raising this issue,  the
    claims that he had made about events in Pakistan and the knowledge that
    his family had of his claimed sexual orientation.

13. The Judge's discussion of the issues raised was set out  in  paragraphs
    28 to 55 of the decision. the Judge clearly had  relevant  guidance  on
    these issues and the case law, particularly that of HJ  (Iran)  and  HT
    (Cameroon) [2010] UKSC 31. The Judge had regard to  inconsistencies  in
    the Appellant's accounts and the fact that he had lived in London  when
    assessing the credibility of the Appellant's case.

14. Given the nature and contents of the  discussion  in  the  decision  it
    cannot be said that the Judge treated the issue superficially or in any
    way unfairly. The  Judge  had  not  approached  the  process  with  any
    suggestion of inappropriate stereotyping as to how a gay  person  would
    be expected to socialise and had regard  to  how  advice  on  sensitive
    topics can accessed relatively easily in this day and age.

15. The decision has to be read as a whole and bearing  in  mind  that  the
    Judge has access to information  that  witnesses  may  not  have.  Read
    fairly I am satisfied that this is a decision  that  was  open  to  the
    Judge for the reasons given and that it does not contain  an  error  of
    law. The decision stands as the disposal of this appeal.

CONCLUSIONS

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside the decision.


Signed:

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal (IAC)

Dated: 9th May 2018


Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule  45(4)(i)  of
the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005  and  I  make  no
order.

Fee Award

In dismissing this appeal I make no fee award.


Signed:

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal (IAC)

Dated: 9th May 2018

