
                                     [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/10340/2019 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided under rule 34                |Decision & Reasons Promulgation      |
|                                     |On 12 August 2020                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman


                                   Between

                                    B S A
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                        DETERMINATION AND REASONS (P)

 1. This determination is to be read with:

      i) The respondent's decision dated 10 October 2019.

     ii) The appellant's grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.

    iii) The decision of a panel  of  the  FtT,  Judges  Tully  and  Curtis,
         promulgated on 19 December 2020.

     iv) The appellant's  grounds  of  appeal  to  the  UT,  stated  in  the
         application for permission to appeal dated on 2 March 2020.

      v) The grant of permission by the FtT, dated 27 March 2020.

     vi) The directions of the UT, issued on 9 June 2020,  with  a  view  to
         deciding without a hearing whether the FtT erred in  law,  and,  if
         so, whether its decision should be set aside.

 2. The UT's directions also gave parties  the  opportunity  to  submit  on
    whether there should be a hearing.

 3. Time for submissions has expired.  To date, no response is on file from
    either party.

 4. The grounds are  fully  expressed,  running  to  over  8  pages,  as  a
    challenge to a decision of 11 pages.

 5. The UT may now fairly and justly decide the above questions  without  a
    hearing, in terms of rules 2 and 34.

 6. Ground 1 complains that the FtT did not make an  anonymity  order.   As
    the judge granting permission noted, that was a procedural  error.   It
    is  of  no  consequence.   Decisions  of  the  FtT  are  not  regularly
    published.  There is no reason for this  decision  to  attract  adverse
    notice to the appellant from anyone.  The presence of  his  name  on  a
    decision finding his claims to have no substance is not a reason to set
    aside that decision.  It has no bearing on  whether  his  appeal  might
    have had another outcome.

 7. Ground  2  criticises  the  panel's  view  of  one  matter  as  "second
    guessing".  However, it is well within the province of  a  fact-finding
    tribunal to consider various possibilities.  That involves no error  of
    law, subject to the tribunal always assessing the overall claim by  the
    lower standard of proof.

 8. Ground 3 is that the panel "failed to consider things that they  should
    and things that they shouldn't".  The  significance  of  a  discrepancy
    over dates was, within reason, for the panel  to  decide.   The  ground
    sets out lengthy quotations from case law, but it does not  rise  above
    insistence and disagreement on a matter of fact.

 9. Ground 4 alleges error of fact by finding a significant aspect  of  the
    claim "inherently implausible".  It is incorrect to say that no reasons
    are given for that view.  Reasons are clear from [21].  The  ground  is
    also incorrect in saying that  the  appellant's  account  is  dismissed
    "solely on that basis".  The panel expressly states that the matter  is
    "not determinative".  It gives several other reasons for rejecting  the
    claim, some of which are unchallenged in the grounds.  Decisions are to
    be read fairly and as a whole.  The FtT is  well  aware  that  inherent
    implausibility may be a dangerous guide.  The doctrine to be  extracted
    from the cases cited is not that the inherently implausible must always
    be accepted as the truth.

10. Ground 5 is that the panel "failed to take account of  the  appellant's
    reasoning".  This ground also relies on the principle  that  people  of
    different nationalities and cultures may behave in  ways  judges  might
    not expect.  That is another principle well  known  to  the  FtT.   The
    appellant cited no evidence that persons of his  background  were  more
    likely to act  as  he  did.   This  ground  is  only  another  form  of
    insistence and disagreement on an issue  of  fact,  the  resolution  of
    which was within the panel's rational scope.

11. Ground 6 complains of application of "a higher standard of proof".  The
    use at [27] of the words "not conclusively" should not be taken out  of
    context.   Particular  matters  may  be  established  with  degrees  of
    likelihood from complete certainty to the slightest  possibility.   The
    final evaluation is overall.  If anything, the expression used at  [27]
    tends in the appellant's favour.  The panel might easily have said that
    the existence of a photograph of a car with  bullet  holes  established
    nothing at all for the appellant.  It would have  stretched  reason  to
    find that such a photograph, without more, was  conclusive  proof  that
    the appellant was in that vehicle when shots were fired through it.

12. Ground 7 continues the theme of selective disagreement on the facts.

13. Ground 8, based on country guidance, does not show that there  was  any
    guidance which, on  application  to  the  facts  found  by  the  panel,
    required a grant of protection.

14. The grounds resolve into no more than disagreement.  They do not  treat
    the decision of the panel as a whole, and they do not show that  it  is
    wrong in law.  That decision shall stand.

15. It may well be an unnecessary precaution, but in light of ground 1, and
    as decisions of the UT are published,  the  appellant  is  now  granted
    anonymity. Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  no
    report of these proceedings shall directly or indirectly  identify  him
    or any member of his  family.   This  direction  applies  both  to  the
    appellant and to the respondent.  Failure to comply with this direction
    could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

        Hugh Macleman

      UT Judge Macleman
      7 August 2020





                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS


1.    A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must  make
a written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any such application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:


2.    Where the person who appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).


3.    Where the person making the application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


4.    Where the person who appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal  is  outside
the United Kingdom at the  time  that  the  application  for  permission  to
appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if  the
notice of decision is sent electronically).


5.    A "working  day"  means  any  day  except  a  Saturday  or  a  Sunday,
Christmas Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.


6.    The date when  the  decision  is  "sent'  is  that  appearing  on  the
covering letter or covering email.

