
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                    Appeal Number:
PA/10155/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 27 June 2018 & 26 September 2018     |On 19 March 2019                    |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE G A BLACK

                                   Between

                                  shwan ali
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

                       DECISION AND REASONS - remaking


1.   Following the decision and directions  made  on  27th  June  2018  that
    there was an error of  law,  a  further  hearing  was  listed  on  26th
    September  at  which  neither  the  appellant  nor  his  representative
    attended.  Mr Jarvis, representing  the  respondent  requested  further
    time in which to respond to  the  directions,  which  was  granted.   I
    directed that the responses should be by way of written submissions.

Submissions

2.  I have received written submissions from the respondent dated  2.10.2018
    but nothing from the appellant or his representatives.

3.  The appellant has  failed  to  provide  any  written  or  oral  evidence
    pursuant to my direction in the EOL decision promulgated  on  5th  July
    2018.

4.  The respondent submits that the law establishes that the onus is on  the
    appellant to show that a) he does not have access to his CSID or  other
    ID document or b) could not have that document/ information sent to him
    in the UK to enable him to approach the Iraqi embassy  in  the  UK  (AA
    (article 15c Iraq CG [2015] UKUT 544  (IAC)  (paras  173-177).   It  is
    further submitted that the appellant has failed to make  out  his  case
    that he does not have a CSID or that he could not  get  one  with  help
    from family.

Decision and reasons

5.    I have regard  to  the  fact  that  the  appellant's  core  claim  was
    disbelieved by the FtT and the appellant gave inconsistent evidence  to
    the respondent and to the FtT as to what documents he did have  or  had
    access to [48].  He stated to the respondent in interview that  he  had
    some identity documents for Greece and perhaps Iraq  (with  his  uncle)
    accessible to him via friends.  Before the FtT he denied that his uncle
    had his Iraqi ID and denied that he had  any  identity  documents  from
    Greece [29]. I am satisfied that in the absence  of  further  evidence,
    which the appellant has declined to provide, I can proceed on the basis
    as submitted by the respondent. I am satisfied that evidence to the FtT
    was not reliable in light of the credibility findings made and that the
    account given to the respondent  in  interview  represents  the  actual
    position.  I find that the appellant would be able to  access  identity
    documents from his uncle in Iraq or seek his assistance  in  forwarding
    those documents to  him  in  the  UK.   The  appellant  has  failed  to
    discharge the burden on him to show  that  he  would  be  destitute  on
    return to Iraq.

Decision

6.  Having found a material error in law in terms of  the  FtT's  assessment
    of the risk of destitution on return to Iraq, I now remake the decision
    and I dismiss the appeal on protection grounds.

7. The appeal is dismissed.


Signed                                  Date 15.3.2019
GA Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

Signed                                  Date 15.3.2019

GA Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black

