
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/10182/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Determined Under Rule 34             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 18 March 2021                     |On 25 March 2021                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STEPHEN SMITH


                                   Between

                                     MA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan born in July 1991. He appeals
    against a decision of the respondent dated 11 October  2019  to  refuse
    his fresh asylum and human rights claim made on 10  April  2019.  These
    proceedings concern only the human rights element of his claim.

 2. The appellant initially appealed against the refusal of his fresh claim
    to the First-tier Tribunal in November 2019. In a decision  promulgated
    on 29 November 2019, First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Sweet  dismissed  the
    appellant's appeal against the refusal of his asylum claim, but allowed
    his appeal on human rights grounds. The Secretary of State appealed. In
    an extempore decision given on 24  February  2020,  I  found  that  the
    decision of Judge Sweet involved the making  of  an  error  of  law  in
    relation to the findings concerning the appellant's human rights claim,
    and set that decision aside insofar as it related  to  the  appellant's
    rights under Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights.  The
    appellant did not cross-appeal against  the  dismissal  of  his  asylum
    appeal, and it is not necessary to address that matter further.

Factual background

 3. The central issue in these proceedings is whether the  appellant  is  a
    citizen of Afghanistan.  The appellant experiences a  range  of  mental
    health conditions, including PTSD and a major depressive disorder.  The
    medication and treatment that he would require in Afghanistan would  be
    difficult to source, and would, on his case, present 'very  significant
    obstacles'  to  his  integration,  within  the  meaning  of   paragraph
    276ADE(1)(vi) of the Immigration Rules.  The respondent considered that
    he was of Pakistani nationality.  On the respondent's case  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal, the obstacles to the  appellant's  integration  in
    Pakistan would not be as significant, where he would have  the  support
    of his family.  He had lived in Pakistan  previously,  and  has  family
    there.

 4. I found that the  reasons  given  by  Judge  Sweet  for  accepting  the
    appellant's claimed Afghan nationality  failed  to  take  into  account
    material considerations, namely the law and procedures  of  Afghanistan
    for enjoying Afghan nationality, in light of earlier findings  of  fact
    by a different judge.  The transcript of my 'error of law decision' may
    be found in the Annex to this decision.

Resumed hearing in the Upper Tribunal

 5. I directed that the appeal be  re-heard  in  the  Upper  Tribunal.  The
    matter resumed before me on 14 October 2020 on a face  to  face  basis,
    following a delay caused by the pandemic. At the hearing, the appellant
    produced a document purporting to be an Afghan passport  in  his  name.
    No such document had been provided previously.  It  was  common  ground
    that  the  central  issue  in  the  proceedings  was  the   appellant's
    nationality.  The  presenting  officer,  Mr  Lindsay,  applied  for  an
    adjournment in order to verify the appellant's Afghan  passport,  which
    he retained with the  appellant's  consent.   There  had  also  been  a
    suggestion that the appellant may have lacked capacity to conduct these
    proceedings, so I directed  his  solicitors  to  consider  that  matter
    further, with  a  view  to  advising  the  appellant  to  apply  to  be
    represented by a  litigation  friend.   In  the  written  directions  I
    drafted immediately following the hearing, I observed that  I  had  not
    seen anything that caused me  to  doubt  the  appellant's  capacity  to
    participate in the proceedings.  In the event, no application was  made
    for a litigation friend to represent the appellant, and,  in  light  of
    the developments set out below, it is not  necessary  to  consider  the
    matter further.

The Secretary of State's concession

 6. In written submissions dated 4 November 2020, Mr Lindsay wrote:

            'Due to current circumstances (Covid-19 pandemic)  it  has  not
            been  possible  to  obtain  a  document  verification   report.
            Accordingly, there is at present no basis for the [Secretary of
            State for the Home Department] to dispute  the  genuineness  or
            validity of A's passport. For these reasons A's claim to  be  a
            national of Afghanistan is not contested in these proceedings.

            The SSHD has reviewed A's claim. In particular, regard has been
            heard to the concession noted above;  the  evidence  (including
            psychiatric  evidence)  produced  by   A;   and   the   present
            circumstances in Afghanistan including the guidance set out  in
            AS (Safety of Kabul) Afghanistan CG [2020] UKUT 130 (IAC).

            It follows that  A's  appeal  should  be  allowed  pursuant  to
            Article 8 ECHR, with reference to  paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)  of
            the Immigration Rules.'

The appellant's response to the Secretary of State's concession

 7. In light of the  above  concession  by  the  Secretary  of  State,  the
    appellant's solicitors wrote to the tribunal on 19 February 2021 in the
    following terms:

            '...the [appellant's and respondent's] positions  are  clear...
            the appeal should be allowed without further delay or the  need
            for another hearing.'

Discussion

 8. First, I am satisfied that, in light  of  the  agreement  between  both
    parties that the appeal should be allowed on  Article  8  grounds  with
    reference to paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of  the  Immigration  Rules  (very
    significant obstacles to the appellant's integration  in  Afghanistan),
    it would be appropriate to determine this  matter  without  a  hearing.
    The power to do so features in rule 34 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008.  The criteria  for  deciding  the  issue  on  the
    papers are satisfied.  The appellant has expressly stated  that  he  is
    content for the  matter  to  be  determined  without  a  hearing.   The
    respondent has conceded that the appeal should be allowed.  I have  had
    regard to those views, as required by rule 34(2).  There are no further
    issues to resolve in order to determine this appeal.  A  hearing  would
    be unnecessary, and a strain on the resources  of  the  tribunal.   The
    overriding objective to deal with cases fairly and justly would not  be
    furthered by holding a hearing.  An unnecessary hearing would introduce
    avoidable delay into the procedure.  I am satisfied that the matter may
    be determined without a hearing fairly and justly.

 9. Secondly, in light of the respondent's  concession  following  the  new
    evidence relied upon by the appellant, I  agree  that  the  appellant's
    physical and mental health conditions would  present  very  significant
    obstacles to his integration in Afghanistan.  I  allow  the  appeal  on
    human rights grounds, with reference to paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of  the
    Immigration Rules.  Pursuant to TZ (Pakistan) v Secretary of State  for
    the Home Department [2018] EWCA Civ 1109, where an appellant meets  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules, that is positively determinative
    of the appeal in their favour: see [34], per the then Senior  President
    of Tribunals.  This  appellant  meets  the  requirements  of  paragraph
    276ADE(1)(vi), as accepted by the Secretary of State, and  so  succeeds
    in this human rights appeal on that basis.

10. I therefore allow the appeal.

11. I maintain the anonymity order previously in force.


Notice of Decision

This appeal is allowed on human rights grounds.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed      Stephen H Smith             Date 18 March 2021

Upper Tribunal Judge Stephen Smith




TO THE RESPONDENT

FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have decided to make no  fee  award
for  the  following  reason.   The  appellant  only   succeeded   in   these
proceedings because he produced a passport at the last minute.  Had he  done
so earlier, the need to bring these  proceedings  could  have  been  avoided
altogether.  A fee award is not appropriate.

Signed      Stephen H Smith             Date 18 March 2021

Upper Tribunal Judge Stephen Smith









                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/10182/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 24 February 2020                           |                              |
|Extempore decision                            |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |


                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STEPHEN SMITH


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     MA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms J Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms N Amin, Counsel, instructed by Sohaib Fatimi
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Secretary of State appeals against a decision of First-tier Tribunal
Judge Sweet promulgated on 29 November 2019.  The judge allowed, on human
rights grounds, an appeal by the appellant before the First-tier Tribunal
against the Secretary of State's decision to refuse his asylum and
humanitarian protection claim.  The Secretary of State's decision was dated
15 March 2019.  For convenience, I will refer to the parties as they were
before the First-tier Tribunal.

The decision under challenge was a refusal of a fresh claim made by the
appellant.  On 29 July 2015, he claimed asylum.  That claim was refused on
2 December 2015 and an appeal against that refusal was dismissed by the
First-tier Tribunal in a Decision and Reasons promulgated on 11 October
2016.  The appellant was refused permission to appeal against the earlier
decision of the First-tier Tribunal, with the effect that he exhausted all
available avenues of appeal against that decision in January 2017.

The basis of the appellant's fresh claim related to his claimed risk of
being persecuted on Convention grounds in Afghanistan.  It is not necessary
for me to say any more about that aspect of his further submissions, as the
judge dismissed the appeal on asylum grounds, and the appellant has not
sought to appeal against those findings.

The Secretary of State appeals against the human rights limb of the judge's
decision.  Judge Sweet accepted the appellant's evidence that he was a
citizen of Afghanistan.  That was a matter of dispute between the Secretary
of State and the appellant, as it had been in the earlier proceedings
before the First-tier Tribunal in 2016.  Judge Sweet accepted the evidence
of two witnesses provided by the claimant, both of whom claimed to have
known the claimant in Afghanistan and considered him to be an Afghan
citizen.  The judge allowed the appeal on the basis that the appellant's
mental health and other circumstances relating to his prospective return to
Afghanistan meant that there would be very significant obstacles to his
integration for the purposes of paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of the Immigration
Rules.  The basis for the judge allowing the appeal on those grounds arose
from two medical reports and a country expert report relating to the likely
circumstances of the appellant's return.

One of the reasons the respondent considered the appellant was from
Pakistan was because he has a mother and a sister there.  He had returned
there following an earlier failed attempt to claim asylum in France.  As
such, contended the Secretary of State, it was not accepted that the
appellant was a citizen of Afghanistan, nor that he would be returning to
Pakistan without the assistance of any family or other local support.  On
the Secretary of State's case, the appellant before the First-tier Tribunal
would be returning to Pakistan, back to his family and back to his country
of nationality.

Permission to appeal

The Secretary of State was granted permission to appeal by First-tier
Tribunal Judge Fisher on the basis that the judge had failed to give
sufficient reasons for accepting that the appellant was a citizen of
Afghanistan.

Discussion

The operative analysis of the judge was brisk.  Brevity is, of course, to
be commended where appropriate.  However, it is trite law that the parties
to litigation should be placed in a position to know why they have lost or
won, as the case may be.  The judge took as his starting point the decision
of First-tier Tribunal Judge Morron promulgated on 11 October 2016.  In
those proceedings the appellant had produced a number of "to whom it may
concern" letters from British citizens of Afghan origin.  Those letters
stated that the authors had known the appellant for periods ranging from
six to ten years concluding that he was an Afghan national born on 10 July
1991.  The judge found that it was unlikely that the authors of those
letters would know the appellant's date of birth.

Significantly, Judge Morron noted that neither the appellant nor the
authors of those letters were able to state how they had known each other
for that long.  The dates that had been given in those letters were
inconsistent.  One author, a Mr K, purported to have known the appellant
for six years, which would have been since 2010.  That was inconsistent
with the accepted chronology of this appellant's travel outside of the
United Kingdom and subsequently to the United Kingdom, which placed him in
France from 2009 to 2013, followed by ten months in Pakistan, arriving in
the UK in 2015.  The author of another letter, a Mr J, stated that he had
known the appellant for seven years, which would have been since 2009.

There is yet another letter by an author who purported to have known the
appellant for eight years but the signatory to that letter was different to
the person whose name in which the letter was purportedly written.  None of
the letters featured dates, none contained statements of truth and none of
the authors of those letters attended the hearing.  Judge Morron noted at
[60], "it is inherently unlikely that the writers can have known the
appellant for the periods claimed".

Judge Morron proceeded to analyse a membership card which the appellant had
produced in support of his claimed Afghan nationality.  It was a Worker's
Recognition ID card for the "[S] Vegetable Oil Industry", where he said he
worked.  The appellant was unable to give an account that was consistent
with his claimed employment under cross-examination before Judge Morron.
The card noted the appellant as being a "ventilation controller".  However,
in cross-examination, when asked what work the appellant did for the [S]
Vegetable Oil Industry he did not say that he was a ventilation controller.
 The judge recorded the appellant as stating that he escorted vehicles from
the border to Kabul and was able to provide spare parts.  He described his
job as being one of an escort or a security man.  The judge noted that the
appellant spoke Pashto, which is one of the languages spoken in
Afghanistan, but recorded at [65] that Pashto was nonetheless spoken in
border areas of Pakistan and that uncertainty over the appellant's
nationality was part of the evidence which needed to be weighed in the
scales in making a determination.

It was against that background that the judge in the present matter, Judge
Sweet, approached the issue of the appellant's nationality.  None of the
authors of the letters of support before the First-tier Tribunal in 2016
wrote to support the appellant on this occasion.  The appellant did,
however, provide two witnesses who did attend to give evidence on his
behalf.  It is Judge Sweet's analysis of the evidence of these witnesses
which the Secretary of State now seeks to challenge.

At [38], the judge said:

"Some new evidence which has been produced since the previous determination
and in my view this goes to one of the main issues, namely in respect of
his nationality [sic].  Apart from the appellant's own evidence, he has
brought two further witnesses, [MJ], who has known the appellant since 2015
in the UK.  He knew the appellant's father and his family since when he was
a child, and comes from the same Pashtun subtribe of [A] as the appellant.
It is a small tribe and the appellant's father was well-known in the
community.  The second witness, [SW], knew the appellant in Kabul in 2007
when he was working for an oil business called [S] Oil Company.  They met
on a number of occasions and he later met him in 2016 in Edgware Mosque.
He is also satisfied that the appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan."

The operative reason of Judge Sweet relating to the appellant's nationality
may be found at [39]:

"Taking into account this further evidence - and the written statement of
[QS], who was not called as a witness - I am satisfied that the appellant
is indeed a citizen of Afghanistan."

Ms Amin submits that the judge had correctly addressed his mind to the
previous decision of the First-tier Tribunal pursuant to the Devaseelan
principle as set out in [37] of the judge's decision.  She also submits
that the judge can be taken to have had regard to the entirety of the
evidence before the Tribunal.  She submits that it was not necessary for
the judge to repeat back to the parties the evidence upon which the
appellant had sought to rely and that brief reasons can be sufficient
reasons provided that the parties know why the judge reached a conclusion
that the judge reached.  She further submitted that the basis upon which
the Secretary of State sought and obtained permission to appeal was on the
basis of sufficiency of reasons rather than a broader perversity or
irrationality basis.

I accept the submissions of the Secretary of State.  The reasons given by
the judge at [39] provide even a well-informed reader with understanding of
the matters and evidence that were before the Tribunal with no reasons as
to why the judge is or was satisfied that the appellant was a citizen of
Afghanistan.  There is no operative analysis on the part of the judge as to
what the features of the witnesses' evidence were which led him to reach
the conclusion that the appellant was an Afghan citizen.  When one examines
the statements of the two witnesses in question these concerns are
reinforced.  In the statement of SW at [5] it states:

"I am certain that he [the appellant] is Afghan.  There is no doubt about
that.  I am from the Pashtun tribe and he also is from the Pashtun tribe.
I know an Afghan when I see one.  I can tell from his accent, dialect and
from his characteristics.  I know him from Afghanistan, and he used to work
for an Afghan company.  That company would not employ a Pakistan national.
All his friends that I have seen are from Afghanistan and he has no
Pakistani friends."

The difficulty with the judge's apparent reliance on SW's statement is that
it features no qualitative analysis of the criteria for an individual to be
granted Afghan citizenship or recognised as an Afghan citizen.  Nowhere in
the judge's decision is there any reference to the requirements under
Afghan law for an individual to be recognised as one of its citizens.  The
burden of proof for establishing nationality in cases of disputed
nationality is upon the appellant before the First-tier Tribunal in the
first instance.  It appears that no submissions were made, or expert
evidence obtained, relating to the legal framework for the conferral or
acquisition of Afghan nationality.  There was no material before the judge
which justified the conclusion that the appellant before the First-tier
Tribunal was a citizen of Afghanistan.

Similarly, in relation to the evidence of MJ at [6] MJ writes in his
statement at [4]: "His [the appellant's] accent is that of a Pashtun
Afghan.  I am also Pashtun.  We are both from Nangahar province, [R]
district, [B] village.  There are hundreds of people from our tribe who are
settled here."  Again, although the evidence of MJ was that he holds a
sincere belief that the appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan there was no
material in his statement which demonstrated the basis upon which the judge
could properly reach that conclusion.  Ms Amin sought to dissuade me from
concluding that there was a perversity or rationality-based feature to the
Secretary of State's challenge.  In my view, the duty to give sufficient
reasons encompasses a duty to give reasons which are consistent with the
underlying legal requirement incumbent upon a Tribunal when reaching
particular findings of fact.

In the present matter, the judge relied on unsubstantiated, albeit likely
to be sincere assertions on the part of two witnesses but had no regard to
the underlying legal framework in relation to Afghan nationality.
Accordingly, quite apart from the fact that [39] in isolation provides no
reasons for the operative conclusions reached by the judge in relation to
the nationality issue, the evidence that was before the judge could not
have admitted of that conclusion in any event and the judge's findings
were, therefore, irrational.

In light of these conclusions it follows, as was accepted by both parties
at the hearing, that the judge's analysis of whether the appellant before
the First-tier Tribunal would face very significant obstacles to his return
to Afghanistan must similarly be flawed.  The judge was considering the
likely return of the appellant to a country in relation to which his
nationality was not yet or not properly established.

I find that the decision of Judge Sweet involved the making of an error of
law.  The error of law was such that the decision must be set aside.  As
there was no challenge to the findings of Judge Sweet concerning the
substantive protection elements of the appellant's appeal, I preserve those
findings.

I direct that the matter be relisted in the Upper Tribunal for
consideration of the appellant's nationality and whether he would face very
significant obstacles to his integration in his country of nationality, or
whether there are any other reasons pursuant to the United Kingdom's
obligations under Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights
preventing his removal.

I maintain the anonymity order already in force.



Notice of Decision

The decision of Judge Sweet involved the making of an error of law.   It  is
set aside,  save  for  his  findings  on  the  protection  elements  of  the
appellant's appeal, which are preserved.

The matter is to be redetermined in the Upper Tribunal, as set  out  in  the
reasons, above.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed Stephen H Smith                                        Date  2  March
2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Stephen Smith


