
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: pa/10743/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Determined on the Papers at Field House       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 7th February 2020                          |On 19th February 2020         |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD

                                   Between

                                   m a h j
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant claims to be a  national  of  Eritrea.   He  entered  the
    United Kingdom on 17th January  2015  and  claimed  asylum.   This  was
    refused.  On 28th August 2019 the appellant  made  further  submissions
    which were refused on 14th  October  2019.   The  appellant  sought  to
    appeal against that decision to the First-tier  Tribunal.   The  matter
    came before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Brewer  for  hearing  on  5th
    December 2019.

2.   The Judge concluded, particularly having regard to the DNA evidence  as
    set out in paragraph 19 of the determination, that  the  appellant  was
    Eritrean.  The Judge went on therefore to consider  his  situation  and
    whether the return exposed  him  to  a  real  risk  of  harm.   It  was
    concluded that there was no such risk and accordingly  the  appeal  was
    dismissed.

3.   The appellant sought to challenge that decision and  permission  to  do
    so was granted essentially on the basis that the Judge had erred in law
    in failing to consider the appellant's risk on return to Eritrea in the
    light of the country guidance findings  in  MST  and  others  (national
    service - risk categories)  Eritrea  CG  and  by  failing  to  properly
    consider the Rule 35 medical evidence.

4.   The matter has been listed in the Upper Tribunal on 3rd March 2020  for
    a determination on that issue.

5.   The respondent in the Rule  24  notice  dated  28th  January  2000  has
    sought  to  challenge  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's  findings  at
    paragraph 19 on the DNA  evidence.   It  is  said  that  the  reasoning
    thereof is unclear.  The Judge seems to  find  that  although  the  DNA
    evidence links the appellant to a particular  woman  it  is  not  clear
    whether that woman has been  linked  in  the  papers  to  the  Eritrean
    national.

6.   However, it is conceded that there was  a  material  error  of  law  in
    relation to the absence of consideration  of  the  case  of  MST.   The
    respondent submits that the proper course would be to remit the  matter
    to the First-tier Tribunal to determine  the  appeal  de  novo.   Those
    acting on behalf of the appellant in a letter  dated  4  February  2020
    express agreement with that proposed course of action.

7.    Having  considered   paragraph   19   of   the   First-tier   Tribunal
    determination it is somewhat difficult to understand how the Judge came
    to the conclusion as to the link between the Eritrean national and  the
    woman whose DNA sample was compared with the appellant.  Thus,  it  may
    well be that it is said it is important that that evidence be clarified
    with the proper continuity being shown.

8.   Given the concern as to the absence of the application of  the  country
    guidance case it is clear that there would need to  be  reconsideration
    of that matter in any event.

9.   It seems to me that  the  approach  suggested  by  the  respondent  and
    concurred with by the appellant's representative is the appropriate one
    in all the circumstances.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal should be set  aside  to  be  remade
upon a de novo hearing in the First-tier Tribunal.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   P.D.King                             Date 14 February 2020

 Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge King TD
