
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10794/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields (Kings Court)          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 26th April 2019                            |On 20th May 2019              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON
                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JM HOLMES

                                   Between

                                    S. A.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Cleghorn, Counsel, instructed by Barnes Harrild &
                    Dyer Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Pettersen, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. In a decision promulgated 22 November 2018 First-tier  Tribunal  Hillis
    dismissed the appeal by the appellant, a national of Iraq born in 1980,
    against the Secretary of State's decision refusing his protection claim
    on 24 July 2018, although it was accepted that he was ethnically a Kurd
    originating from Kirkuk.


 2. The appellant had arrived in the United Kingdom clandestinely in  2008.
    He claimed asylum which was refused on 22 December 2009 and his  appeal
    against that decision was dismissed on 13 April  2010  by  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Cope.  The appellant  unsuccessfully  applied
    for permission  to  appeal  that  decision.   He  then  lodged  further
    submissions with the Secretary of State  in  October  2010  which  were
    refused  the  following  month.   He  more  recently   lodged   further
    submissions on 15 July 2014 which led to the respondent's  decision  to
    accept a fresh protection claim, and to refuse  it,  and  thus  to  the
    present appeal.


 3. According to the respondent's decision letter the claim  made  in  2008
    was based on a fear from a terrorist group in Iraq that  had  kidnapped
    and tortured him.  The credibility of his claim  was  rejected  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge in 2010.  The claim made  in  2014  was  also
    based on a fear from terrorist groups and was  accompanied  by  medical
    evidence.  The appellant  also  contended  that  the  current  unstable
    security and humanitarian conditions in Iraq would result in  a  breach
    of his absolute  rights  under  the  Human  Rights  Convention  and  he
    contended also  that  Article  15(c)  of  the  Qualification  Directive
    applied.   The  respondent  contended  the  appellant  had  failed   to
    demonstrate he would be unable to obtain a CSID and it was possible  he
    could do so [RFR 22].  The appellant  who  was  from  Kirkuk  could  be
    returned to Baghdad and it would then be possible for him to travel  to
    Erbil on an internal flight by way of internal relocation.


 4. Judge Hillis made reference to findings by Judge Cope. In particular he
    referred to the way in which Judge  Cope  had  dealt  with  allegations
    regarding the reliability of two  documents  which  the  appellant  had
    relied on to establish his identity being an Iraqi identity card and  a
    certificate  of  Iraqi  citizenship.   According   to   two   "document
    examination reports" those documents were counterfeit.   The  appellant
    had not accepted this.  Judge Cope did  not  consider  these  documents
    took the appellant's case  any  further.   Judge  Hillis  set  out  his
    conclusions between [42] and [45]:


         "42. It is  the  Appellant's  account  that  those  documents  were
             genuine and that he did not seek in any  way  to  deceive  the
             Home Office as to his nationality and residence in Kirkuk.   I
             remind myself that the  current  situation  in  Iraq  is  very
             different to that considered by Judge Cope in 2010 which  pre-
             dates both the authorities of AA (Iraq) in 2015 and  2017  and
             the 2018 authority of AAH.  Had the country  situation  before
             Judge Cope been that which is before me today, in my judgment,
             he would not have reached the conclusion that the authenticity
             of those documents did  not  take  the  Appellant's  case  any
             further.


         43.  There was no dispute before me that the Appellant  comes  from
             Kirkuk and he was certainly not cross-examined on  that  basis
             at the appeal hearing before me.  I, therefore, conclude  that
             the Appellant is from Kirkuk and accept that the Appellant has
             shown, to the low standard of proof, on the  guidance  in  the
             authority of Tanveer Ahmed, namely, the evidence  taken  as  a
             whole, that those documents were genuine Iraqi documents.


         44.  I accept Ms. Hashmi's submission that the Appellant has  given
             credible evidence on that aspect of  his  case.   In  reaching
             this conclusion I have borne in mind the circumstances set out
             in Judge Cope Determination with particular reference  to  the
             non-disclosure of further details about those documents  which
             may have caused the Respondent difficulties in maintaining the
             allegation of forgery which appears to have resurfaced in  the
             appeal before  me  without  any  evidential  basis  being  put
             forward on the documents before me.


         45.  The  Appellant  has  failed  to  show,  to  the  low  standard
             required, that he faces a risk of  death,  persecution  and/or
             ill-treatment on removal to the IKR area of Iraq for a  reason
             recognised by the Refugee Convention and,  in  particular,  an
             imputed political opinion.  In reaching this conclusion I have
             taken into account  that  it  is  now  nine  years  since  the
             Appellant's claimed difficulties in his home  area  of  Kirkuk
             due to working for the then Iraqi State doing earthworks  with
             his digger."


 5. As to relocation to Baghdad City the judge found:


         "47. I accept that the Appellant is  a  Sunni  Muslim  who  has  no
             family or connection in Baghdad and who does not speak Arabic.
              I, therefore,  conclude  that  he  cannot  remain  safely  in
             Baghdad City (BA headnote at paragraph vii) and that he  would
             face destitution there."


    The judge thereafter concluded with reference to  AAH  (Iraqi  Kurds  -
    Internal relocation) Iraq  CG  [2018]  UKUT  00212  (IAC)  that  Kirkuk
    remains a contested area  of  Iraq  and  the  appellant  could  not  be
    returned there. There are  no  findings  of  fact  as  to  whether  the
    appellant had ever previously lived in the IKR.


 6. The judge then turned to the enquiry whether  the  appellant  would  be
    able to travel safely from Baghdad Airport to the IKR and concluded  at
    [55] and [56]:


         "55. I have accepted the submissions of Ms. Hashmi, for the reasons
             set out above, that the documents served by the  Appellant  on
             the Home Office in his 2010 application are genuine.  There is
             no evidence before me that those original  documents  are  not
             still in the possession of  the  Home  Office.   Additionally,
             there is no evidence before me, given the refusal to  disclose
             all of the evidence in relation to those documents,  that  the
             Home Office would not return those documents to the  Appellant
             to enable him to return to Baghdad airport and make the onward
             journey to the IKR in safety.


         56.  The recent country guidance  shows  that  Iraqi  Nationals  of
             Kurdish ethnicity are not required to provide a Sponsor to  be
             granted leave to enter and remain in the IKR.  It is  accepted
             by both parties to the appeal that  the  Appellant  would  not
             face a risk of persecution and/or ill-treatment for any reason
             recognised by the Refugee Convention or at all."


 7. Under the heading "The European Convention Article 2 and 3 Claims"  the
    judge addressed the standalone claim  under  Article  3  of  the  Human
    Rights Convention and concluded at [58] and [59};


         "58. I have carefully considered the background  material  and  the
             findings set out above in  the  country  guidance  authorities
             with particular reference to the 70% unemployment rate and the
             ability of the Appellant to be able to find gainful employment
             in the IKR  to  accommodate  and  maintain  himself  by  local
             standards  thus  avoiding  being  rendered  to  a   state   of
             destitution.


         59.  The Appellant on his own account possess the skills to operate
             a hydraulic digger machine and in my judgment, he will be able
             to use  those  skills  to  find  employment  in  the  IKR  and
             accommodate  and  maintain  himself.   Although  the  building
             industry is said to have collapsed in the IKR people  who  can
             operate hydraulic digging machines, in my judgment, are always
             in demand for repairing and maintaining roads and other  vital
             structures in any country.  I conclude on the  evidence  taken
             as a whole that the Appellant will  not  face  destitution  on
             relocation to the IKR where he can use his CSID card  to  gain
             employment and support from the State."


 8. The grounds of challenge on which permission was granted argue that the
    finding as to the ability of the appellant to travel  to  the  IKR  via
    Baghdad was based on pure speculation.  The judge could not lawfully be
    satisfied that  there  was  a  realistic  possibility  in  all  of  the
    circumstances that the appellant would be able to obtain the  necessary
    documentation. Ms Cleghorn accepted  before  us  that  the  appellant's
    challenge was focused solely upon the humanitarian protection appeal.


 9. In granting permission to  appeal  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Neville
    observed:


         "3.  The grounds  are  arguably  correct  that  the  Judge  had  no
             evidential basis on which to find that the documents submitted
             8 years previously (and considered forgeries since) were still
             held by the respondent or even if they were that they would be
             returned to the appellant.   The  presenting  officer  himself
             doubted this at para 30.


         4.   The respondent did not rely  on  the  2010  documents  in  the
             refusal letter, and the issue seems to have taken both parties
             by surprise.  Given that enquiries could have been made by the
             respondent  and  the  position  clarified,  arguably  it   was
             procedurally unfair for the issue to be treated as  conclusive
             of the appeal.  I make no directions but  it  may  assist  the
             Upper Tribunal  if  the  respondent  has  established  if  the
             documents are still held and could be used to obtain a CSID."


10. Before us it was confirmed on behalf of the respondent that his current
    stance was accurately recorded in the letter of 31 January  2019;  that
    the documents submitted for examination December  2009  are  forgeries,
    and, that the appellant would be unable to use them to  obtain  a  CSID
    (and presumably also a passport or laissez passer).


11. Ms Pettersen accepted  that  there  was  no  evidence  to  suggest  the
    appellant  had  ever  been  issued  with  a  passport  by   the   Iraqi
    authorities. Although we note that Judge Hillis recorded the  appellant
    as having told him he had attended the Iraqi Embassy in London to  seek
    a replacement passport [31], this was inconsistent  with  the  evidence
    given in his witness statement, when he had said that he  attended  the
    Embassy in order to try to apply for a passport; he made no  suggestion
    therein that he had previously been issued with a passport. Thus  Judge
    Hillis appears to have misunderstood, or mis-directed himself  upon,  a
    material issue of fact.


12. The humanitarian protection appeal begged the question of  whether  the
    appellant's return to Iraq was feasible, which in  turn  raised  issues
    over whether the appellant was in possession of  any  genuine  identity
    documents, and if not, whether he was  genuinely  unable  to  establish
    contact with any member of his  extended  family  and  thus  unable  to
    acquire verification of  his  identity,  and  in  turn,  the  issue  of
    replacement identity documents.


13. It was confirmed before us that at the hearing before  Judge  Cope  the
    respondent had  declined  to  disclose  all  of  the  evidence  in  his
    possession concerning the identity documents  that  the  appellant  had
    produced to the respondent. Thus two document examination reports  were
    disclosed, but a third, which was said to  be  more  detailed  was  not
    [Cope 33]. That  remains  the  position,  notwithstanding  the  further
    opportunity  to  disclose  the  relevant  evidence   offered   by   the
    respondent's letter of 31 January 2019. It is not necessary for  us  to
    resolve the issue, but we are doubtful that this approach is consistent
    with the guidance to be found in UB (Sri Lanka)  [2017]  EWCA  Civ  85.
    What is clear to us is that this approach has denied the appellant  the
    opportunity to engage properly with the evidence  relied  upon  by  the
    respondent  in  relation  to  a  credibility  issue  of   significance.
    Moreover, the appellant has consistently maintained  that  he  believes
    the identity documents which  are  the  subject  of  these  examination
    reports are genuine. At neither the  hearing  before  Judge  Cope,  nor
    Judge Hillis, was there any exploration of the circumstances  in  which
    he had acquired these  documents,  and  thus  whether  his  belief  was
    honestly and reasonably held, even if the  appearance  and  content  of
    these documents  were  such  as  to  indicate  that  they  were  indeed
    forgeries.


14. It is common ground before us that although Judge Hillis  recorded  the
    appellant's evidence concerning his family members, he made no findings
    of fact upon that evidence [29-30]. He simply proceeded  on  the  basis
    that  the  documents  were  genuine,  and  could  be  supplied  by  the
    respondent to the appellant, and that  he  could  use  them  to  obtain
    further documents (presumably to include a CSID),  and,  to  travel  to
    Iraq, and, internally within Iraq.


15. Ms Pettersen conceded that in all the circumstances  Judge  Hillis  had
    erred in law in his approach to  the  humanitarian  protection  appeal,
    and, that the humanitarian protection appeal should be remitted to  the
    First-tier Tribunal for rehearing. With hindsight she informed us  that
    she also considered the decision under  appeal  upon  the  humanitarian
    protection claim was unsustainable, and that it should be withdrawn  so
    that this element of the protection claim might be reconsidered.


16. To that end, and by consent, we set aside the judge's decision upon the
    humanitarian protection appeal and remit it to the First-tier Tribunal.
    In our capacity as Judges of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  we  treat  the
    humanitarian protection appeal as withdrawn pursuant to Rule  17(2)  of
    the Tribunal Procedure (First-tier Tribunal)  (Immigration  and  Asylum
    Chamber) Rules 2014.


NOTICE OF DECISION


   The Decision of the First Tier Tribunal  which  was  promulgated  on  22
   November 2018 contained a material error  of  law  in  the  decision  to
   dismiss the Appellant's humanitarian protection  appeal  which  requires
   that decision to be set aside.


   There is no error of law in the decision to dismiss the asylum and human
   rights appeals and those decisions are confirmed.


   The  humanitarian  protection  appeal  is  remitted  to  the  First-tier
   Tribunal for rehearing.


   The decision upon the humanitarian protection claim of 24 July  2018  is
   withdrawn by the Respondent. In turn the humanitarian protection  appeal
   is treated as withdrawn pursuant to Rule 17(2) of the Tribunal Procedure
   (First-tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  26 April 2019


Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes


