
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10822/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard remotely at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 2 September 2020 via Skype for Business    |On 23 September 2020          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STEPHEN SMITH


                                   Between

                                     LA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R. Toal, Counsel, instructed by York Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A. Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DECISION AND REASONS (V)

This has been a remote hearing which has been consented to  /  not  objected
to by the parties.  The form of remote hearing was  V  (video).  A  face  to
face hearing was not held because it was  not  practicable  and  all  issues
could be determined in a remote hearing.

The documents that I was referred to are in the appellant's  bundle  of  168
pages, the respondent's bundle, and the grounds of appeal  the  contents  of
which I have recorded.

The order made is described at the end of these reasons.

The parties said this about the process: the parties were content  that  the
hearing had been conducted fairly in its remote form.

 1. This is an appeal against a decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Roots
    promulgated on 20 April 2020 dismissing the appellant's appeal  against
    a decision of the respondent dated 25 October 2019 to refuse his asylum
    and humanitarian protection claim.

Factual background

 2. The appellant, LA, is a citizen of Sri Lanka, born  in  May  1987.   He
    arrived in the United Kingdom in February 2011 as a  student  and  held
    leave to remain in that capacity until it was curtailed in  June  2015.
    The day before the curtailment became  operative,  the  appellant  made
    detailed legal submissions concerning leave outside the rules, but  the
    application was refused in circumstances that did not attract  a  right
    of appeal exercisable from within this country.  On  6  November  2017,
    the appellant claimed asylum, and it was the refusal of  that  decision
    that was under appeal before the First-tier Tribunal.

 3. The appellant claims to have had a friend in Sri Lanka called K.   They
    met in late 2009.  K is a close friend of the family and they stayed in
    touch throughout the appellant's time here.  What the appellant did not
    know about K, however, was that he had very close links to the LTTE  in
    Sri Lanka.  Because of those links, the appellant claims  that  he  was
    arrested, detained and beaten by the army or  police  during  a  return
    visit to Sri Lanka in December 2015.  His father was also beaten during
    the same raid.  He died shortly afterwards.  The appellant was released
    from police detention following the payment of a bribe,  and  an  uncle
    helped him to leave the country using  his  own  passport  through  the
    airport.  The uncle facilitated his departure without it being hindered
    by the usual checks, he claims.

 4. The appellant now experiences a range of psychiatric conditions and was
    unable to give evidence  before  the  judge.   The  case  proceeded  on
    submissions alone.

 5. The judge did not find the appellant  to  be  credible.   Part  of  the
    appellant's case had originally been that his mother received an arrest
    warrant in his name: see question 85  of  the  asylum  interview.   The
    appellant retained a local  lawyer  in  Sri  Lanka,  and  there  was  a
    detailed letter from the lawyer in the appellant's bundle outlining the
    steps that taken on behalf of the appellant to verify the existence  of
    the arrest warrant.  The judge  had  significant  credibility  concerns
    that the appellant had not produced a copy of that warrant, or made any
    efforts to obtain it (see, for example, [26]), despite  having  engaged
    local legal representation in Sri Lanka.  The judge was also  concerned
    that there was confusion in the lawyer's letter as to how  many  arrest
    warrants there had been.  It was  "very  unclear"  whether  the  arrest
    warrant the lawyer referred to  was  the  original  warrant  issued  in
    January 2015, or an additional warrant issued subsequently.

 6. At [26], the judge said,

         "I find that on balance, the failure to give a clear  and  credible
         explanation as to whether this  warrant  was  actually  received...
         does damage his credibility."

   7. At [34], the judge said,

         "on balance, the  letter  from  the  lawyer  leave  [sic]  so  many
         questions  unanswered  that  I  give  the  lawyer's  letter  little
         weight."

   8. At [35], the judge rejected a concern raised by  the  respondent  that
      the appellant had given an account in his screening interview that was
      inconsistent with the account he would later give in  his  substantive
      asylum interview,

         "On balance given that he did clearly stated question 4.1  that  he
         had been arrested by the army, I do not find the  apparent  alleged
         omissions are questions 5.3 and 5.4 to be of great significance".

 9. Overall, the judge was not satisfied that the appellant had provided an
    explanation as to why the authorities would be interested in him in the
    manner claimed. The delay in  the  appellant's  claim  for  asylum  was
    significant, especially when one considers the representations he  made
    on 15 June 2015 concerning leave to remain outside the rules. The judge
    noted that the representations, signed under the hand of the appellant,
    featured detailed  legal  representations,  by  reference  to  the  key
    authorities on Article 8 of the European  Convention  on  Human  Rights
    ("the ECHR"). It was clear that the appellant was well advised, or that
    he or someone helping him had some knowledge  of  immigration  law  and
    procedure, when he drafted or signed that  letter.  Significantly,  the
    letter spoke in detailed terms of the hardship the appellant would face
    upon his return to Sri Lanka. The  letter  post-dated  the  events  the
    appellant claimed to have taken place in Sri  Lanka,  yet  he  did  not
    mention any of the claimed difficulties he would later seek to base his
    claim for asylum upon.

10. The judge  made  allowances  for  the  appellant's  mental  health,  by
    reference to a psychiatric report which the appellant had relied  upon,
    but did  not  consider  that  those  conditions  provided  an  adequate
    explanation for his failure to claim asylum at the  time  he  made  his
    June 2015 representations. The judge  noted  that,  when  making  those
    representations, the appellant had been able to give a detailed account
    of the reasons why he claimed his return to Sri Lanka would  place  the
    United Kingdom in breach of its obligations  under  Article  8  of  the
    ECHR.  If he was able to make  those  representations,  considered  the
    judge, then he should have been able to  explain  his  protection-based
    reasons, too.

Permission to appeal

11. Permission to appeal was granted by Designated Judge of the  First-tier
    Tribunal McClure, on the basis that it was arguable that the judge  had
    failed to apply the correct  standard  of  proof,  given  the  multiple
    reliance on the term "on balance".





Submissions

12. Mr Toal submits that the judge's repeated use of the term "on  balance"
    reveals that the functional  analysis  relied  upon  by  the  judge  to
    dismiss the appellant's appeal was by reference to a higher standard of
    proof than is permissible in asylum claims. Mr Toal accepted that there
    were a number of different meanings  that  could  be  ascribed  to  the
    phrase "on balance", but that in common  parlance  it  typically  meant
    that a balancing act had been performed, whereby the factors militating
    in favour of one conclusion outweighed those in favour of the  opposite
    conclusion. It is, he submitted, the language of the  alternative,  the
    language of the balance  of  probabilities;  the  language  of  whether
    something is more  likely  than  not.  He  noted  that  the  judge  did
    correctly direct himself concerning the lower standard, see for example
    [23], [48] and [49]. However, even reading the decision as a whole, the
    use of the term "on balance" suggests that at the key  operative  parts
    of the decision,  the  judge  may  have  been  using  the  "balance  of
    probabilities" civil standard. The standard paragraphs included by  the
    judge, which feature in many asylum decisions, submitted Mr Toal,  were
    insufficient to cure any uncertainty which  otherwise  arose  from  the
    judge's use of the term "on balance" throughout his crucial reasoning.

13. Very fairly, Ms Everett noted that she  had  "some  sympathy"  for  the
    submissions made by Mr Toal, adding that it was  "never  helpful"  when
    language  such  as  that  relied  upon  by  the  judge  was  used,  but
    nevertheless submitted that, when read as a whole, it  was  clear  that
    the judge was well aware of what the correct standard of proof was, and
    applied it throughout. If one were to look at the  operative  reasoning
    of the decision, the judge relied on the correct standard of proof.  It
    was difficult, she submitted, to read the  decision  as  a  whole,  and
    conclude that the judge is working to the wrong standard.

Discussion

14. The difficulty with the term "on balance" is that there  are  different
    meanings which could be ascribed to that term. On the one hand, it  can
    have meanings along the lines of, "when all relevant factors have  been
    considered carefully,  the  decision  is  X",  or,  similarly,  "having
    considered everything in the round, the conclusion I reached is Y".  On
    the other, it can also denote that  a  50/50  balancing  act  has  been
    performed, whereby the matters on one side of the scale outweigh  those
    on the other side of the  scale.   Put  another  way,  it  can  be  the
    language of the civil standard of proof.

15. Aside from the concerns arising from the "on balance" terminology,  the
    decision of the judge was meticulous and  is  very  well  written.  The
    judge correctly direct himself as to the appropriate standard of proof,
    namely the lower standard, at various points. The reasons  relied  upon
    by the judge for dismissing the asylum claim were well within the range
    of options open to him, and it is not possible to fault  its  reasoning
    on that account; indeed, although the grounds of appeal upon which  the
    appellant had obtained permission included collateral  attacks  on  the
    judge's analysis of the arrest warrant issue  and  the  absence  of  an
    explanation by the appellant as to  his  failure  to  explain  why  the
    authorities had been interested in him at  this  late  stage,  Mr  Toal
    rightly did not pursue those submissions orally. But for the use of the
    term "on balance", the decision is in many respects a  model  decision,
    which is admirable for its clarity and brevity.

16. However, protection claims require exacting standards of procedural and
    substantive fairness. An appellant  whose  protection  claim  has  been
    dismissed is entitled to know that the correct standard  of  proof  has
    been  applied  throughout  all  operative  parts  of   the   decision's
    reasoning.  I accept  that  some  real  uncertainty  does  exist,  even
    reading the decision as a whole, as to whether the  term  "on  balance"
    refers to the civil standard, or simply to  careful  consideration,  or
    something similar. While I suspect that it is the  latter,  it  is  not
    possible to reach that conclusion with the  certainty  that  protection
    claims require.  The judge  deployed  the  term  "on  balance"  in  his
    operative reasoning at two separate points against the  appellant,  and
    at one point in his favour. While I note the judge did  direct  himself
    correctly at the outset of the decision, and in his concluding remarks,
    I do not consider that that correct  self-direction  is  sufficient  to
    overcome the real uncertainty that the use of the term  throughout  the
    decision creates, even reading the decision as a whole.

Conclusion

17. This appeal is allowed. I set the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    aside, with no findings of fact preserved. It follows from my  analysis
    that the appellant has thus far been deprived of a hearing  before  the
    First-Tier Tribunal conducted by reference to the correct  standard  of
    proof. Substantial findings of fact  need  to  be  reached.  Under  the
    circumstances, a remittal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  the  only
    appropriate disposal.


Notice of Decision

The decision of Judge Roots involved the making of an error of  law  and  is
set aside.

The matter is remitted to a different judge of the First-tier Tribunal  with
no findings of fact preserved.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed Stephen H Smith                                    Date 18  September
    2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Stephen Smith
