
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/10799/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 8th May 2017                       |On 24th May 2017                      |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON


                                   Between

                                 Mr K H A-S
                         (aNONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Alam instructed by A2 Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant appeals against a decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge R
    J N B Morris dismissing the appellant's appeal against the decision  of
    the Secretary of State dated 21st September 2016 to refuse him  asylum,
    humanitarian protection and protection under  the  ECHR.   The  grounds
    assert that the judge made findings which were contrary to the evidence
    and/or attached undue weight to matters  which  were  peripheral.   The
    judge failed to apply the low standard of proof and  the  most  anxious
    scrutiny and simply adopted the adverse points made in the reasons  for
    refusal letter.

 2. It was submitted that  the  judge  failed  to  consider  the  objective
    evidence in the appellant's bundle which demonstrated that  the  Bidoon
    Committee did not register all Bidoons.

 3. The judge further misdirected herself at paragraph 25 by not giving any
    weight to the evidence of the appellant's supporting witnesses  despite
    the consistency of their account.  The  judge  drew  conclusions  which
    were based on evidence of  the  witness  that  the  judge  had  already
    concluded was unreliable.

 4. Further, the judge misconstrued the appellant's answer to AIR27 and  28
    and erred at 29 when she concluded that  there  was  no  record  of  18
    February 2014 protest.

 5. At the hearing before me Mr Alam submitted that specifically the  judge
    erred in her assessment and conclusion that the appellant  would  be  a
    documented Bidoon and failed to appreciate the evidence before her.   I
    was referred to the case law, specifically page 76 of  the  appellant's
    bundle, and NM (documented or  undocumented  Bidoon:  risk)  Kuwait  CG
    [2013] UKUT 00356 which identified the distinction  between  those  who
    are documented and those who are undocumented Bidoon and  the  relevant
    crucial document from possession of which a range of  benefits  depends
    is a security card rather than the "civil identification document".

 6. At paragraph 47, Mr Alam submitted, the judge erred in concluding  that
    the appellant would be a documented Bidoon, failed to appreciate it was
    possible and not to be documented as a Bidoon.  I was referred to NM at
    paragraph 47.

 7. At paragraph 88 of NM the Tribunal distinguished between those who  had
    civil identification documents from which benefits flowed and those who
    were not able to renew their security cards or  people  who  had  never
    obtained security cards.  Registration was identified at  paragraph  91
    as  being  the  'gateway'  to  relevant  and  potentially   significant
    documents.

 8. What is clear from NM is that there are three categories of  Bidoon  as
    identified at paragraphs 82 and 87 of NM.  The judge proceeded  on  the
    basis at 23 that the appellant  was  not  an  undocumented  Bidoon  and
    merely because of her findings on poor  credibility  to  conclude  that
    there was a possibility that his family were duly registered  in  1965.
    Albeit that there was an  Executive  Committee  for  Illegal  Residents
    established in 1993  to  regularise  Bidoon  status,  as  indicated  at
    paragraph 47 of NM, it was estimated that no more than  20%  of  Bidoon
    were able to fulfil the restrictive conditions laid down by the law  in
    2000 and indeed from 1986 onwards  the  government  began  to  restrict
    access by the Bidoon to passports granting  them  only  to  individuals
    with official permission.

 9. At [37], of the decision, it is correct to say that it was not  a  pre-
    requisite for being registered with these bodies that a person  or  his
    or her family had already registered with the 1965 census but the  case
    law presents a mixed picture of the ability of Bidoon  to  be  able  to
    register.

10. Further, at paragraph 24(iii) there appeared to be a  contradiction  in
    the judge's findings on the one  point  that  the  appellant  had  some
    knowledge of  issues  relating  to  undocumented  Bidoons  and  further
    contrasted with a statement that the appellant's ignorance of  material
    aspects of Bidoons' circumstances  after  independence  undermined  his
    claim.

11. The approach to the witnesses at paragraph 25 appears to be based on  a
    previous rejection of the appellant's  credibility  whereby  the  judge
    states at 25(i):

         "Given my findings generally regarding the appellant's  credibility
         and that of Mr [K] and Mr [A] I find the claim that he had two such
         fortuitous meetings in crowded areas of London cast some  doubt  as
         to the reliability of this part of their evidence".

12. It  is  also  clear  that  the  appellant  is  attributed  with  giving
    contradictory causes as to his detention at paragraph 28(i) because  of
    a misunderstanding of the interview record.  It is quite clear that his
    responses to questions 27 and  28  of  his  asylum  interview  did  not
    accurately reflect the answers to the questions.  This too  contributed
    to the assessment of the appellant's credibility.

13. Further, at paragraph 29 the judge states "there is no reference  to  a
    protest in February 2014".  That  is  factually  incorrect  and  indeed
    there is evidence in the papers which refers to a protest  in  February
    2014.  This was not addressed by the judge.

14. The judge does comment that  there  were  three  opportunities  in  the
    appellant's screening interview  where  he  could  have  mentioned  his
    alleged participation in the demonstration and  subsequent  arrest  and
    did not do so.

15. The judge states that  the  appellant  had  not  given  a  satisfactory
    explanation (I note there  is  a  letter  dated  April  2014  from  the
    appellant's solicitors referring to his  detention  and  prior  to  the
    asylum interview), for the two answers in relation to his  reasons  for
    not referring to the detention in his screening interview, -that he was
    afraid of the government and that he was tired, but the reasoning  does
    not necessarily take  into  account  the  fear  and  suspicion  of  the
    government in Kuwait.

16. I  took  into  account  Mr  Kotas'  submissions,  not  least  that  the
    appellant's credibility was damaged and the reference to  the  lack  of
    mention of detention in the screening interview, but criticisms of  the
    judge's findings are such that they may have affected  the  materiality
    of the decision.

17. The judge at 31 also appears to consider that someone who claims to  be
    under-privileged, stateless and undocumented  and  who  has  only  ever
    worked in menial jobs would be unable to instruct an agent and this too
    was contested as being illogical.

18. I find that there are evident factual errors and  inadequate  reasoning
    within the determination emanating in material errors of  law  and  the
    decision should be set aside and remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    for re-determination.

19. As the decision was predicated largely on the  credibility  I  preserve
    none of the findings.  The  Judge  erred  materially  for  the  reasons
    identified. I set aside the decision pursuant to  Section  12(2)(a)  of
    the Tribunals Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 (TCE 2007).   Bearing  in
    mind the nature and extent of the findings to be made the matter should
    be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal under section 12(2) (b)  (i)  of
    the TCE 2007 and further  to  7.2  (b)  of  the  Presidential  Practice
    Statement.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                              Date  Signed  15th   May
2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington

