
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: pa/10628/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 12 October 2017                    |On 27 October 2017                    |
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE

                                   Between

                           Nesrin Mohamed Elhatab
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Vaughan, NBS Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwncyz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant Nesrin Mohamed Elhatab was born on 23 July 1982 and is  a
    female citizen of Libya.  She entered the United Kingdom  in  September
    2008 with valid entry clearance.  She  was  granted  further  leave  to
    remain as a Tier 4 Migrant.  She left the country and returned to Libya
    thereafter applying and obtaining another visa which was valid until 30
    April 2016.  Before that visa expired, she claimed asylum in the United
    Kingdom.  By a decision dated 21 September 2016, the respondent refused
    the appellant's application for asylum.  The appellant appealed to  the
    First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  G  R  J  Robson)  which,  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 20 March 2017, dismissed the appeal.  The appellant  now
    appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. I find that the judge's decision should be set aside.  However,  I  see
    little merit in the ground of  appeal  which  asserts  that  the  judge
    failed properly  to  take  into  account  the  distress  shown  by  the
    appellant when  giving  evidence.   The  judge  found  the  appellant's
    answers "unhelpful and vague".  I have no reason to  believe  that  the
    judge did not take into account  the  fact  the  appellant  had  become
    distressed and no submission appears to have been made to  him  at  the
    First-tier Tribunal to the effect that the appellant's evidence  should
    be considered in the light of her having become distressed.  Indeed, at
    [32], the judge refers to the problems the appellant  had  when  giving
    evidence.   Quite  properly,  the   judge   satisfied   himself   that,
    notwithstanding her distress,  the  appellant  was  in  a  position  to
    proceed to give her evidence.  I am satisfied also the judge took  into
    account all the evidence (including documentary evidence adduced by the
    appellant) in breaching his credibility findings.  Those findings shall
    remain.

 3. The problem with the judge's decision lies in his assessment of risk on
    return.  The judge was aware [78] of  the  recent  case  of  FA  (Libya
    Article 15(c)) Libya CG [2016] UKUT 413 (IAC).  The judge  was  put  on
    notice by the decision in that appeal and he  should  consider  country
    material very carefully in assessing risk  on  return.   His  analysis,
    however, was limited to two  short  paragraphs  [80  -  81]  and  makes
    reference only to the fact that the Tribunal in FA found  that  Tripoli
    was "relatively calm".  Having examined the file, I observe that  there
    was additional country material to which the judge does not  appear  to
    have made specific reference.  Generally, the First-tier Tribunal Judge
    should not be expected to refer to and discuss each and every  item  of
    evidence or country  material  but,  given  the  evident  volatile  and
    deteriorating security situation in Libya at the time of the First-tier
    Tribunal hearing, I consider that he  should  have  looked  beyond  the
    country  guidance  case  which,  as  the  Upper  Tribunal  acknowledge,
    ultimately concluded that the First-tier Tribunal Judges consider  each
    appeal very carefully.  The Upper Tribunal  has  now  produced  country
    guidance in the form of ZMM  (Article  15(c))  Libya  [2017]  UKUT  263
    (IAC).  That country guidance was promulgated on 28 June 2017, that is,
    several months after Judge Robson's decision.   Judge  Robson  can,  of
    course, not be held responsible for failing to have regard  to  country
    guidance which did not exist at the date of his own decision but, as  I
    have noted, much of the evidence before him was the same as that  which
    was put before the Upper Tribunal in ZMM.  In the circumstances, I find
    that the judge did err in law such that his decision falls  to  be  set
    aside.  ZMM makes it clear that no national of Libya is currently  safe
    in that country.  I therefore remake the decision allowing  the  appeal
    on humanitarian protection grounds.



Notice of Decision

 4. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on 20 March 2017 is
    set aside.  The findings as regards the credibility of the  appellant's
    account shall stand.  I  have  remade  the  decision.   The  appeal  is
    allowed on humanitarian protection grounds.

 5. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 27 October 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee order.


Signed                              Date 27 October 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane

