
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10242/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House (by remote video means)  |Decision & Reasons           |
|                                              |Promulgated                  |
|On 25th September 2020                        |On 26 October 2020           |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON


                                   Between

                                     AK
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADe)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms G Capel of Counsel, instructed by Duncan Lewis &
                    Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A Tan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This has been a remote hearing which has not been objected  to  by  the
    parties.  The form of remote hearing was by video, using Skype.  A face
    to face hearing was not held to take precautions against the spread  of
    Covid-19 and as all issues could be determined by  remote  means.   The
    documents were available in paper format on the court file.

 2. The Appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Khan promulgated on 12 December 2019, in which  the
    Appellant's appeal against the decision to refuse  his  protection  and
    human rights claim dated 3 October 2019, in the context of  refusal  to
    revoke a deportation order, was dismissed.

 3. The Appellant is a national of Morocco, born on 3 April 1980  (although
    he has previously used different identities)  who  first  came  to  the
    United Kingdom in 2004 using a  false  Belgian  passport  and  claiming
    asylum as an Algerian national fearing persecution on  return  from  an
    armed Islamic group.  That claim was refused on 26 August 2004 and  the
    Appellant's appeal against refusal was dismissed on 10  November  2004.
    The Appellant voluntarily departed from the United Kingdom  to  Morocco
    on 15 July 2009.  The Appellant married a British  citizen  in  Morocco
    and was subsequently granted entry clearance as a spouse from 26 August
    2010 to 26 December 2012.

 4. On 29 January 2012, the Appellant was arrested for sexual offences  and
    on 1 October 2012 he was convicted of one count of sexual  assault  and
    theft.  He was then convicted on 25 January  2013  of  attempted  rape.
    The  Appellant  was  released  on  bail  but  absconded  until  he  was
    encountered in Ireland and on 21 December 2016  he  was  convicted  for
    breaching his conditions of bail.  On that date he was sentenced to  10
    days for the breach of bail and a consecutive 40  months'  imprisonment
    for the sexual offences, with a concurrent one-month  imprisonment  for
    the theft offence.  A deportation order was made against the  Appellant
    on 6 June 2017.

 5. The Appellant applied  for  and  then  withdrew  from  the  facilitated
    returns scheme and directions  for  his  removal  in  early  2018  were
    deferred following further  submissions  being  made.   The  Respondent
    refused the Appellant's further submissions on 20  September  2018  and
    his appeal against the refusal was dismissed on 30 October 2018.

 6. In his appeal before the Tribunal in 2018, the focus of the Appellant's
    claim was that he had elderly and ailing parents in the United  Kingdom
    to whom he provided assistance and that due to his  own  mental  health
    problems, his removal to Morocco would be in breach of Articles 3 and 8
    of the European Convention on Human Rights.  First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Hodgkinson found that although the Appellant's parents had a  range  of
    medical problems and that the Appellant had provided some assistance to
    them prior to absconding in 2012 (following which he  went  to  Ireland
    until he was encountered there in  2016),  they  were  able  to  manage
    adequately without him at the time of the hearing.

 7. The Tribunal in 2018 further  found  in  relation  to  the  Appellant's
    claimed mental health problems, that it had not been  established  that
    the Appellant had a specific mental health problem at the time  of  the
    hearing, with the  hospital  records  from  prison  reflecting  limited
    depression and anxiety because of the immigration  situation  that  the
    Appellant found himself in.  It was not accepted that the Appellant was
    in need of any medical treatment at the time, but  that  if  it  became
    needed, adequate treatment would be available in Morocco.

 8. On 21 February 2019, the Appellant claimed that he  feared  persecution
    on return to Morocco as a homosexual man, by way of a letter  from  his
    immigration advisers with a request for a  screening  interview,  which
    subsequently took place on 2 April 2019.  In  the  screening  interview
    the Appellant stated that he was suffering from depression and anxiety,
    being medicated with mirtazapine.  In relation to his protection claim,
    he stated that he was bisexual and  would  be  at  risk  on  return  to
    Morocco as such.

 9. The Appellant underwent a substantive asylum interview on 10 June  2019
    (with his immigration advisers in attendance), during which  he  stated
    that he feared return to Morocco 2001 because of his sexuality but  did
    not claim asylum when in France at that time because he  did  not  know
    anything about it.  The Appellant  stated  that  there  were  only  two
    people who knew  about  his  sexuality  in  Morocco,  in  secret.   The
    Appellant referred interchangeably to being  bisexual  and  homosexual,
    until the difference was explained to him, at which point he  clarified
    that he was bisexual.  The Appellant stated that he  had  relationships
    with both men and women but had no evidence  of  any  relationships  or
    encounters with men, which happened around 14 or  15  years  previously
    and were only one or two night stands.  The Appellant was  specifically
    asked why he had not made any reference previously to his sexuality  or
    fear on return to Morocco on this basis, to which he said that he had a
    right of appeal against the previous decision and that he did not  know
    why he didn't mention his sexuality back then.   The  Appellant  stated
    that he had been to a few gay bars and clubs in the United  Kingdom,  a
    long  time  ago  but  was  not  a  member  of  any  gay   or   bisexual
    organisations, nor was he aware of any  such  websites  in  the  United
    Kingdom.

10.  The  Respondent  issued  a  certificate  under  section  72   of   the
    Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002   and   refused   the
    application on the basis that the Appellant's claim  was  not  credible
    due to the delay in it being made, that it was  vague  and  lacking  in
    detail.  In any event, although it was accepted  that  there  was  some
    discrimination against members of the LGBT community in Morocco,  there
    were established communities in some urban areas and treatment did  not
    amount to persecution.   The  Respondent  did  not  consider  that  the
    Appellant would be at real risk of persecution on return to Morocco, he
    was not entitled to humanitarian  protection  and  there  would  be  no
    breach of Articles 2 and/or 3  of  the  European  Convention  on  Human
    Rights by his removal.  In relation to private and family life, and the
    Appellant's mental health; the Respondent relied  on  the  then  recent
    dismissal of the Appellant's appeal on these grounds by the  First-tier
    Tribunal.   In  conclusion,  the  Respondent  refused  to  revoke   the
    deportation order.

11. Judge Khan dismissed  the  appeal  in  a  decision  promulgated  on  12
    December 2019 on all grounds.  First,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  found
    that the Appellant had not established  his  protection  claim  on  the
    basis that he would be at risk on return to Morocco on the basis of his
    sexuality and that this  claim  had  been  fabricated.   Secondly,  the
    certificate under section 72 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum
    Act 2002 was maintained  on  the  basis  that  the  Appellant  had  not
    provided any rebuttal to the matters set out by the Respondent  and  it
    was found that his offending had been particularly serious and that his
    presence in the United Kingdom constituted a continuing danger  to  the
    community  in  the  United  Kingdom.   Thirdly,  in  relation  to   the
    exceptions to deportation in paragraph 399 and 399A of the  Immigration
    Rules and replicated in section 117C of  the  Nationality,  Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002, the First-tier Tribunal  relied  on  the  findings
    made when the Appellant's previous appeal  was  dismissed  noting  that
    there was no new or further evidence to  show  that  he  could  satisfy
    either of the exceptions to deportation.

The appeal

12. The Appellant appeals on three grounds as follows.  First,  that  there
    was procedural unfairness in the First-tier Tribunal in its refusal  of
    the application for an adjournment, which deprived the Appellant  of  a
    fair  hearing.   In  particular,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  failed  to
    consider why the previous legal  representatives  had  stopped  acting,
    what steps had been taken to  secure  alternative  representation,  the
    Appellant's  explanation  for  failing  to  obtain  representation  and
    failing to consider whether  an  adjournment  would  have  allowed  the
    Appellant to obtain legal aid.  Further, that the  First-tier  Tribunal
    failed to consider the Presidential Guidance Note No 2 of 2010: 'Child,
    vulnerable adult and sensitive appellant  guidance'  given  that  there
    were indications before it of the Appellant's history of mental  health
    problems, which affected the Appellant's ability  to  prepare  for  the
    appeal and represent himself.  The Appellant had not prepared a witness
    statement and was not given a reasonable opportunity to deal  with  the
    Respondent's reasons for refusal for the first  time  at  the  hearing.
    Secondly, that the First-tier Tribunal failed to give adequate  reasons
    for refusing the adjournment.  Thirdly, that there  was  unfairness  in
    the proceedings as  the  majority  of  reasons  for  refusal  were  not
    expressly put to the Appellant during the hearing, including not  being
    asked why  he  did  not  want  to  talk  about  his  sexuality  and  no
    consideration of any reasons for the delay in the claim.

13. In her rule 24 response, the Respondent opposes the appeal  and  relies
    in particular on the comments of Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Mandalia  that
    there is little merit in the Appellant's ground of appeal  in  relation
    to the refusal of his application for an adjournment.  This is  on  the
    basis that  the  Appellant  had  had  copious  time  to  arrange  legal
    representation and at the time of the hearing, there was no  reason  to
    conclude that there would be representation available  to  him  in  the
    foreseeable  future.   The  Appellant  had  also   not   been   legally
    represented before the previous  First-tier  Tribunal  in  his  earlier
    appeal.

14. In relation to the Appellant's claimed vulnerability, on behalf of  the
    Respondent it was submitted that even if it had been concluded that the
    Appellant was a vulnerable witness, supported by  evidence  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal, there would not have been any material  difference
    in the findings of the First-tier Tribunal on  the  factual  matrix  of
    this case.  The previous decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  was,  in
    accordance with the principles in Devaseelan, the appropriate  starting
    point, in which all of the Appellant's claims, except one  new  ground,
    the Appellant's sexuality, were dismissed; including with  findings  of
    deception and adverse credibility findings.

15. Overall, the Respondent submitted that the reasons  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal were sufficient on the evidence before it and that independent
    findings were made on the issue of the Appellant's  claimed  sexuality.
    In any event, the Appellant did not claim to have any problems with his
    sexuality in Morocco, nor did he live  openly  as  a  gay  or  bisexual
    person in the United Kingdom and there was  no  basis  upon  which  the
    First-tier Tribunal could have concluded that he would do otherwise  on
    his return to Morocco, or be at risk on return there.  The Respondent's
    position was therefore that there were no material errors of law in the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

16.  At  the  hearing,  Counsel  on  behalf  of  the  Appellant  made  oral
    submissions pursuant to the grounds of  appeal.   In  relation  to  the
    first  ground  of  appeal,  it  was  submitted  that  the  First-tier's
    tribunals process of assessing the application for an  adjournment  and
    its refusal  of  it  were  unfair  and  lacked  anxious  scrutiny.   In
    particular, it was submitted that the First-tier Tribunal were required
    to find out the basis of the application for  adjournment  -  that  the
    Appellant  had  sought  a  legal  representative  and  made  a  written
    application on this basis that was renewed at the oral hearing and that
    as a litigant in person he would lack specific  information  about  the
    process.  Counsel relied specifically on the 'Adjudicator Guidance Note
    No.5: Unrepresented Appellants' as requiring the First-tier Tribunal to
    consider in more detail why there was no legal representation.  In  the
    present case, the Appellant was represented but  those  representatives
    were not able to continue when he was moved to a different IRC too  far
    away.  In his written statement, the appellant set out the efforts made
    to obtain a new legal representative through the surgery and  after  he
    received the Respondent's decision, was assisted by another detainee to
    lodge his appeal and to find a legal representative.  Counsel  accepted
    that the Appellant  had  not  taken  any  steps  to  instruct  a  legal
    representative prior to the appeal hearing, but  the  Appellant  should
    have been able to access one and was entitled to at least  some  advice
    when in detention.

17. The failure of the First-tier Tribunal to make further enquiries as  to
    the situation regarding representation was further  compounded  by  its
    failure to make enquiries about whether the Appellant was a  vulnerable
    witness; which  was  itself  relevant  to  assessing  the  fairness  of
    proceeding with the hearing without a legal representative and  in  the
    absence of any written statement or evidence from  the  Appellant.   In
    this case, the Appellant may be a vulnerable witness on  the  basis  of
    his sexuality and/or mental health and there was information before the
    First-tier Tribunal as  to  the  Appellant's  history  of  poor  mental
    health.

18. The application for permission to appeal included with it a copy of the
    Appellant's medical records from prison and detention (albeit  none  of
    these were before the First-tier Tribunal); which included  details  of
    numerous psychiatric observations of the Appellant experiencing  visual
    and auditory  hallucinations,  self-harm  and  suicidal  ideation  with
    medication prescribed for mental health problems.  Counsel referred  to
    five entries in the medical records between August  2019  and  November
    2019 showing poor mental health symptoms  of  varying  degrees,  albeit
    there were also entries on 31 October and 1  November  2019  (the  last
    entry prior to  the  hearing  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  on  21
    November 2019) which stated that  the  Appellant  was  on  those  dates
    asymptomatic.

19. Counsel submitted that if enquiries had been made of the  Appellant  as
    to his mental health or vulnerability, those matters  would  have  been
    relevant to the consideration of the application for adjournment  as  a
    matter  of  fairness  and  also  relevant  to  the  assessment  of  the
    Appellant's credibility.  The relevance of his mental health  (both  to
    the request for an adjournment and the hearing itself) was not a matter
    which the Appellant,  as  a  litigant  in  person  with  mental  health
    problems, could have been expected to be aware of.

20.  Secondly,  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  reasons   for   refusing   the
    application for an adjournment, set out in paragraph 4 of the decision,
    were very brief and did not contain any reasons for the conclusion that
    it was in the interests of justice and fairness to  proceed.   Further,
    it is not possible to tell  if  the  First-tier  Tribunal  applied  the
    relevant test in Nwaigwe  (adjournment:  fairness)  [2014]  UKUT  00418
    (IAC) or not.

21. Thirdly, in relation to the assessment of  the  Appellant's  protection
    claim, the First-tier Tribunal dismiss this in two short paragraphs, 40-
    41 for two  reasons,  the  timing  of  the  claim  and  an  unspecified
    inconsistency in the Appellant's account.   There  is  nothing  in  the
    decision to suggest  that  the  reasons  in  the  refusal  letter  were
    specifically put to the Appellant to respond to at the hearing  and  in
    particular, nothing to suggest that the Appellant was asked why he  was
    unable to name any relationships with men; whether he was aware of  the
    difference between being homosexual and bisexual; and why the Appellant
    did not want to talk about his claim or why  his  claim  was  not  made
    sooner.  Counsel again relied on the Adjudicators Guidance Note  No.  5
    of 2003 that the Judge should identify the reasons for refusal and  put
    them to a litigant in person at the hearing.

22. On behalf of the Respondent, Mr Tan relied on the rule 24 response  and
    made submissions on the first two grounds together.   He submitted that
    the nub of the Appellant's claim was that with the benefit of hindsight
    and a significant number of new documents, the First-tier Tribunal  may
    have done things  differently.   Any  application  for  an  adjournment
    should be supported by evidence  and  from  the  medical  evidence  now
    available, it  is  clear  that  the  Appellant  was  self-reporting  in
    relation to his mental health and seeking assistance with it; such that
    it is remarkable he did not mention anything about it to the First-tier
    Tribunal.  There was no evidence  of  the  Appellant's  current  mental
    health before the First-tier Tribunal, only a historical  reference  by
    the Appellant and the previous Tribunal  in  2018,  who  dismissed  the
    appeal on medical grounds  and  upon  which  no  further  evidence  was
    available (save for in relation to a hernia operation).  The First-tier
    Tribunal was not required on these facts to go on a fishing  expedition
    for further information when the Appellant's mental health had not been
    put in issue.

23. The only basis for the application for  adjournment  was  the  lack  of
    legal representation which is what the First-tier Tribunal dealt  with.
    On the facts before it, the Appellant's previous legal  representatives
    had ceased to act some four months previously and gave no indication of
    his attempts to obtain new representation or the likelihood of doing so
    given that his evidence was that he would  need  to  pay  for  a  legal
    representative and could not afford to do so.  On these facts,  it  was
    entirely open to the First-tier Tribunal  to  refuse  the  adjournment.
    The First-tier Tribunal was of course required to act in the  interests
    of fairness to both parties, not just the Appellant.

24. As to the third ground of appeal, the Respondent noted that  there  was
    no challenge to  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  to  uphold  the
    section 72 certificate, such that  the  appeal  on  asylum  grounds  is
    necessarily limited.  Nor has there been any challenge to the dismissal
    of the appeal on Article 8 grounds.

25. The Respondent had set  out  clear  reasons  for  the  refusal  of  the
    Appellant's asylum claim in the reasons for refusal letter,  which  the
    Appellant was fully aware of.   These  included  the  lateness  of  the
    claim, the previous adverse findings including  of  deception  and  the
    Appellant's criminal offending, which was noted was against  women  and
    combined with his marriage, undermined his asylum claim.  The Appellant
    had also been asked detailed questions at  interview,  including  about
    the delay in making his claim.  The  burden  is  on  the  Appellant  to
    establish his claim and he simply had not done so in this case.

26. In reply,  Counsel  for  the  Appellant  submitted  that  the  lack  of
    available medical evidence was a reason to grant the  adjournment,  not
    refuse it and  there  was  enough  information  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal to establish a potential vulnerability on the grounds of  poor
    mental health such as to need further evidence.

27. Counsel accepted that there was no express challenge to the findings on
    the section 72 certificate or on Article 8 grounds, but that Article  3
    was  clearly  still  relevant  and  in  any  event,  the  arguments  on
    procedural fairness must extend to the section 72 certificate.

Findings and reasons

 1.  The  first  ground  of  appeal  concerns  the  First-tier   Tribunal's
    consideration of the Appellant's request  for  an  adjournment  of  his
    appeal, on the grounds of procedural fairness both  in  relation  to  a
    lack of legal representation  and  potential  vulnerability  on  mental
    health grounds.  The issue is not whether the First-tier  Tribunal  was
    unreasonable in refusing the adjournment request, but whether there was
    any deprivation of the right to a fair hearing for the Appellant.  This
    is set out in Nwaigwe, as follows: "if a Tribunal refuses to accede  to
    an adjournment request, such decision could, in principle be  erroneous
    in law in several respects;  these  include  a  failure  to  take  into
    account   all   material    considerations;    permitting    immaterial
    considerations to intrude; denying the party concerned a fair  hearing;
    failing to  apply  the  correct  test;  and  acting  irrationally.   In
    practice, in most cases  the  question  will  be  whether  the  refusal
    deprived the affected party of his right to a fair hearing.   Where  an
    adjournment refusal is challenged on fairness grounds, it is  important
    to recognise that the question for the Upper Tribunal  is  not  whether
    the First-tier Tribunal acted  reasonably.   Rather,  the  test  to  be
    applied is that of fairness: was there any deprivation of the  affected
    party's right to a fair hearing? ..."

 2. In the present case however this still needs  to  be  consideration  of
    what was before the First-tier Tribunal in relation to the  Appellant's
    circumstances  relevant  to  consideration  of  the   application   for
    adjournment and in particular whether this identified any matters which
    should have been taken into  account  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  or
    prompted further enquiries before making such a decision.

 3. The medical evidence that was before the  First-tier  Tribunal  was  in
    relation to  the  Appellant's  parents  and  not  in  relation  to  the
    Appellant (save for in relation  to  a  hernia  operation).   The  only
    reference to the Appellant having any medical problems at  all  was  in
    the Respondent's reasons for refusal letter  dated  20  September  2018
    (the  one  prior  to  the  decision  under  appeal)  referring  to  the
    Appellant's claim to suffer from depression, mental health  issues  and
    acid reflux for  which  he  was  receiving  medication  and  which  the
    Respondent considered could be treated on return to  Morocco.   In  the
    decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Hodgkinson,  promulgated  on  30
    October 2018 reference was made to the  same  matters  and  to  medical
    notes from the prison healthcare team (not before the most recent First-
    tier  Tribunal)  about  poor  mental  health.   The  findings   include
    reference to the Appellant suffering  from  mild  depression,  moderate
    anxiety and adjustment disorder due to his incarceration in prison  and
    a claim by the  Appellant  to  have  been  in  a  Moroccan  psychiatric
    hospital at some point between  2008  and  2010.   Overall,  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Hodgkinson concluded that  upon  the  available  medical
    evidence before him, he was not satisfied  that  the  Appellant  had  a
    mental health problem at that time,  having  previously  suffered  some
    limited depression and anxiety as a result  of  his  incarceration  and
    uncertainty about his immigration status.  There was an express finding
    that the Appellant was not in need of any  medical  treatment  at  that
    time.

 4. In the representations made on  21  January  2019  on  the  Appellant's
    behalf, by his legal  representatives,  there  is  no  further  medical
    evidence or specific medical claim,  under  Articles  3  or  8  of  the
    European Convention on Human Rights or otherwise.  In  the  Appellant's
    initial contact and Asylum registration form completed on 2 April 2019,
    when asked about whether he had any medical conditions, he stated  that
    he had a hernia, depression and anxiety,  in  particular  that  he  was
    worried about his parents.  There is no further reference  to  anything
    other than the Appellant's hernia in his substantive  interview  on  10
    June 2019, about which he had signed a medical disclaimer form.

 5. There is nothing within the record  of  proceedings  at  any  point  to
    suggest that the Appellant had any current mental  health  problems  or
    any other reason for which he may be  considered  to  be  a  vulnerable
    witness and there was no specific medical or other evidence before  the
    First-tier Tribunal on this point at the date of hearing.

 6. I pause to note at this stage  that  although  the  Appellant  was  not
    legally represented before the First-tier Tribunal, he was  represented
    at the time of his further submissions and  during  the  screening  and
    substantive asylum interview process, during which no specific reliance
    was placed on any mental health problems and no evidence  was  provided
    at any of these three early  stages  of  the  process,  even  with  the
    benefit  of  professional  immigration  advice  and  even  though  such
    evidence had been previously submitted and considered by  the  Tribunal
    in 2018.  The Appellant was also at this  time  self-reporting  to  the
    healthcare team and engaging with health services in  detention,  known
    only by virtue of the medical records subsequently relied on before the
    Upper Tribunal.

 7. On the basis of the information that was before the First-tier Tribunal
    in relation to the Appellant's health, or more accurately, the lack  of
    any such relevant information,  I  do  not  find  that  there  was  any
    rational or reasonable basis upon which the Judge should have made  any
    further enquiries with regards to the Appellant's mental health.  There
    was only a historic reference to inpatient treatment in Morocco in  the
    late 2000's and finding the previous year  by  the  Tribunal  that  the
    Appellant was not suffering from any mental health problems, a decision
    made with benefit of medical evidence at that time.  There was  nothing
    before the First-tier Tribunal to suggest  any  current  mental  health
    problems, or in fact any formal diagnosis of  the  same  at  any  time.
    There  was  in  these  circumstances,  no   reason   to   suspect   any
    vulnerability of the Appellant on the basis of mental health,  nor  any
    reason to apply the guidance on vulnerable witnesses for this reason.

 8. The medical evidence now produced and relied  upon  arguably  paints  a
    different  picture  (albeit  with  significant  variation  of  symptoms
    experienced, and at times no symptoms at all,  including  on  the  last
    observation prior to the hearing before the  First-tier  Tribunal)  but
    only in hindsight and not in any way indicated or even hinted at on the
    basis of information before the First-tier Tribunal.

 9. The Appellant's application for an adjournment was solely on the  basis
    that he was unrepresented and therefore  not  ready  for  the  hearing.
    There is both a handwritten and typed record of  proceedings  available
    from the First-tier Tribunal,  albeit  neither  set  out  any  detailed
    application  for  adjournment  by  the  Appellant,  the  only  possible
    reference to this being at the  very  end  of  proceedings  during  the
    course of the Appellant's closing submissions  that  he  did  not  have
    anyone to represent him, his family could not pay and he would have  to
    apply for legal aid.

10. The information before the First-tier Tribunal  in  relation  to  legal
    representation was again relatively limited.  It would have been  known
    that the Appellant had previously appeared in person before the  First-
    tier Tribunal in 2018 (and could be inferred that he therefore  had  at
    least some understanding of the process  and  procedure)  and  that  at
    least up  until  his  substantive  asylum  interview,  he  was  legally
    represented.  The Appellant had expressly stated that  neither  he  nor
    his family could pay for a legal representative and he  would  have  to
    apply for legal aid, but gave no information about any efforts to  find
    a new legal representative through whom such an  application  could  be
    made or whether this  was  realistic  or  likely  within  a  reasonable
    timeframe.

11. For the purposes of this appeal, it  is  said  on  the  behalf  of  the
    Appellant that the First-tier Tribunal was under an obligation to  make
    further enquiries of the Appellant about his situation consider whether
    he was likely to be able to instruct a  legal  representative  for  his
    appeal.  There was however nothing on  the  basis  of  the  information
    before the First-tier Tribunal to prompt any such further questions and
    I do not find that the Adjudicators Guidance  Note  relied  upon  takes
    this matter any further.

12. In any event, it is now known from  the  Appellant's  evidence  to  the
    Upper Tribunal, that he had been without legal representation for  some
    four months prior to the hearing before the First-tier  Tribunal,  with
    his previous representatives not being able to continue to  assist  him
    after he was moved to a different IRC.  The  Appellant's  evidence  was
    that he made initial attempts through the surgery in the IRC to  obtain
    new representation, but that no further steps had been taken to find  a
    new legal representative following receipt of the Respondent's  refusal
    decision, to lodge his notice of appeal or having been notified of  his
    appeal hearing.  He did obtain  assistance  from  another  detainee  to
    lodge his notice of appeal and request for an adjournment, but  not  to
    identify or instruct a new legal representative (even if, latterly, for
    a practical reason that this particular individual had been moved to  a
    different location).  On this basis, it is entirely unclear  that  even
    if further questions have been asked by the  First-tier  Tribunal  that
    the Appellant could have given any indication  that  he  had  made  any
    actual attempts to, or been likely to obtain legal  representation  for
    his appeal.

13. In all of the circumstances set out above and taking into  account  the
    experience of the First-tier Tribunal  of  hearing  from  litigants  in
    person, particularly those who have already appeared before a  Tribunal
    recently and taking into account that the Appellant was in detention, I
    do not find that the First-tier Tribunal failed  to  make  any  further
    enquiries that it should have done about the Appellant's circumstances,
    nor is there anything to suggest that there was a failure to take  into
    account any material considerations about those  circumstances.   There
    was, on the information before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  nothing  to
    suggest that the Appellant would be denied a fair hearing of his appeal
    on the basis of a lack of legal representation and/or on the  basis  of
    mental health ability.

14. However, whilst for the reasons set out above, I find no error  in  the
    approach taken by the First-tier Tribunal at the hearing before it, nor
    in the decision reached to  refuse  the  application  for  adjournment,
    which was entirely appropriate and lawful on the basis of the situation
    and information presented to it at the time, the medical  evidence  now
    available does raise substantial concerns as  to  whether  the  hearing
    was, in hindsight, fair, by reason of the  combination  of  Appellant's
    mental health (as evidenced by the health records from  detention)  and
    lack of legal representation.  For  these  reasons,  ultimately  it  is
    appropriate to set aside the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  on
    grounds of fairness, even in the absence of any identifiable  error  of
    law by the Tribunal in its handling of the application for  adjournment
    and for reasons entirely unknown to it.

15. Whilst there is significant force in the Respondent's  submission  that
    none of this could have made any material difference to the outcome  of
    the appeal given the  Appellant's  immigration  and  criminal  history,
    including significant adverse credibility findings and previous use  of
    deception, combined with the lack of any detailed evidence  in  support
    of the Appellant's claim; as well as the absence of  any  challenge  to
    the findings  in  relation  to  the  section  72  certificate  and  the
    Appellant's Article  8  claim;  it  is  not  appropriate  to  deny  the
    Appellant the opportunity of a fair hearing on his claim.

16. In circumstances where the decision of the First-tier Tribunal needs to
    be set aside grounds of fairness, it is not necessary  to  deal  in  as
    much detail with the second and third grounds of  appeal.   The  second
    ground of appeal concerned the adequacy of reasons given by the  First-
    tier Tribunal for refusing the application for adjournment, on which  I
    find no error of  law.   Although  the  decision  in  relation  to  the
    adjournment application is relatively  brief,  recording  that  it  was
    refused on the basis that it was  in  the  interests  of  fairness  and
    justice to proceed with the hearing without any further explanation  or
    reference to the test to  be  applied,  I  find  that  in  all  of  the
    circumstances this was sufficient  and  proportionate  to  the  factual
    situation presented to the First-tier Tribunal in the application made.

17. The final ground of appeal was that the First-tier Tribunal  failed  to
    adequately deal with the substance of the Appellant's protection claim,
    specifically that the reasons for refusal were not individually put  to
    the Appellant for his response  at  the  hearing  and  that  inadequate
    reasons were given for the refusal on this basis.

18. The Appellant underwent a screening and substantive  asylum  interview,
    which included detailed questions, inter alia,  about  the  Appellant's
    claimed sexuality and reasons for delay in his claim; examples  of  the
    questions  and  responses  have  already  been  set  out  above.    The
    Respondent's reasons for refusal letter  sets  out  clear  reasons  for
    refusal of the Appellant's claim of persecution on return to Morocco as
    a homosexual or bisexual man, including the delay  in  the  claim,  the
    vagueness of the claim and lack of detail about  it  and  that  in  any
    event the Appellant did not live openly as a gay or bisexual man either
    Morocco or the United Kingdom.  In addition,  the  Respondent  set  out
    reasons why the Appellant would not be at risk on return  even  if  his
    claim was credible (which have not been challenged at all).

19. In addition to these matters, from interview and in refusal, which  the
    Appellant was expressly aware of and which were in evidence before  the
    First-tier Tribunal, it is clear from the record of proceedings  before
    the First-tier Tribunal that these matters were in substance put to the
    Appellant,  even  if  there  were  not  detailed  follow-up   questions
    response.  In particular, the Appellant was asked about his  protection
    claim in 2004 in a different identity and nationality and why he should
    now be believed given his history of deception; he was asked why no one
    in the United Kingdom knew about his claimed sexuality; and  about  why
    there was no evidence in relation to his claimed sexuality or about any
    previous partners.  It is trite that the burden is on the Appellant  to
    establish his claim.

20. The First-tier  Tribunal  sets  out  its  findings  of  credibility  in
    paragraphs 36 to 41 of the decision, with extensive references  to  the
    earlier decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on  30  October
    2018 as a starting point on issues relating to the Appellant's  parents
    and his medical conditions.  The First-tier Tribunal then find that the
    Appellant's claim in relation to his  sexuality  was  not  credible  or
    consistent and refers to his evidence of being in a relationship with a
    male in the mid-1990s and claiming asylum as an Algerian national  upon
    entry to the United Kingdom in 2004 despite claiming to be in  fear  of
    return to Morocco on the basis of  his  sexual  orientation.   No  such
    claim was made on this basis until very recently.  Overall, the  First-
    tier Tribunal found that the Appellant  had  failed  to  establish  his
    protection claim and had simply fabricated evidence of  the  last-ditch
    attempt to remain in the United Kingdom.  That was, on  the  incredibly
    limited evidence before the First-tier Tribunal and taking into account
    the Appellant's criminal and immigration history, a conclusion that was
    entirely open and rational for it to make, with adequate reasons  given
    when reading the decision as a whole.  For  these  reasons  I  find  no
    error of law on the third ground of appeal, however,  for  the  reasons
    set out above in relation to fairness the decision must be  set  aside,
    there will of course in any event be  a  full  reconsideration  of  the
    Appellant's protection appeal.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  was,  in  hindsight,
procedurally unfair and as such it is necessary to set aside the decision.

I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal and remit the appeal  to
the First-tier Tribunal for a de novo hearing before any Judge except  Judge
M A Khan.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed   G Jackson                               Date 21st October 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson

