
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10431/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester via Microsoft Teams      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 30 June 2021                              |On 13 July 2021                |
|                                             |                               |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                    JSJM
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr Akram instructed by Halliday Reeves Law Firm
For the Respondent: Ms Everett a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. The appellant appeals  with  permission  a  decision  of  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge Traynor ('the Judge') promulgated on 5  January  2021
       in which the Judge dismissed the appellant's appeal on all grounds.
    2. Permission to appeal was granted on a  renewed  application  by  the
       Upper Tribunal, the  operative  part  of  the  grant  being  in  the
       following terms:


         1) The renewed grounds appeal against a very narrow finding  -  the
            FTT's approach to prospective risk in the light of matters  that
            have been accepted, i.e. the appellant's  participation  in  MDC
            activities in the UK. Much of the  appellant's  claim  has  been
            rejected and has not been the subject of any challenge.
         2) It is arguable that the FTT failed to give adequate reasons  for
            rejecting the evidence of the country expert on the narrow issue
            identified in the grounds of appeal.


    3. The appellant is a citizen of Zimbabwe who was born 10 October 1965.


Discussion

    4. There is no error  in  the  Judge  accepting  the  evidence  of  the
       appellant's country expert  in  relation  to  the  fact  the  arrest
       warrant produced by the appellant was not genuine, yet not accepting
       the evidence of the country expert with regard to  risk  on  return,
       which is  predicated  on  the  basis  of  an  individual's  profile,
       provided such an approach is supported by adequate reasons.
    5. Ms Everett submitted  that  whether  the  Judge  had  erred  in  law
       depended upon what interpretation was given to [41] of  the  experts
       report and whether that related to an assessment of the  appellant's
       overall profile. It was accepted that if the Judge had found no risk
       based upon  a  more  narrow  and  less  nuanced  assessment  of  the
       appellant's profile the error would be made out.
    6. At [41] in Section 7: Risk  of  state  persecution  on  return,  the
       country expert wrote:


       41.    The CIO and other security forces take  a  keen  interest  in
             those who have been deported back to  Zimbabwe  from  the  UK.
             This is not only the case regarding those arriving through the
             airport, but also with those who use the road. In  particular,
             those who are identified as  having  failed  in  their  asylum
             application are  inevitably  interviewed  by  security  agents
             stationed at the airport. This practice is a  rigorous  Harare
             International Airport, as it is the main international airport
             serving the country.


    7. It is important that the Judge considered all the material that  was
       made available. In addition to the country evidence  the  Judge  had
       country guidance caselaw and although the country expert states that
       in her opinion the situation in Zimbabwe requires a  reconsideration
       of country guidance decisions, it was not made out that this  was  a
       point raised before the Judge either  in  the  appellant's  skeleton
       argument or submissions made. Indeed, Mr Akram in his submission  to
       the Judge specifically relied upon the country guidance case  of  CM
       (EM country guidance; disclosure) Zimbabwe CG [2013] UKUT 00059(IAC)
       when arguing against the availability of internal relocation.
    8. In TM, KM and LZ (Zimbabwe)  [2010]  EWCA  Civ  916  the   Court  of
       Appeal  said  that  the  Tribunal  "must  treat   as   binding   any
       country  guidance  authority  relevant  to  the  issues  in  dispute
        unless  there  is  good  reason  for  not   doing   so,   such   as
       fresh  evidence which  casts  doubt  upon  its  conclusions,  and  a
       failure to follow the country  guidance  without  good   reason   is
       likely  to  involve  an  error  of  law. It was not made  out  there
       was sufficient material to enable  the  Judge  to  depart  from  the
       current country guidance in this case, which makes  an  individual's
       profile relevant to the extent of risk faced upon return in light of
       the prevailing country conditions.
    9. The evidence contained in the expert report relates to the  position
       in Zimbabwe following the deposing of President  Robert  Mugabe  and
       the  swearing  in  of  the  current  incumbent  President   Emmerson
       Mnangagwa and the activities of  the  security  forces  and  Zanu-PF
       against those perceived to be in opposition to the government, which
       reflects the activities of the  state  authorities  and  Zanu-PF  in
       relation to the Mugabe regime which was considered  in  the  country
       guidance case law.
   10. The Judge's factual  findings,  which  are  not  challenged  can  be
       summarised as follows:


          a. Whilst undertaking reporting activities the  appellant  covered
             events at an LGBT book fayre in her capacity as a reporter  but
             there was no evidence that simply because she was  there  as  a
             reporter the authorities, including  members  of  the  Zanu-PF,
             took any adverse interest in her [62].
          b. The respondent did not doubt the appellant's claimed membership
             of the MDC, both in Zimbabwe and in the United Kingdom [62].
          c. The appellant's claim to have  received  threatening  anonymous
             telephone  calls,  which  she  attributed  to  the   government
             intelligence officers or members of  Zanu-PF  was  speculative,
             wholly vague, evasive and an unreliable account [63].
          d. The appellant's  husband  and  children  continue  to  live  in
             Zimbabwe with the appellant producing no  evidence  to  suggest
             that the authorities had visited the home or that there was any
             continuing interest in the appellant [65].
          e. While not doubting the appellant was a member  of  the  MDC  in
             Zimbabwe, there was nothing in her  activities  in  support  of
             that organisation or  as  a  journalist,  which  attracted  the
             adverse attention from the authorities. Whilst in Zimbabwe  the
             appellant was a member of the party and sympathetic to the aims
             of the MDC with no evidence she had  held  any  profile  within
             that organisation sufficient to attract the  attention  of  the
             authorities there [66].
          f. The appellant's activities on behalf of the MDC in  the  United
             Kingdom are  self-serving.  The  appellant  claimed  asylum  in
             January 2019 yet there was little evidence of activity or  even
             membership of the MDC branch in Newcastle upon Tyne until  late
             2019. At its highest the appellant is an  organising  secretary
             with minutes of the branch meetings implying she is involved in
             social events and  other  similar  activities,  but  not  at  a
             greater or higher profile than that [67].
          g. It is not just doubted by the Judge that the appellant attended
             one demonstration in London but that is found to be an isolated
             event. The Judge finds it is reasonably likely such  attendance
             would have come to the attention of the Zimbabwean  authorities
             who monitor such meetings and it is accepted MDC activities  in
             the UK are heavily monitored. Notwithstanding, it is found  the
             appellant's profile is not of any significance and the  minutes
             of the meeting did not suggest she is  anything  other  than  a
             member of an organisation with some limited role not  found  to
             be sufficient to provide her with  a  profile  which  would  be
             likely to draw adverse attention to  her  upon  her  return  to
             Zimbabwe [67].
          h. Whilst the  appellant's  support  for  the  LGBT  community  in
             Zimbabwe is accepted there was no evidence the  authorities  in
             Zimbabwe know about the appellant's previous support  for  this
             group. There was no evidence the appellant held any profile  as
             an activist or supporter of the LGBT community in Zimbabwe when
             living there [68].
          i. The Judge finds there was no plausible or credible  reason  why
             the authorities in Zimbabwe would  take  any  interest  in  the
             appellant; finding it highly implausible and unlikely that  the
             authorities would continue to take any interest in  her  beyond
             2011, a finding reinforced by the  appellant's  admission  that
             she encountered no problems in Zimbabwe between 2011  and  2018
             when she left to visit her sister in the UK [69].
          j. The documents submitted by  the  appellant,  claiming  she  was
             charged with offences relating to public order issues that took
             place in January 2019 in Zimbabwe, relate to a time she was  in
             the  United  Kingdom.  The  country  expert  acknowledged   the
             document is  unreliable.  The  Judge  finds  the  appellant  is
             willing to produce a document which is clearly  bogus  with  no
             plausible reason why the authorities would  pay  "the  remotest
             interest" regarding events that took place  when  she  was  not
             even present in the country. The Judge accepts the  appellant's
             absence would have been known as she left the country using her
             passport and that her return will be monitored by  showing  the
             same passport [70].
          k. The appellant's support and activities on behalf  of  the  LGBT
             community in the  United  Kingdom  would  not  lead  anyone  in
             Zimbabwe to take an  adverse  interest  in  her.  There  is  no
             evidence that she was active on behalf of the LGBT community in
             Zimbabwe [71].
          l.  The  expert  report  did  not  assist  the  Judge  in  lifting
             considerable doubt regarding the appellant's reliability  is  a
             credible and truthful witness. There  was  nothing  within  the
             context of the  appellant's  activities  which  she  could  not
             continue to do upon return to Zimbabwe.  Whilst in Zimbabwe the
             appellant encountered no adverse consequences as the result  of
             past activities and there will be no adverse interest in her if
             she continued the same activities on return [72].
          m. There is an absence of any credible  or  reliable  evidence  to
             show the appellant had come to the adverse attention  of  Zanu-
             PF, the government/authorities  or  anybody  else.   There  was
             insufficient evidence to show her claim has merit or  that  she
             would face any risk on return [73].
          n. The appellant's attempt to raise her profile by suggesting that
             an adverse interest has been taken in her was not  accepted  as
             the appellant had failed  to  establish  any  reliable  factors
             which will show that she has suffered any adverse  interest  in
             Zimbabwe in the past or that she would be likely to  do  so  in
             the future.


   11. The Judge sets out the  conclusions  following  the  application  of
       those findings to the relevant legal test between [74 - 75]  in  the
       following terms:


       74.    Having carefully considered the  Appellant's  case,  I  find,
             where she has continuously sought to provide vague speculative
             accounts of alleged adverse interest in her in Zimbabwe in the
             past, that all of this fails the low  threshold  of  proof  of
             reasonable likelihood. I find that there is nothing within the
             context of the Appellant's account which would  indicate  that
             she has come to the adverse attention of  the  authorities  in
             Zimbabwe prior to coming to this country in October  2017.  It
             is noteworthy that she states that her husband is a  supporter
             of Zanu-PF and that she  has  two  children  who  are  clearly
             highly educated. I find that her  account  is  absent  of  any
             information regarding her personal  and  family  circumstances
             and there is nothing to suggest  that  her  family  either  in
             Zimbabwe or in the UK have supported her in her application to
             seek protection from the United Kingdom authorities based upon
             the reasons which she has given. I find that there is  nothing
             within the context of her claim that would lead me to conclude
             that she has faced persecution in the past, or  that  anything
             that  she  has  presently  done  in  the  United  Kingdom   is
             sufficient to amount to presenting her with a profile which is
             likely  to  attract  adverse  attention  from  the  Zimbabwean
             authorities  and  members  of  Zanu-PF  upon  her  return   to
             Zimbabwe. I find that it is open for the Appellant  to  return
             to live with her family in Harare and she  has  not  suggested
             that this would not be an option available to her. Should  she
             choose to live anywhere else in Zimbabwe, then I equally  find
             that it is open for her to do so because I find that there  is
             no risk that she would face for  the  reasons  which  she  has
             given.


       75.    Given the conclusions as outlined  above,  I  find  that  the
             Appellant has not discharged the burden of proof to  establish
             that she is entitled to the grant of asylum.  I  come  to  the
             conclusion that the Appellants removal  would  not  cause  the
             United Kingdom to be in breach of its  obligations  under  the
             Qualification Regulations.


   12. It is clear from reading the decision that the Judge did  take  into
       account all the material that the appellant relied  upon,  including
       the content of the expert's report. It is also  clear  from  reading
       the expert report that some of  the  conclusions  contained  therein
       relating to risk are based upon an  acceptance  of  the  appellant's
       claims relating to her activities and related risk,  some  of  which
       the Judge found lacked credibility.
   13. So far as the point raised by Ms Everett is concerned, it  is  clear
       that the expert at [41] of the report was referring to the issue  of
       risk taking the appellant's profile into account as a  whole  and  I
       find this is what the Judge did having found the appellant  to  lack
       credibility. I do not find it made out that the  Judge's  assessment
       of risk  based  upon  the  appellant's  profile  has  been  unfairly
       restricted or limited.
   14.  The  appellant's  sur  place  activities  in  the  United  Kingdom,
       including the attendance at one demonstration, was accepted  as  was
       the fact  that  this  would  have  come  to  the  attention  of  the
       authorities in Zimbabwe who monitor such occurrences. That is not  a
       new phenomena but one that has been known for some time. It is  also
       accepted by the Judge that the appellant attended  meetings  of  the
       MDC at a local branch in Newcastle upon Tyne and that such  meetings
       are monitored by  the  authorities  in  Zimbabwe  through  their  UK
       network/connections. It does  not  matter  whether  the  appellant's
       attendance  at  such  events  is  disingenuous  if  the  agents   of
       prosecution view them as being opposed to their interests.
   15. The expert at [46 - 48] when considering procedure on return writes:


       46.     In  February  2017,  the  government  of  Zimbabwe  acquired
             approximately 70 biometric scanners that use iris  recognition
             and introduced advance passenger information systems (APIs) at
             its international airports  to  help  increase  security.  The
             Zimbabwean Department of Immigration,  has  developed  a  link
             between Immigration and all airlines Departure Control Systems
             (DCS) in order  to  facilitate  data  transfer.  Airlines  DCS
             electronically transmit to the border control agencies at  the
             destination after the flight departs. This enables the CIO  to
             be given data on all passengers  several  hours  before  their
             arrival in Zimbabwe. The CIO monitors every flight from London
             to Harare. Passenger lists are passed to agents in the airport
             before the flight lands.


       47.    The CIO  meet  flights  arriving  in  Harare,  where  British
             Immigration officers' hand over failed asylum seekers to their
             Zimbabwe counterparts.


       48.    It is my opinion that it is  plausible  and  consistent  with
             country conditions that if  the  Appellant  has  come  to  the
             adverse attention of the CIO in the UK  as  a  result  of  her
             political activities with the MDC she will  be  identified  by
             state authorities on her return to Zimbabwe as a critic of the
             government of Zimbabwe. It is plausible that this  may  render
             her vulnerable to state persecution within Zimbabwe, including
             arbitrary arrest and  violence  is  witnessed  throughout  the
             country in 2018 - 2019.


   16. The incidents of violence referred to by  the  expert  postdate  the
       appellant leaving Zimbabwe and the question in all appeals  of  this
       nature relate to that of future risk. The expert in [48] finds  that
       the appellant may be vulnerable to state persecution within Zimbabwe
       but whether she is will depend upon her profile as  acknowledged  by
       both the expert and the country guidance caselaw.
   17. Whilst the  expert  report  speaks  of  violence  and  human  rights
       violations following the election in July 2018 and individuals being
       attacked and persecuted as suffering ill treatment as  a  result  of
       the perpetrators of such ill-treatment having lists  of  individuals
       they are seeking, or as a result of random acts of violence on  some
       occasions, there is no evidence of any ongoing interest against  the
       appellant based upon her experiences  or  those  of  her  family  in
       Zimbabwe.
   18. The Judge gives reasons for why he did not follow the country expert
       which is that the Judge did not accept that the appellant's  profile
       would give rise to a real risk at the  point  of  return  or  within
       Zimbabwe. It is for this reason that the Judge does not  accept  the
       expert's opinion that such risk will exist, even if the appellant is
       questioned on arrival at Harare airport.
   19. In the CM, it was found:


       (d)    The fresh evidence regarding the position  at  the  point  of
             return does not  indicate  any  increase  in  risk  since  the
             Country Guidance was given in HS  (returning  asylum  seekers)
             Zimbabwe CG [2007] UKAIT 00094. On the contrary, the available
             evidence as to the treatment of those who have  been  returned
             to Harare Airport since 2007 and the absence of  any  reliable
             evidence of risk there means that there  is  no  justification
             for extending the scope of who might be regarded by the CIO as
             an MDC activist.


   20. The headnote of HS, which properly reflects the findings made by the
       Upper Tribunal in that case reads:


       1. Failed asylum seekers do not, as  such,  face  a  risk  of  being
          subjected, on return to Zimbabwe, to persecution or serious  ill-
          treatment. That will be the case whether the return is  voluntary
          or involuntary, escorted or not.


       2. The findings in respect of risk categories in SM and Others  (MDC
          - Internal flight - risk categories)  Zimbabwe  CG  [2005]  UKIAT
          00100, as adopted, affirmed and  supplemented  in  AA  (Risk  for
          involuntary returnees) Zimbabwe CG [2006] UKAIT 00061 are adopted
          and  reaffirmed.  The  Tribunal  identifies  one   further   risk
          category, being those seen to be active in association with human
          rights or civil society  organisations  where  evidence  suggests
          that the particular  organisation  has  been  identified  by  the
          authorities as a critic or opponent of the Zimbabwean regime.


       3. The process of screening returning passengers is an  intelligence
          led process and the CIO will generally have identified  from  the
          passenger manifest in  advance,  based  upon  such  intelligence,
          those passengers in whom there is  any  possible  interest.   The
          fact of having made an asylum claim abroad is not something  that
          in itself will give rise to adverse interest on return.


       4. The Tribunal adopts and reaffirms the findings in AA  in  respect
          of  the  general  absence  of  real  risk  associated  with   any
          monitoring of returnees that might take place after such  persons
          have passed through the airport and returned to their  home  area
          or re-established themselves in a new area.

       5. Country conditions have continued  to  deteriorate  but  are  not
          generally such as to bring about an  infringement  of  Convention
          rights for returnees or to  require  the  grant  of  humanitarian
          protection.


   21. In addition to  the  expert's  report,  the  appellant  relied  upon
       country material, including the  respondent's  Zimbabwe  CPIN  dated
       February 2019. The appellant in her grounds specifically  refers  to
       paragraph 40 of the expert's  report,  which  refers  to  paragraphs
       2.4.25 in support of the argument it is plausible that a person with
       the appellant's profile will face a  real  risk  of  harm  on  their
       return to Zimbabwe.
   22. At Judge finds the appellant  can  return  to  the  family  home  in
       Harare. At [2.4.5] it is written:


       2.4.5  With regard to urban areas, primarily  Harare  and  Bulawayo,
             the Tribunal in CM found that a returnee to Harare  will  face
             socio-economic difficulties living in high density  areas  not
             faced by persons living  in  other  urban  areas  and  persons
             perceived to be active in MDC politics may face  the  risk  of
             targeted reprisals (para 100 of CM  referencing  para  200  of
             EM). However, in general a person returning to a high  density
             area without ZANU-PF connections  will  not  face  significant
             problems unless he or she:
         . has a significant MDC profile, which might cause him or  her  to
             feature on a list of those targeted for harassment
             . would otherwise engage in  political  activities  likely  to
             attract the adverse attention of the ZANU-PF
             . would be reasonably likely to engage in such  activities  if
             it wasn't for a fear that by doing so they would come  to  the
             adverse attention of the ZANU-PF (EM, para 215 (5))
       2.4.6  A returnee to a low or medium density area  in  Harare  will,
             however, in general face no significant difficulties (EM, para
             215 (5)).


   23. The Judge found there was no evidence of problems being  experienced
       by the appellant's family who live in Bloomingdale in in  Harare  in
       Zimbabwe, a low density comparatively affluent suburb, and that  her
       husband is a supporter of the ruling party.
   24. At 2.4.25 it is written:


       2.4.25     The authorities  use  legal  restrictions  to  impede  or
             interfere with the activities of civil  society  organisations
             and human rights defenders perceived to  be  critical  of  the
             government.  Prominent  activists,  who  are  vocal  in  their
             criticism of the government, may be at risk of serious harm or
             persecution (see Civil society groups (NGOs) and Protests  and
             demonstrations about the economy).


   25. The Judge's finding is that the appellant's  profile  is  not  as  a
       prominent activist or one that will lead to her being  perceived  to
       be critical of the government such as to give rise to a real risk on
       return.
   26.  Other  country  information  includes  an  article   referring   to
       journalists being beaten and humiliated by security forces dated  30
       June 2020, but the appellant was found not to be at risk as a result
       of such activities in 2011, which is a finding  reasonably  open  to
       the Judge on the evidence. Similarly, the account of  two  freelance
       journalists being assaulted by soldiers in Harare dated 24 June 2020
       indicates  an  ongoing  problem  for  journalists  perceived  to  be
       reporting matters the authority would rather they  did  not,  rather
       than establishing a credible real risk for this appellant on return.
   27. The Amnesty International article dated 8 June  2020,  referring  to
       hospital-based activists risking being jailed refers to action being
       taken against known activists in Zimbabwe.
   28. The country material supports  the  findings  that  the  authorities
       remain critical of persons  accused  of  insulting  the  President's
       office and there is reference to arrests  being  made  by  those  in
       Zimbabwe being openly critical of the government, although  also  of
       charges being withdrawn. Those targeted do appear to be  those  with
       the type of profile identified in the  country  material  as  giving
       rise to a real risk which the Judge did not find  was  satisfied  by
       this appellant on the facts as found.
   29. The Judge did not accept the appellant's claim that her role  within
       the MDC in  the  Newcastle  upon  Tyne  branch  included  recruiting
       members and that at its highest the evidence only showed she was  an
       organising secretary involved in social  events  and  other  similar
       activities. The Judge found little evidence of her membership of the
       MDC or activities until after her asylum claim  had  been  made  and
       there was nothing before the Judge to warrant a finding that even if
       questioned about her activities it would be  shown  the  appellant's
       profile was such that she would be deemed to be of adverse  interest
       the authorities.
   30. There was nothing before the Judge to show that all members  of  the
       MDC at any level were at risk, it being  dependent  upon  how  their
       activities are perceived.
   31. In relation to the demonstration, the Judge does not find  that  the
       appellant had any profile, noting that even if  the  agents  of  the
       authorities in Zimbabwe were aware of  her  attendance,  they  would
       know it was an isolated event, there being no  further  evidence  of
       subsequent attendances, or that the  appellant  was  anything  other
       than a member of the MDC with no adverse profile.
   32. The point in issue in this case is that in so finding, the appellant
       asserts the Judge fails to give adequate reasons for  rejecting  the
       evidence of the country expert that in light of the conditions  that
       prevail at the date of the hearing in Zimbabwe the profile as  found
       will give rise to a real risk at the point of return  as  stated  in
       the grant of permission.
   33. Whilst it  is  accepted  that  on  arrival  at  Harare  airport  the
       appellant  may  be  subject  to  robust  questioning,  it  was   not
       established that with the profile as found, which is not  challenged
       in the grounds of appeal, that such will  result  in  ill  treatment
       sufficient to amount to persecution or to warrant the grant of leave
       pursuant to article 3 ECHR on any other basis.
   34. The Court of Appeal have made it clear that appellate judges  should
       not interfere in a decision of a court  below  unless  there  is  an
       identifiable legal error material to the  decision  to  dismiss  the
       appeal. The fact the appellant disagrees with the outcome is not the
       correct test. Having given very careful consideration to this matter
       I find it is not made out, in light of the factual findings made  by
       the  Judge  and  current  country  guidance  case  law,   that   the
       conclusions in relation to risk on return at the airport and  within
       Zimbabwe are outside the range of those reasonably available to  the
       Judge. On that basis, it is not appropriate to find that  the  Judge
       has erred in law in a manner material to the decision to dismiss the
       appeal or for the Upper Tribunal to interfere any  further  in  this
       matter.


Decision

   35. There is no  material  error  of  law  in  the  Immigration  Judge's
       decision. The determination shall stand.


   Anonymity.


   36. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule  45(4)(i)  of
       the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


I make such order pursuant to rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure     (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008.



Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated 5 July 2021












