
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/10366/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons  Promulgated    |
|On 12th February 2018                |On 1st March 2018                    |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON


                                   Between

                                      SK
                         (Anonymity Direction Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Bandegani, instructed by Duncan Lewis & Co
Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    The Appellant

      1. The appellant is a national of Sri Lanka born in 1979.  He  entered
         the UK on 4th December 2000.  On 14th May 2001 his asylum claim was
         refused and his appeal dismissed on  18th  January  2002.   He  was
         appeal rights exhausted on 5th February 2002.  On 1st June 2010  he
         was granted Indefinite Leave to Remain.  On 29th September 2016  he
         was convicted at Wood Green  Crown  Court  for  wounding/inflicting
         grievous bodily harm and sentenced  to  12  months  in  prison.   A
         Deportation Order was signed and served on 18th October  2016.   On
         2nd October 2017 a decision to refuse a protection and human rights
         claim was made and the appellant appealed on human rights  grounds.



      2. In a determination dated 23rd  November  2017  First-tier  Tribunal
         Judge Howard dismissed the appeal on all grounds.

    Application for Permission to Appeal

      3. The application for permission was made by the  appellant  who  was
         unrepresented.  He asserted that he  had  family  in  the  UK  (his
         brother), he had no family in Sri Lanka and that the government  in
         Sri  Lanka  was  still  pressuring  Tamils  wrongly.   He  had   no
         connection with family in Sri Lanka, had lived in  the  UK  for  17
         years.

      4. Permission to appeal was granted by DIJ Shaerf who recognised  that
         the appellant was unrepresented at the hearing.  He noted that  the
         structure of the decision was 'unusual'  and  did  not  follow  the
         structure recommended by the Supreme Court in  Hesham  Ali  v  SSHD
         [2016] UKSC 60. Particularly striking was the consideration at [37]
         without enumeration of the factual findings  against  the  criteria
         contained in  paragraphs  398-399B  and  after  he  had  given  his
         decision  in  the  preceding  paragraph.  There  was,  further,  no
         reference to Section 117B or  Section  117C.   The  Judge  made  no
         distinction in his treatment of the Appellant's claim under Article
         8 whether within or without the Rules.

    The Hearing

      5. At the hearing before me,  Mr  Bandegani  attempted  to  amend  his
         grounds of appeal  to  include  a  challenge  to  (i)  the  judge's
         direction in law relating to the test of  'unduly  harsh'  when  in
         fact the challenge related to his 'private life', (this was related
         to EX.1)  (ii) there was no reference to the test in SSHD v  Kamara
         [2016] EWCA Civ 813  such that the  concept  of  integration  is  a
         broad evaluative one and not confined to the mere ability to find a
         job, (iii) the fact that the question  of  rehabilitation  was  not
         irrelevant and (iv) that there was unfairness in that the appellant
         was not represented and thus the judge should  have  adjourned  the
         hearing.  The judge did not proceed in a procedurally fair  manner.
         The  appellant  was  unable  to  furnish  the  court  with  further
         information.

      6. Mr Tufan resisted the further grounds of  challenge  and  submitted
         that any error of law was immaterial to the outcome.

    Conclusions

      7. The challenge by the appellant was in relation to the assessment of
         Article 8.  I declined to  allow  Mr  Bandegani  to  raise  further
         grounds of appeal with reference to the overriding objective of The
         Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.   This  application
         was made at the last moment and two days prior to the hearing.  The
         solicitors were  instructed  by  the  end  of  January  2018.   The
         appellant's solicitors were instructed late but were  on  file  and
         the grounds of appeal could have been settled earlier and certainly
         prior to two days before the hearing.

      8. Notwithstanding my point above I find that the further grounds  (i)
         and (ii) are effectively already  incorporated  by  virtue  of  the
         effective omission of reference to  the  Immigration  rules.   With
         reference to (iii) I am not  persuaded  that  rehabilitation  would
         make a material difference and thus is not arguable.

      9. With reference to (iv) above, the  appellant  was  invited  by  the
         court's  direction  dated  17th  October  2017  to  submit  further
         evidence to the Tribunal in support  of  his  appeal.    There  was
         absolutely no evidence submitted by the appellant for his appeal or
         indeed any request for  an  adjournment  at  any  time.   That  the
         appellant was detained does not immediately preclude  the  need  to
         comply with court directions.  The appellant was  able  himself  to
         appeal the refusal of his human rights claim  and  further  request
         permission to appeal when the decision dismissed his  appeal.  This
         was despite the fact that he was in detention.  Although not framed
         in legalistic terms  those  documents  produced  by  the  appellant
         enabled him to express dissatisfaction with the  process.   In  the
         circumstances I am not persuaded that it  was  incumbent  upon  the
         judge to adjourn the proceedings of his own motion.  There  was  no
         indication that any further evidence would be forthcoming.

     10. Mr Bandegani also indicated that there was medical evidence  dating
         from 18th December 2001 on the Home Office file  and  which  should
         have been considered but there was  no  indication  that  this  was
         placed before  the  judge.  Further,  this  document  predated  the
         appellant's hearing in 2001,  was  specifically  compiled  for  the
         court in 2001, relied on the appellant's  account  which  was  then
         rejected and further identified  'past  medical  history'  as  'nil
         significant and is not on regular medication'.  For these reasons I
         am not persuaded that there was any 'error of fact' on the part  of
         the judge in failing to have regard to this medical  evidence  such
         that the appellant would have been considered 'vulnerable'.

     11. There was no indication that the judge should have, in the  absence
         of any request by the appellant for  an  adjournment,  and  in  the
         absence of any further evidence  and  any  medical  evidence,  have
         taken it upon himself to direct an adjournment or conclude that  it
         was unfair to proceed.

     12. The challenge in the appellant's grounds of appeal  and  indeed  in
         the application for  permission  to  appeal  rested  on  Article  8
         grounds and the attendant difficulties in his  return.   I  am  not
         persuaded that there was any procedural error and thus the  judge's
         approach to the  asylum  claim  was  not  challenged  and  will  be
         preserved.

     13. I can, however, appreciate the judge  did  not  approach  the  law,
         regarding Article 8, in a structured manner and as  recommended  by
         Hesham Ali v SSHD [2016] UKSC 60. I was invited  to  conclude  that
         this was not material.  I cannot agree.  Had the judge adopted  the
         'balance sheet approach', although not compulsory,  as  recommended
         in Hesham, he may have avoided falling into the error  of  ignoring
         any assessment of the appellant's integration  into  the  UK.   The
         judge needed to interpret the Immigration Rules in accordance  with
         the law and apply them.  Under the broad evaluative test  regarding
         integration, and as set out in SSHD v Kamara [2016]  EWCA  Civ  813
         [37], the fact that the appellant had been in  the  United  Kingdom
         for 18 years and had previously been granted  Indefinite  Leave  to
         Remain was a relevant  and  important  issue  to  factor  into  the
         assessment. In making an assessment with reference to Section  117C
         (2)  it is also relevant to factor in the  concept  that  the  more
         serious the offence committed by a foreign criminal the greater  is
         the public interest in deportation of the criminal.

     14. As set out by Lord Thomas in Hesham at [83]

             'One way of structuring such a judgment  would  be  to  follow
             what has become known as the "balance sheet"  approach.  After
             the judge has found the facts, the judge would set out each of
             the "pros" and "cons" in what has been described as a "balance
             sheet" and then set out reasoned conclusions as to whether the
             countervailing factors outweigh the importance attached to the
             public interest in the deportation of foreign offenders'.

     15. Although Mr Tufan made the point  that  the  test  would  be  'very
         compelling circumstances' the judge needed to factor  in  all  that
         was relevant in coming to the assessment and made no  findings  for
         example, on the seriousness of the offending,  the  family  in  Sri
         Lanka and the relevance of the previous grant of  Indefinite  Leave
         to Remain.  The judge failed to  set  out  the  Immigration  Rules,
         failed to refer anywhere to the correct test and failed to set  out
         the mandatory statutory factors.  As such the judge failed to  make
         the relevant findings and therefore I find that there is  an  error
         of law in relation to the assessment of the human rights claim.

     16. For clarity

             53. As explained at para 17  above,  the  Rules  are  not  law
             (although they are treated as law for the purposes of  section
             86(3)(a) of the 2002 Act), and therefore  do  not  govern  the
             determination of appeals, other than appeals  brought  on  the
             ground that the decision is not in accordance with the  Rules:
             see para 7 above. The policies adopted  by  the  Secretary  of
             State, and given effect  by  the  Rules,  are  nevertheless  a
             relevant and important consideration for tribunals determining
             appeals brought on Convention grounds,  because  they  reflect
             the assessment of the general  public  interest  made  by  the
             responsible  minister   and   endorsed   by   Parliament.   In
             particular, tribunals should accord respect to  the  Secretary
             of State's assessment of the strength of  the  general  public
             interest in the deportation of  foreign  offenders,  and  also
             consider all factors relevant  to  the  specific  case  before
             them, as explained at paras 37-38, 46 and 50 above. It remains
             for them to judge whether, on the facts  as  they  have  found
             them, and giving due weight to  the  strength  of  the  public
             interest in deportation in the case before them,  the  factors
             brought into account on the other side lead to the  conclusion
             that deportation would be disproportionate.

     17. In making an assessment with reference to Section 117C (2)   it  is
         also relevant to factor in the concept that the  more  serious  the
         offence committed by a foreign criminal the greater is  the  public
         interest in deportation of  the  criminal.   As  pointed  out,  the
         provisions under Section  117  are  mandatory  and  were  material.
         Albeit there was automatic deportation the nature and extent of the
         offending and the weight attached to that needed to be addressed.

     18. The First-tier Tribunal Judge's decision on asylum is preserved but
         the decision in relation to Article 8  is  set  aside.  The  matter
         should be returned to the First Tier  Tribunal  for  a  hearing  de
         novo, bearing in mind the need for relevant and  adequate  findings
         to found the Article 8 human rights' assessment.


Signed      Helen Rimington  Date 12th February 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington

