
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10584/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 2nd July 2018                              |On 28th September 2018        |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                Karam Shamri
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Cleghorn, instructed by Immigration Legal Advice
Centre
For the Respondent:    Mrs Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. The appellant, Karam Shamri, claims to have been born on 1  January
         1985 and to be an undocumented Kuwaiti Bidoon.  He claimed to  have
         arrived in the United Kingdom in January 2012 and claimed asylum on
         20 March 2012.  His claim was refused and he appealed against  that
         refusal.  His appeal was dismissed.  The  appellant  became  appeal
         rights exhausted in August 2012  but  he  remained  living  in  the
         United Kingdom.  On 27 September 2015, the appellant  made  further
         submissions to the respondent repeating his original  asylum  claim
         but also making a further claim based on his  relationship  with  a
         British citizen, [S C] (hereafter Ms  [C]).   His  application  was
         refused by a decision of the respondent dated 3 October 2017.   The
         appellant applied to the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Duff) which, in
         a decision promulgated on 24 November 2017, dismissed  the  appeal.
         The appellant now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

      2. The grounds of appeal are somewhat difficult  to  follow,  in  part
         because  they  do  not  contain  any  clear  headings.    This   is
         significant given that Judge Boyes, who granted permission  in  the
         First-tier Tribunal, has given permission on "ground 2" but not  on
         the first ground.  As regards the first  ground  of  appeal,  Judge
         Boyes wrote that, "the factors listed in Section 117B(2) -  (3)  do
         not create a positive for the appellant, they are merely statements
         of relevance."  I take it that ground 1 is contained in  paragraphs
         2 and 3 of the grounds of appeal.   As  regards  what  Judge  Boyes
         identified as "ground 2", he writes,

             "The judge seemingly has applied the  Razgar  principles  into
             the insurmountable obstacles test  without  first  considering
             the Rules then considering the position outside the Rules.  In
             addition, the  inclusion  of  the  test  of  impossibility  is
             arguably wrong in law."

         As I understand it,  Judge  Boyes  has  given  permission  for  the
         appellant to argue the contents of paragraphs 4 - 6 of the  grounds
         of appeal.

      3. Judge Duff's decision  is  not  unproblematic.   I  agree  with  Ms
         Cleghorn, who appeared before both  Tribunals  for  the  appellant,
         that the judge appears to move in and out of  an  analysis  of  the
         Immigration Rules  and  Article  8  ECHR.   However,  that  is  not
         necessarily indicative of a serious error of law.   The  judge  had
         before him an appeal in which he needed first to  consider  whether
         or not the appellant met the requirements of HC 395 and  thereafter
         whether the appeal should be allowed on Article 8 grounds.  In  his
         analysis, the asylum grounds are not mentioned at  all  but  it  is
         quite clear, both from the evidence which was led before the First-
         tier Tribunal and the comments  of  Ms  Cleghorn  recorded  by  the
         judge, that the only ground of appeal which was being  advanced  to
         the First-tier Tribunal was that in respect of Article 8 ECHR.

      4. Whilst I agree with Ms Cleghorn that Judge  Duff's  analysis  is  a
         little jumbled, I do not find that he has erred in law.   The  sole
         issue at dispute in this appeal concerned not the appellant's claim
         for asylum or humanitarian protection but his relationship with  Ms
         [C] whom he had met in a coffee shop in York in 2012 and with  whom
         he had cohabited since 2013.  The only substantive issue so far  as
         Article 8 was concerned was whether it was reasonable to expect the
         appellant and Ms [C]  to  pursue  their  relationship  outside  the
         United Kingdom, in this particular case in Egypt.  Ms Cleghorn made
         submissions to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  that  the  Secretary  of
         State's country policy and information note on Egypt showed that it
         would not be possible for Ms [C] to  enjoy  family  life  with  the
         appellant in Egypt on the basis of "societal discrimination in that
         country."  [28].  The judge  explicitly  rejected  that  submission
         [32] where he found that Ms [C], who has grown-up  children,  would
         find it possible to live in  Egypt  as  a  mature  woman  "in  good
         health"   "unencumbered   by   children"   with    the    appellant
         notwithstanding any of the difficulties possibly indicated  by  the
         country policy and guidance note.  In my view, that was  a  finding
         available to the judge.  For all the apparent  confusion  regarding
         EX.1, EX.2 and Razgar principles, the judge has ultimately  focused
         upon  this  central  question  in  this   appeal,   that   is   the
         reasonableness or otherwise of family life between Ms [C]  and  the
         appellant continuing in Egypt.

      5. The remaining ground of appeal challenges the decision on the basis
         that the judge has introduced a test of  impossibility  as  regards
         Article 8 which  the  appellant  submits  is  inappropriate.   That
         challenge arises from this passage at [32]:

             "[Ms [C]]  would,  perfectly  understandably  and  properly  -
             rather see the end of their relationship than leave her  home,
             job and her daughters and her grandchildren.  That is a wholly
             understandable choice on her part -  but  it  is  her  choice.
             Whilst, if the appellant were living in Egypt, I have no doubt
             that it would be very difficult for Ms [C] to  join  and  live
             with him there it would clearly not be impossible."

      6. Ms Cleghorn submitted that this test of impossibility  was  at  the
         back of the  judge's  mind  throughout  the  analysis  and  thereby
         vitiated it.  I disagree.  The judge has not stated in  terms  that
         the test as to whether it would be appropriate for family  life  to
         take place in Egypt is one possibility; and has  elsewhere  in  the
         analysis  used  the   appropriate   language   of   "insurmountable
         obstacles".  Whilst the judge's use of  language  is  arguably  not
         felicitous, I do not  find  that  he  has  established  a  new  and
         inappropriate test but has used the words "it would clearly not  be
         impossible"  synonymously,  concluding  that  there  would  be   no
         insurmountable obstacles to family life taking place in Egypt.  The
         judge has correctly recorded that Ms [C] categorically stated  that
         she would not go to Egypt to live with the  appellant  if  he  were
         removed there does not end at the argument.  It is the task of  the
         judge  to  consider  whether  or  not  there  were   insurmountable
         obstacles to family life taking place in Egypt and, having rejected
         Ms Cleghorn's submission based on the country policy, and having no
         other evidence (for example, concerning Ms [C]'s  health  or  other
         particular circumstances) which  might  lead  to  Ms  [C]  and  the
         appellant encountering a high level of hardship  by  relocating  to
         Egypt, he has plainly reached an outcome which was available to him
         on the evidence.

      7. For the reasons I have given, I uphold Judge Duff's  decision.   In
         closing, however, I would deprecate his use of  language  at  [31].
         Before stating that he intended to dismiss the appeal,  Judge  Duff
         wrote that it was a decision which he took "with  extreme  personal
         regret."  A judge may show empathy  for  the  circumstances  of  an
         appellant but it is  not  appropriate  for  the  judge  to  express
         "extreme personal" emotions of any kind when allowing or dismissing
         any appeal.

    Notice of Decision

      8. This appeal is dismissed.

      9. No anonymity direction is made.




    Signed                              Date 25 September 2018


    Upper Tribunal Judge Lane








    I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.




    Signed                              Date 25 September 2018


    Upper Tribunal Judge Lane






