
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10140/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at FIELD HOUSE                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 26th April 2017                            |On 8th May 2017              |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE
                                Ms. G A BLACK


                                   Between

                                     g s
                            ANONYMITY ORDER MADE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms E. Sanders (Counsel instructed by  J.D. Spicer &
co )
For the Respondent:    Mr P. Armstrong  (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   I shall refer to the parties as "the appellant"  and  "the  Respondent"
    who is the Secretary of State.  This is an  error  of  law  hearing.  I
    consider whether or not there  is  a  material  error  of  law  in  the
    decision  the  First-tier  Tribunal   (Judge   CM   Phillips)   ("FTT")
    promulgated on 30th November 2016 in which the appellant's  application
    for asylum and humanitarian protection was dismissed.


Background

2.  The appellant claimed to be a citizen of  Eritrea  and  her  nationality
    was the main issue to be  determined  on  appeal.  The  appellant  also
    claimed that she was a Pentecostal Christian and she feared persecution
    on religious grounds. The respondent did not accept that she  was  from
    Eritrea, nor that she was a Pentecostal Christian,  nor  that  she  had
    left Eritrea illegally.  It was the appellant's claim that she was born
    in Eritrea and then went to Ethiopia  and  grew  up  speaking  Amharic,
    although she could understand Tigrinya which her  parents  spoke.   She
    returned to Eritrea with her father when she was of school  age  for  a
    period of two years from the age of 9 years old. Military service was a
    relevant consideration on return.

Adjournment application at FTT

3.  At the hearing the appellant's representative requested  an  adjournment
    in order to  obtain  expert  evidence  on  nationality  and  rights  of
    residence, and for the appellant and/or her solicitors to make  further
    attempts to contact the Ethiopian Embassy to establish her nationality.
     Counsel argued that the appeal hearing on 26th October had been listed
    quickly. It was on 15th  September  that  the  appellant  received  the
    refusal letter informing her that nationality was in dispute.   It  was
    important that the appellant had the opportunity to show that  she  had
    taken reasonable  steps  to  obtain  an  Ethiopian  passport  [9].  The
    respondent opposed the application citing MA (Ethiopia) [2009] Civ  289
    [10].

4.   In refusing the application the FTT found that the  grounds  were  "too
    vague" and it was not clear what evidence  could  be  provided  by  the
    Ethiopian Embassy when it was the appellant's  position  that  she  was
    Eritrean.  Credibility issues were  raised  in  the  refusal  and  "the
    reasons for the adjournment did not address those issues" [11].

FTT findings and decision

5.  The FTT accepted that the determinative issue  in  the  appeal  was  the
    appellant's nationality and that if she were Eritrean then she would be
    entitled to a grant of refugee status [38] because on return she  would
    be eligible for military service [60].  The FTT emphasised that as  the
    issue was narrowly focused the evidence would be  carefully  considered
    and the utmost scrutiny applied. The FTT found that the  appellant  was
    not an Eritrean national. The FTT found that the account given was  not
    credible.  The  appellant's  timeline  evidence  was  unconvincing  and
    inconsistent [45-47][50].  The  appellant's  explanation  for  speaking
    Amharic and minimal Tigrinya was lacking in credibility  [46-50].   The
    appellant's lack of knowledge  about  Eritrea  was  further  cause  for
    finding her lacking in credibility.  The FTT found that she was  not  a
    Pentecostal Christian [52-56].   The  FTT  considered  the  appellant's
    account of attending the Ethiopian Embassy  and  found  it  lacking  in
    credibility.  The FTT did  not  find  it  credible  that  the  Head  of
    Consular would have a business  card  showing  a  private  yahoo  email
    address.  The FTT disbelieved her account  that  she  had  requested  a
    passport without making an appointment  or  producing  any  documentary
    evidence [58].  The FTT found that "the appellant has  not  shown  with
    sufficient, satisfactory evidence that she made a proper application to
    the Ethiopian Embassy for a passport and this was refused for any other
    reason other than her statement that she is Eritrean, born  in  Eritrea
    with no independent or documentary evidence originating from  Ethiopia"
    [59].  The FTT found that her attempts to obtain a passport  which  had
    not involved making an appointment were not bona fides and  the  denial
    of  a  passport  did  not  assist  in  her  establishing  her  Eritrean
    nationality.

Grounds of application for permission to appeal
6.  The appellant relied on two grounds of appeal.   The  first  ground  was
    that the FTT unfairly refused the application for an adjournment in the
    light of the lack of time for preparation of the appeal, clear  reasons
    for an adjournment were given, the FTT having refused  the  application
    then went on the find the appellant's  account  of  attendance  at  the
    Embassy was not sufficiently credible or a bona fides attempt to do so.

7.  The second ground argued was that the FTT's  assessment  of  credibility
    was flawed. The FTT failed to take into account the  appellant's  young
    age at the time of material events and the interpretation issues raised
    by the appellant, in making negative findings as to material issues.

Permission to appeal
8.  Permission was  granted  on  renewal  by  UTJ  McWilliam  who  found  it
    arguable  that  the  FTT  gave  inadequate  reasons  for  refusing  the
    adjournment, and which could  amount  to  procedural  unfairness.   The
    evidence sought by the appellant in respect of nationality was directly
    relevant to credibility.

Rule 24 response
9.  The respondent opposed the appeal.  The grounds  challenging  the  FTT's
    reasoning  and  amount  to  disagreements.   The  FTT  gave   perfectly
    sustainable reasons for refusing the adjournment and no good reason why
    further enquiries were necessary was given.  A request  for  an  expert
    ought to have been made  at an earlier stage.

Submissions
10.  Ms Sanders argued all of the grounds but  her  primary  submission  was
    the refusal to adjourn which fed into the findings made by the FTT.  In
    cases of disputed nationality it was a recognised that an applicant, on
    whom the burden falls, would seek to establish Ethiopian nationality or
    acquire a right to it and this involved potentially complex  facts  and
    circumstances to be considered.  The request  for  an  adjournment  was
    clearly made and the steps proposed to be taken were set out  in  terms
    of  a  further  visit  and  /or  contact  with  the  Embassy  by  legal
    representatives.  Counsel addressed the FTT  as  to  the  need  for  an
    expert on the issue of nationality and possible  corrupt  practices  at
    the Embassy.  The refusal was further compounded by the FTT's rejection
    of  the  appellant's  account  of  having  attended  the   Embassy   as
    unsatisfactory.  The nationality issue was central to the appeal.

11.  The FTT did not specifically consider the question of  the  appellant's
    age.  The FTT failed to take into account the  appellant's  explanation
    about mistranslation.   In  essence  the  FTT  erred  by  deciding  the
    credibility  issues  first  and  thereafter  going  on  the  deal  with
    nationality.

12. Mr Armstrong argued that the  appellant  had  ample  time  in  which  to
    obtain further evidence including an expert.  The FTT's approach to the
    account of attendance at the Embassy and the finding as to the business
    card, was perfectly reasonable.   The  FTT  had  given  valid  multiple
    reasons for not accepting the credibility of the  appellant's  evidence
    and was entitled to do so given the discrepancies and inconsistencies.

Discussion and conclusion

13.    I find that there was a material error in law leading  to  procedural
    unfairness  arising  from  the  refusal  of  an  adjournment  and   the
    inadequacy of the reasons given  in  support.   The  FTT  rejected  the
    application because the reasons given were "too vague". Yet it is clear
    that the adjournment was sought in  order  to  instruct  an  expert  on
    nationality to look at the facts and circumstances relating to Eritrean
    or Ethiopian nationality  and  to  obtain  further  evidence  from  the
    Ethiopian Embassy.  This is entirely consistent with the guidance in ST
    (Ethnic Eritrean- nationality-return) Ethiopia  CG  [2011]  UKUT  00252
    (IAC) (see headnote (4-6)).  For such an  application  to  be  made  in
    advance of the hearing would have been appropriate  and  desirable  but
    reference was made to the shortness of time in which to prepare for the
    appeal. Furthermore the FTT reasoned that the refusal  letter  set  out
    credibility issues which were not addressed by the  reasons  given  for
    the adjournment.  Clearly  this  is  not  the  case  at  all;  the  FTT
    emphasised the need for utmost care and scrutiny given  that  the  main
    credibility issue under appeal was  the  appellant's  nationality.  The
    reasons for finding her lacking in credibility as  to  her  nationality
    were set out in the reasons for refusal and thus central to the appeal.
    The  respondent  specifically  raised  the  issue  of  re  establishing
    Ethiopian residency at paragraph 27 of the refusal letter.

14.   I take the view that the refusal of an adjournment then  infected  the
    FTT 's findings  particularly as  to  the  account  given  of  and  the
    significance of the contact with the Embassy and which was relevant  to
    the issue of nationality. Both were matters which could  properly  have
    been addressed by an expert.

Decision
15.   There is a material error of law in the decision which  shall  be  set
    aside.   The  matter  is  remitted  for  re  hearing  at  Taylor  House
    (excluding Judge CM Phillips).


                               Signed                     Date  4.5.2017


                               GA Black
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal




Direction Regarding Anonymity - rule 13 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-
tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014

Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


NO FEE AWARD






                               Signed                 Date 4.5.2017


                               GA Black
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


