
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10656/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard remotely at Field House        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 20th July 2020                    |On 10th August 2020                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES


                                   Between

                                    S W G
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Fazli, instructed by Sohaib Fatimi Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer

This has  been  a  remote  hearing  which  has  been  consented  to  by  the
parties. The form of remote hearing was video by Skype (V). A face to face
hearing was not held because it was not practicable and all issues could  be
determined in a remote hearing. The documents that I was referred to are in
a bundle of 218 pages, the contents of which I have recorded. The  order
made is described at the end of these reasons.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan  born  in  1992.  He  appeals
    against the decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Kudhail,  dated  28
    December 2019, dismissing his protection  claim  on  asylum  and  human
    rights grounds.

2.   The Appellant arrived in the UK in December 2009 and claimed asylum  on
    21 January 2010. His application was refused and his  appeal  dismissed
    on 6 August 2010. He became appeal rights exhausted on 4 October  2010.
    On 18 October 2018 he made a fresh claim for asylum which  was  refused
    with no right of appeal. He made a further claim on 2 April 2019  which
    was refused on 14 October 2019, the subject of this appeal.

3.   It is the Appellant's claim that his father was  a  Taliban  commander,
    preacher and child recruiter in Helmand province. His elder brother was
    forcibly taken from the family home by his father to be a  soldier  for
    the Taliban. His brother was killed  six  months  later  in  a  suicide
    mission. The Appellant was told he would be taken when he was 15  years
    old. The Appellant's uncle, who lived in Kabul,  helped  the  Appellant
    leave Afghanistan with the assistance of an agent.

4.   In 2010, First-tier Tribunal Judge Beg did not find  the  Appellant  to
    be a credible  witness.  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Kudhail  set  out
    Judge's Beg's reasons for  coming  to  this  conclusion  at  [11a)]  to
    [11s)].  Judge  Kudhail  applied  Devaseelan  and  considered  the  new
    documentary evidence in accordance with Tanveer  Ahmed  giving  reasons
    for the weight he attached to it. He concluded the documents  were  not
    reliable and the Appellant was not a credible witness.

5.   The Appellant applied for permission to appeal on five  grounds.  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Allen granted permission on grounds  4  and  5.  It  was
    arguable:

         "4)  The judge  rejected  the  Appellant's  father's  role  in  the
             Taliban on the basis that the letters from the Moulvi and  the
             elders  were  not  verified  by  the  Appellant's  expert   Dr
             Giustozzi. The judge erred in law in  requiring  corroboration
             in the form of expert verification.

         5)   The judge erred in law in failing to adequately  consider  the
             expert report, in particular the risk on  return.  The  expert
             report undermined Judge Beg's credibility findings set out  at
             11b and 11k of Judge Kudhail's decision."

Submissions

6.   Mr Fazli  submitted  the  judge  erred  in  law  in  finding  that  the
    documentary evidence should have  been  verified  by  the  expert.  The
    Appellant had already provided  corroboration  of  the  documents.  The
    judge erred in law in requiring further  corroboration.  He  applied  a
    higher threshold test than that required by Tanveer Ahmed.

7.   Mr Fazli submitted the judge failed to deal with  the  risk  on  return
    from the authorities referred to at paragraphs 37, 40, 42, 46 and 59 of
    the expert report. The judge had not engaged  with  the  expert  report
    which undermined the credibility  findings  at  [11b]  and  [11k].  The
    expert evidence clearly contradicted the  previous  findings  of  Judge
    Beg. Judge Kudhail's failure to deal with these points demonstrated his
    failure to deal with the expert report in its entirety.

8.   Mr Clarke submitted that the starting point was the decision  of  Judge
    Beg. She set out 19 reasons for finding  that  the  Appellant  was  not
    credible which were listed at [11] of Judge Kudhail's decision.

9.   Mr Clarke relied on ST (Corroboration - Kasolo) Ethiopia  [2004]  UKIAT
    00119 and accepted  that  corroboration  was  not  required  in  asylum
    appeals. He submitted  the  judge  was  entitled  to  draw  an  adverse
    inference from the failure to produce evidence which  could  reasonably
    have been provided. The judge was entitled to take into account a  lack
    of evidence which the Appellant ought to have been able to  produce  to
    support his claim.

10.  Mr Clarke submitted that,  in  considering  the  expert  report,  Judge
    Kudhail was entitled to look at what could have been provided  to  take
    the evidence further. The expert stated he had contacts in  Afghanistan
    which enabled him to make enquiries. However, he did not seek to verify
    the documentary evidence relied on by the Appellant. Judge Kudhail  was
    entitled to take into account a lack of such evidence. In  relation  to
    the letter from the elders, the expert undermined  the  credibility  of
    the letter by stating he  could  not  understand  why  they  would  put
    themselves at risk in providing such a letter.

11.  The risk from the authorities referred to in the paragraphs  identified
    in the grounds was predicated on the assumption  that  the  Appellant's
    father was a Taliban commander. The matters referred to therein did not
    take the Appellant's case any further because they failed  to  identify
    matters capable of undermining Judge Beg's credibility findings.  Judge
    Kudhail dealt with the expert report at [33j]. The Appellant relied  on
    one sentence in the report to undermine the 19 credibility  points  set
    out at [11].

12.  In response, Mr  Fazli  submitted  Judge  Kudhail  erred  in  requiring
    corroboration and in failing to refer to the relevant paragraphs of the
    expert report.

Conclusions and reasons

13.  At [33g] and  [33h]  Judge  Kudhail  gave  three  reasons  for  why  he
    attached little weight to the letter from the Moulvi (page 111/2 of the
    Appellant's bundle). The Appellant claimed  his  brother  had  obtained
    this evidence and produced the envelopes in which  the  documents  were
    sent but failed to produce evidence of how the document  was  obtained.
    Judge Kudhail questioned the provenance of the letter from the  Moulvi.
    Secondly, the content of the letter from the  Moulvi  was  inconsistent
    with the Appellant's evidence of when his elder brother died.  Thirdly,
    Judge Kudhail found that the letter could have  been  verified  by  the
    Appellant's expert, but it was not.

14.  At [33i] Judge Kudhail gave three reasons for why  he  attached  little
    weight to the letter from the elders (page 116/117 of  the  Appellant's
    bundle). The Appellant's own expert was unclear why  the  elders  would
    expose themselves to the risk of writing such a letter.  Secondly,  the
    elders referred specifically to  the  risk  to  the  Appellant  without
    considering the risk to the Appellant's younger  brother  who,  if  the
    Appellant's  account  was  true,  would  also  be  at  risk  from   the
    Appellant's father. Thirdly, the Appellant's expert could have  carried
    out some enquiries or checks to verify the letters but he failed to  do
    so.

15.  Judge Kudhail did not reject the letters on the basis  that  they  were
    not corroborated by the expert. This lack of evidence was only  one  of
    the reasons for attaching little weight to the documents.  Further  the
    judge did not require corroboration. He was entitled to rely on a  lack
    of evidence which the Appellant ought to have been able to  produce  if
    his account was credible. Judge Kudhail attached little weight  to  the
    letters because of  their  content,  the  manner  in  which  they  were
    obtained and the lack of evidence to their  provenance.  Judge  Kudhail
    properly applied Tanveer Ahmed.

16.  The paragraphs of the expert report relied on by the Appellant  in  the
    grounds and in submissions confirm that son's follow their fathers into
    the  Taliban  and  refer  to  detention  of  relatives  of  insurgents,
    likelihood of detention at the airport, and the risks on return because
    the Appellant's father is a Taliban commander.

17.  Dr Giustozzi did not  interview  the  Appellant  and  he  accepted  the
    Appellant's account without considering  the  credibility  findings  of
    Judge Beg. There was nothing in the report to undermine the totality of
    the credibility findings. Even if [11b] and [11k] are  contradicted  by
    the report, those findings are not so significant so as to disturb  the
    remaining 17 reasons for finding the Appellant's account not credible.

18.  Judge Kudhail properly considered the expert report at [33j]  and  gave
    cogent reasons for the weight he attached to it. He was  not  bound  by
    the expert's opinion that the Appellant's account  was  plausible.  His
    finding that the expert report did not add further detail  which  would
    cause him to depart from the previous credibility findings of Judge Beg
    was open to him on the evidence before him.

19.  In any event, the risk categories identified by Dr  Giustozzi  did  not
    identify the Appellant to be at risk. Having rejected  his  claim  that
    his father was a Taliban commander, the paragraphs  relied  on  by  the
    Appellant in these submissions did not put him at risk on  return.  Any
    failure to specifically mention these paragraphs in  the  decision  was
    not material.

20.  Accordingly, I find there was no error of law in the decision of  Judge
    Kudhail and the Appellant's appeal is dismissed.



Notice of decision

Appeal dismissed



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


              J Frances

Signed                                  Date: 31 July 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Frances




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


              J Frances

Signed                                  Date: 31 July 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Frances

