
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal number: PA/10735/2019 (V)



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard Remotely at Manchester CJC   |Decision & Reasons Promogulated    |
|On 25 June 2021                    |On 7 July 2021                     |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PICKUP



                                   Between

                                     HB

                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



                          DECISION AND REASONS (V)



For the appellant:     Mr P Lewis of Counsel, instructed by Duncan  Lewis  &
Co

For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Presenting Officer



This  has  been  a  remote  hearing  which  has   been   consented   to by
the parties. The form of remote hearing was video by Skype (V). A face-to-
face hearing was not held because it was not  practicable,  and  all  issues
could be determined in a remote hearing. At the conclusion of  the  hearing,
I reserved my decisions and reasons,  which  I  now  give.  The  order  made
is described at the end of these reasons.


1. The appellant, who is a national of Botswana with date of birth given  as
   24.5.92, has appealed with permission to the Upper Tribunal  against  the
   decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated 29.9.20 (Judge A Davies),
   dismissing on  all  grounds  his  appeal  against  the  decision  of  the
   Secretary of State, dated 7.8.19, to refuse his claim  for  international
   protection on the basis of sexual orientation and being  a  member  of  a
   particular social group (PSG) as a homosexual man at risk  on  return  to
   Botswana.

2. Permission to appeal was granted by the First-tier Tribunal on  26.10.20,
   the judge considering it arguable that the judge erred in law by  looking
   at passages of source material other  than  those  cited  in  the  expert
   report and in failing to provide the  appellant  and  his  representative
   notice of the new  matters  under  consideration,  thereby  amounting  to
   procedural unfairness. However, there were a number of other  grounds  in
   the application for permission to appeal.

3. I have carefully considered the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  in
   the light of the written and oral submissions.

4. The Upper Tribunal has received the respondent's Rule 24 response,  dated
   2.11.20. Very late, by email received on 23.6.21, the Upper Tribunal  now
   has the appellant's skeleton argument  dated  23.6.21,  together  with  a
   bundle of materials including the witness statement  of  Ms  A  Faryl  of
   Counsel. However, there has been no Rule 15(2A) application.

5. As I explained to the parties at the outset of  the  hearing,  I  do  not
   have a copy of the notice and grounds of application  for  permission  to
   appeal. The notice within the file relates to a different  case  entirely
   (EA/06684/2019). However, from  according  to  the  appellant's  skeleton
   argument, grounds 2 and 3 submit that there was procedural unfairness  in
   that the Home Office Presenting Officer indicated at a CMR that they  did
   not wish to cross-examine the appellant as there was no issue as  to  his
   credibility, as a result of which the appellant was not  called  to  give
   evidence. It is argued that the respondent effectively conceded that  the
   appellant's factual account was credible in its entirety,  including  his
   assertion that he did not conduct his  relationship  with  TB  openly  in
   Botswana.

6. There was no record of the CMR in the Tribunal's case  file.  Ms  Faryl's
   statement suggest that it took place on 14.9.20, which cannot be  correct
   as that was the date of the substantive appeal hearing. However, Mr Lewis
   identified the correct date as 13.7.20, which  Ms  Everett  was  able  to
   confirm from Home Office records. She also  read  out  the  minute  which
   included the Presenting Officer's suggestion at the CMR  that  given  the
   respondent's acceptance of the appellant's sexual orientation there  were
   very few issues, proposing that  the  appeal  could  proceed  by  way  of
   submissions only. Ms Faryl's recollection was that the Presenting Officer
   stated that he did  not  wish  to  cross-examine  the  appellant  as  his
   credibility was not in issue. The Home Office minute indicates  that  the
   judge agreed to this course of action. In consequence, the appellant  was
   not called to give  oral  evidence  at  the  First-tier  Tribunal  appeal
   hearing.

7. The significance to the grounds of appeal is as follows.

8. The previous First-tier Tribunal appeal before Judge Amin in 2014  stated
   at [45] that the appellant's relationship with TB  was  "to  some  extent
   conducted openly when the appellant and (TB) met in public  houses."   At
   [28] of the instant decision, the judge recorded this  finding.  However,
   the appellant's witness statement from January 2020 stated at [9] of that
   document that, "I understand that the previous Tribunal  thought  that  I
   had conducted some of my previous relationship in the open  but  that  is
   not correct. I believe that was a misunderstanding of my evidence that  I
   gave in my interview and I refer to the notes  of  that  interview."  The
   judge correctly noted this challenge to Judge Amin's finding at  [39]  of
   the decision, "The  appellant  stated  that  the  previous  Tribunal  had
   incorrectly reached the conclusion that he  had  conducted  some  of  his
   previous relationship in the open."  Nevertheless, at [40] the judge went
   on to note that this disagreement with the previous Tribunal findings was
   not supported by fresh evidence or evidence not available in  2014.  "For
   example, the appellant did not  in  his  witness  statement  provide  any
   detail about the extent to which the relationship with (TB) was conducted
   in public and the extent to which it was conducted in private.  There  is
   nothing in his witness statement to make it appropriate  to  depart  from
   Judge Amin's conclusion that part of  the  appellant's  relationship  was
   conducted (publicly) such as visiting pubs."

9. It follows from the above and the rest of the decision  that  the  First-
   tier Tribunal Judge relied on the relationship having been  conducted  at
   least in part openly in the assessment as to whether to depart from Judge
   Amin's findings and more generally in determining  the  overall  risk  of
   persecution on return. However,  the  appellant  had  maintained  in  his
   witness statement that Judge Amin got it wrong and given  that  the  Home
   Office did not challenge  the  appellant's  credibility,  the  First-tier
   Tribunal Judge was not entitled to go behind that  concession,  which  by
   implication  includes  his  assertion  that  he  did  not   conduct   his
   relationship with TB publicly. As the Upper Tribunal  stated  in  Kalidas
   (agreed facts - best practice) [2012]  UKUT  00327  (IAC),  "35.  Judges,
   unless  in  exceptional  circumstances,  do  not  look   behind   factual
   concessions.  Such  exceptional  circumstances  may   arise   where   the
   concession is partial or unclear, and evidence develops  in  such  a  way
   that a judge considers that the extent and correctness of the  concession
   must be revisited. If so, she must draw that immediately to attention  of
   representatives so that they have an  opportunity  to  ask  such  further
   questions, lead such further evidence and make such  further  submissions
   as required. An adjournment may become necessary."

10. It is submitted that had  the  appellant  and  his  representative  been
   aware that the judge intended to go behind  the  concession,  they  would
   have considered calling the appellant to give oral  evidence.  They  were
   deprived of the opportunity to consider this and to make  submissions  on
   the point at the First-tier Tribunal, which would likely have steered the
   judge away from making this error of law.

11. Following discussion with  the  two  representatives  as  to  this  sole
   ground of appeal, Ms Everett very fairly  conceded  that  she  could  not
   defend the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  accepted  that  a
   material error of law had been identified.

12. I entirely agree with the submissions contained in the grounds  on  this
   point and, notwithstanding the absence of some documentation and indeed a
   copy of the grounds as originally  drafted,  I  am  satisfied  that  this
   amounted to such a material error of law that the decision  cannot  stand
   but must be set aside. Mr Lewis concurred with my suggestion that in  the
   circumstances of this finding, there was no  purpose  in  canvassing  the
   other alleged errors of law set out in the grounds and skeleton argument.
   For that reason I have not addressed the other grounds at all.

13. In the circumstances and for the reasons set  out  above,  I  find  such
   material error of law in the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  as  to
   require it to be  set  aside  to  be  remade  afresh,  with  no  findings
   preserved.

14. When a decision of the First-tier Tribunal has been set  aside,  section
   12(2) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007  requires  either
   that the case is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal with directions,  or
   it must be remade by the Upper Tribunal.  The  scheme  of  the  Tribunals
   Court and Enforcement Act 2007 does not assign the  function  of  primary
   fact finding to the Upper Tribunal. The error of the First-tier  Tribunal
   Judge vitiates all other findings of fact and the conclusions from  those
   facts so that there has not been a valid determination of the  issues  in
   the appeal.

15. In all the circumstances, at the invitation and request of both  parties
   to relist this appeal for a fresh hearing in the First-tier  Tribunal,  I
   do so on the basis that this is a case which falls  squarely  within  the
   Senior President's Practice Statement at paragraph 7.2.



Decision

      The appeal of the appellant to the Upper Tribunal is allowed.

      The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

      The making of the decision in the appeal is remitted to the First-tier
      Tribunal sitting at Manchester to be remade de novo.

      I make no order for costs.



Signed: DMW Pickup

Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

Date:       25 June 2021



Anonymity Direction

I am satisfied, having had  regard  to  the  guidance  in  the  Presidential
Guidance Note No 1 of 2013: Anonymity Orders, that it would  be  appropriate
to make an order in accordance with  Rules  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 in the following terms:

      "Unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise, the appellant
      is granted anonymity. No report of these proceedings shall directly or
      indirectly identify him or any member of his  family.  This  direction
      applies to, amongst others, both the  appellant  and  the  respondent.
      Failure to comply with this direction could lead to contempt of  court
      proceedings."



Signed: DMW Pickup

Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

Date:       25 June 2021


