
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10768/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard remotely via Skype for Business         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 12 March 2021                              |On 24 March 2021              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                     A R
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant


                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Shah
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, a male citizen of Bangladesh, appeals against a decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on 27 February  2020  dismissing
    his appeal against a decision  of  the  Secretary  of  State  dated  16
    October 2019 which refused his claim for international protection.

 2. The decision under challenge is the second determination of  an  appeal
    brought by the appellant. The first,  following  a  refusal  of  asylum
    dated 20 April 2016, was dismissed by the  First-tier  Tribunal  on  10
    October 2016.

 3. The grounds and the  appellant  in  his  witness  statement  repeatedly
    assert that  the  Secretary  of  State  should  have  verified  various
    documents which the appellant had adduced in  evidence.  There  was  no
    obligation on the Secretary of State to carry out such a  verification.
    It is for the appellant to discharge the burden of proof  by  reference
    to the appropriate standard of proof. The judge did not fall into error
    by failing to require the Secretary of State to  verify  documents  nor
    did she do so by relying on Tanveer Ahmed* [2002] UKIAT 00439 to  guide
    her assessment of the documentary evidence.

 4. Having said that, there are problems  with  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    decision. The analysis is thorough but at times the  text  is  unclear,
    perhaps, in part, as a  consequence  finding  poor  proof-reading.   At
    [38], the judge writes that she 'will place  no  evidential  weight  on
    none of these documents (sic).' The first  sentence  of  the  following
    paragraph  reads,  'I  have  nevertheless  considered   some   of   the
    documents.' It is not clear why the judge has considered some documents
    and not others or why  she  has  considered  any  documents  having  (I
    assume) already intended to indicate in the previous paragraph that she
    would not place 'evidential weight' on any document. More  problematic,
    is that the judge at [35] and [36] states that appellant had given  'no
    explanation' for  a  discrepancy  between  the  date  on  some  of  the
    documents sent from abroad and the apparent dates of posting.  This  is
    problematic because the appellant had provided an  explanation  in  his
    witness statement of 31 January 2020 at paragraphs [38-43].  The  judge
    was not, of course, obliged to accept the appellant's explanation.  She
    was not obliged to refer to every item of evidence or every part of the
    witness account given by the appellant.  However, stating categorically
    that there had been 'no explanation' for the discrepancy was  factually
    incorrect and emphasises the fact that the judge had not  addressed  or
    made any finding on that explanation.

 5. There is force in the submission  made  by  Mr  Diwnycz,  who  appeared
    before the  Upper  Tribunal  for  the  Secretary  of  State,  that  the
    determination of the appellant's first appeal had been entirely damning
    of his credibility as a witness. It may well be  that  the  explanation
    provided by the appellant is found to be inadequate of incredible. As I
    have stated above, it is for the appellant  to  persuade  the  Tribunal
    that his evidence is credible; he cannot point  to  a  failure  of  the
    Secretary of State to verify documents as  proof  that  they  or  their
    contents should be accepted as genuine.  However, I find that, in  this
    instance, the judge has fallen into error and her  decision  should  be
    set aside. The judge was required to consider a explanation  where  one
    had been offered and her  findings  on  the  documentary  evidence  are
    unsound in consequence. There will need to be new fact-finding exercise
    at a de novo hearing and the  decision  remade.  That  task  is  better
    undertaken in the First-tier  Tribunal  to  which  the  appeal  is  now
    returned.

    Notice of Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  is  set  aside.  None  of  the
    findings of fact shall stand. The appeal is returned to the  First-tier
    Tribunal for a hearing de novo (not Judges Geraint  Jones  or  O'Garro;
    Hatton Cross; First-tier Tribunal to  determine  if  face  to  face  or
    remote; Bangali (Sylheti) interpreter; 1.5 hours; first available date)



Signed                              Date 12 March 2021
Upper Tribunal Judge Lane



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.








