
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10244/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 11 October 2018                            |On 12 November 2018           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

                                     s k
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms N Loughran, Loughran & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms M O'Brian, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Doyle promulgated on 26 March 2018. The appellant's
    claim is that he was a member of the Iraqi Police Force assigned to the
    Forestry Environment  Department  in  the  Independent  Kurdish  Region
    ("IKR").  Whilst on duty, on 30 July 2016, he came across  a  group  of
    men who were hunting illegally.  The men challenged  him  and  a  fight
    broke out.  What the appellant did not know is that the leader  of  the
    group was Shek Sadradin Shekh Hussain, a powerful member  of  the  PUK.
    Although the appellant managed to escape, Shek Hussain  threatened  his
    life.  The following day a hand grenade was thrown into his house.  The
    appellant reported this to his superior office and who  told  him  that
    nothing could be done because Shek Hussain  was  so  influential.   The
    appellant left Iraq on 2 August 2016 taking his wife and  two  children
    with him and on 17 August 2016 a warrant was issued for the appellant's
    arrest as a deserter from the Iraqi Police Force.

 2. The appellant fears that he would be killed if returned to the  PUK  as
    there is now a warrant for his arrest.  He is charged  with  desertion,
    the penalty for which is death.

 3. The respondent did not accept  the  appellant's  case  concluding  that
    internal  flight  was  in  event  a  viable  alternative   to   seeking
    international protection.

 4. The judge heard evidence from the appellant found to  be  credible  and
    concluded that the appellant:-

      i) was a police  officer  working  in  the  Forestry  and  Environment
         Department of the police within IKR [12D];

     ii) did receive a credible threat; that an attack was made on his house
         and that he had been charged with desertion [12D];

    iii)  the  existence  of  the  warrant  for  arrest  was  indicative  of
         prosecution not persecution [12N] but it did  not  follow  that  he
         faces persecution by the IKR  authorities  who  would  be  able  to
         protect him, that the  arrest  warrant  having  relevance  only  in
         considering Articles 2 and 3 of the Human Rights Convention;

     iv) could be returned to the IKR where there would  be  protection  for
         him as soon as he removed himself from a PUK dominated area [12O];

      v) was not entitled to humanitarian protection nor was  his  return  a
         breach of the Human Rights Convention.

 5. The appellant sought permission to appeal on the grounds that the judge
    had erred :

      i) in finding that the appellant could safely relocate  to  a  non-PUK
         dominated area as the arrest warrant was addressed "to  all  forces
         of legal enforcement; all forces of  the  Asayish;  all  those  who
         receive this arrest warrant - you are authorised  and  it  is  your
         duty to arrest the suspect ..."; and, given that it  was  addressed
         to all these areas the appellant simply could not escape the arrest
         warrant by removing himself from a PUK dominated area as all forces
         of law enforcement and Asayish have  been  charged  with  arresting
         him;

     ii) in failing to note that the charge of desertion had arisen  as  the
         result of the appellant fleeing for his life.

 6. When the matter came before me, Mrs  O'Brien  candidly,  and  properly,
    conceded that this is an appeal which should have been allowed.

 7. The judge accepted that the arrest warrant was correct but does not, in
    assessing the consequences that flow from that being addressed  to  all
    the security forces of the IKR that he would not be safe in  a  non-PUK
    dominated area. Indeed, it is likely  that  he  would  be  arrested  on
    return.  Further,  the  judge  appears  not  to  have  considered   the
    consequences of the appellant being taken into detention.   It  follows
    from the judge's finding that the appellant would be safe in a  non-PUK
    dominated area that he would be  at  risk  in  a  PUK  dominated  area.
    Accordingly, and in the light of the concessions made, I  am  satisfied
    that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal should be  set  aside  and
    remade on the basis that the appellant would be at risk of serious harm
    on return.

 8. It was at the  hearing,  unclear  whether  the  accepted  risk  to  the
    appellant of serious ill-treatment  was  on  account  of  a  convention
    reason.  Accordingly, I adjourned the matter to permit  submissions  on
    this issue from both parties, the appellant to make submissions  within
    fourteen days, the response from the respondent  within  fourteen  days
    after that.

 9. Having  read  Ms  Loughran's  submissions,  Mrs  O'Brien  has  formally
    conceded in  an  email  dated  1  November  that  the  appellant  faced
    persecution on account of imputed political  opinion,  given  that  the
    individual targeting him is a powerful PUK actor. I  consider  that  is
    so, and is also the reason he was not protected by the state.

10. In the circumstances I am satisfied that  the  appellant  has  a  well-
    founded fear of persecution on Refugee Convention grounds, and I  allow
    the appeal on that basis. Similarly, his removal would be in breach  of
    Article 3 of the Human Rights Convention, and I  allow  the  appeal  on
    that grounds also.

Notice of Decision

      1) The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making  of  an
         error of law and I set it aside.

      2) I remake the appeal by allowing it on refugee grounds and on  human
         rights grounds.

      3) In light of the above the appeal on humanitarian protection grounds
         falls to be dismissed.

      4) I maintain the anonymity order made by the First-tier Tribunal.


Signed                                  Date 5 November 2018

[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul
