

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)
                                                Appeal Number: PA/10227/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5 June 2017                        |On 21 June 2017                      |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                     J S
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr Sharma instructed by Londonium Solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr Tarlow Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


     1. This is an appeal against a decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
        Wyman ('the Judge') promulgated on 23 November 2016  in  which  the
        Judge dismissed the appellant's appeal on asylum and  human  rights
        grounds.
     2. Permission to appeal was refused by another judge  for  the  First-
        tier Tribunal but granted on a renewed  application  to  the  Upper
        Tribunal. The operative section of the grant being in the following
        terms:


   1. the Appellant is  a  national  of  Bangladesh,  born  on  1.8.75.  She
      appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  against  a  decision  by  the
      Respondent dated 12.9.16. Her appeal came before  First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge Wyman for hearing on 26.10.16.  In  a  decision  promulgated  on
      23.11.16 the Judge dismissed the appeal.


   2. The grounds in support of the application for  permission  to  appeal,
      which was made in time, assert that the Judge erred materially in law:
      (i) in her assessment of the credibility of the Appellant; (ii) in her
      conclusions concerning the risk to the  Appellant  of  persecution  in
      light of the positive evidence of  domestic  violence;  (iii)  in  her
      findings  on  internal  relocation,   which   contradicted   her   own
      observations at [64]; (iv) in failing to take account of  the  reasons
      for the delay in claiming asylum.


   3. The Judge rejected the Appellant's asylum  claim  essentially  on  the
      basis that no evidence had been provided to  support  her  assertions.
      However, it would appear that she accepted that the Appellant could be
      at risk from her husband or his family in  her  home  area,  but  that
      there would be sufficiency of protection available and she  would  not
      be at risk if she relocated at [65]-[67].


   4. In light of the lack of clarity as to which aspects of the  Appellants
      evidence the Judge accepted and  which  she  rejected,  permission  to
      appeal is granted on the basis that it  is  arguable  that  the  Judge
      erred in this respect. It is further arguable that in considering  the
      viability of internal relocation, the Judge failed to correctly direct
      herself as to whether or not in all  the  circumstances  it  would  be
      unduly harsh for the Appellant to internally  relocate  and  that  she
      failed to give reasons for finding that there would be sufficiency  of
      protection for the Appellant on return.


   5. Permission to appeal is granted. All grounds may be argued.



Error of law


     3. On behalf of the appellant, Mr Sharma asserted three  issues  arose
        in relation to the decision. The first of these related to  [64]  -
        [66] in which the Judge recognised when considering  the  situation
        of women in Bangladesh generally that it is a  patriarchal  society
        in which women without a male protector can be vulnerable to  abuse
        and isolation. The Judge noted at [65 - 66]:


         65.  Weighing up all the other evidence, I find that there would be
             sufficiency of protection for the appellant if she returns  to
             Bangladesh. The appellant could choose to return to Dhaka  and
             live with her mother, and have the advantage of  her  siblings
             (including brothers) living either with or close to  her.  She
             would therefore have the advantage of a  male  protector  from
             within the family network.


         66.  Alternatively, there is  an  internal  relocation  alternative
             available for the appellant.  There  is  freedom  of  movement
             within the country. The appellant has shown that she can  live
             independently having travelled to the United Kingdom and lived
             here for  five  years,  a  country  to  which  she  had  never
             previously travelled. By  contrast  moving  within  Bangladesh
             should be a  simple  process  as  she  is  familiar  with  the
             language and culture of Bangladesh. There are  certainly  good
             employment opportunities for  a  person  with  the  appellants
             skills, including  education,  work  experience  and  language
             skills in other towns such as Chittagong, which is now seen as
             the commercial centre of Bangladesh.


     4. Mr Sharma asserted that although  there  is  no  challenge  to  the
        Judge's findings regarding  the  availability  of  the  appellant's
        brother  per  se,  the  Judge  fails  to  deal  with  whether  such
        protection would be available to the appellant if she was forced to
        internally relocate away from her home area.
     5. The finding in relation to internal flight is clearly expressed  by
        the Judge has  a  finding  in  the  alternative.  It  is  therefore
        necessary  to  consider  the  Judge's  primary  finding  which   is
        summarised in [65] above.
     6. The appellants claim is that she cannot return to Bangladesh as she
        fears persecution from her husband on return. It  is  not  disputed
        that the appellant married her husband on  30  May  1996  and  that
        there are two daughters from the marriage both  of  whom  currently
        live with the appellant's mother in Bangladesh. It is not  disputed
        that prior to coming to the United Kingdom the appellant worked  as
        an Assistant Officer before being promoted to a Senior Officer in a
        bank in  Bangladesh.  In  relation  to  the  core  element  of  the
        appellants claim the Judge made the following findings:


        59.  The appellant  has  claimed  asylum  stating  that  she  fears
             persecution from her husband. I  note  that  this  is  a  non-
             Convention reason. Accordingly, I have  gone  on  to  consider
             whether or not she faces a real risk of suffering serious harm
             on return from the UK.


        60.  The appellant stated that she has been beaten  and  abused  on
             numerous occasions by her husband, until she decided that  she
             could no longer tolerate the abuse and returned to her parents
             home. The appellant has not submitted any medical evidence  of
             this in the form of a GP report or evidence from a hospital in
             Bangladesh. Nor has the appellant provided supportive evidence
             in the form of a letter confirming the domestic violence  from
             her mother or adult brothers. Nor has the  appellant  provided
             any evidence from  any  domestic  violence  charities  in  the
             United  Kingdom,  confirming  that  the  appellant  has   been
             receiving support and  counselling  from  them  regarding  her
             experiences in Bangladesh. Nor has the appellant provided  any
             explanation as to why  she  has  not  obtained  this  evidence
             (either from Bangladesh or the United Kingdom) despite  having
             plenty of time to do so.


        61.  I note the appellant has chosen not to  divorce  her  husband,
             despite her stating that she has had a very  unhappy  marriage
             of some 20 years, and also despite the fact that she has lived
             in the UK for the past five years (and  therefore  is  not  in
             current fear of him and what he could  do  if  he  receives  a
             divorce petition). The appellant speaks English and so has had
             every opportunity to obtain  legal  advice  from  a  qualified
             solicitor regarding divorce proceedings. I note that there are
             also many Bangladeshi speaking  qualified  solicitors  in  the
             United Kingdom that the appellant could have approached.  This
             therefore  reduces  her  credibility  as  she  has   had   the
             opportunity to take advice regarding her  marriage  and  issue
             divorce proceedings over the past five years, but has  clearly
             chosen not to do so. The fact that she has clearly  chosen  to
             remain  married  to  her  husband,  despite   making   serious
             allegations against him, is a factor that I  have  taken  into
             account, and weighs against her credibility.


        62.  Whilst the appellant has stated that  her  husband  has  links
             with the Awami League and/or the police, as  explained  above,
             no evidence what so ever has been provided  of  any  of  these
             links  whatsoever.  The  appellant  stated  that  her  husband
             arrived with the police at her mother's home. Yet there is  no
             affidavit from her mother confirming  these  details,  or  any
             document from the police or warrant  explaining  that  she  is
             under arrest. The appellant has stated that  her  husband  has
             links with high-ranking officials from the Awami  League.  Yet
             the appellant has not provided evidence such as photographs of
             the appellant's husband together with the police  officers  or
             newspaper articles. The burden of proof is  on  the  appellant
             that she has failed to  put  forward  any  evidence  of  these
             matters.


        63.  Turning to consider  the  situation  of  women  in  Bangladesh
             generally, it is not in dispute that education and  employment
             opportunities  have  significantly  increased  the  women   in
             Bangladesh over the past twenty years.  Indeed,  this  can  be
             seen by the appellant some positive educational and employment
             history.


     7. The finding by the Judge that the appellant had  failed  to  adduce
        sufficient evidence to enable her to discharge the burden of proof,
        even to the lower standard, to show that the core of her claim  was
        credible, both in relation to the threat faced by her  husband  and
        alleged lack of sufficiency  of  protection  as  a  result  of  her
        husband's connections, is a finding reasonably open to the Judge on
        the basis of the  evidence  made  available.  In  addition  to  the
        failure of the appellant  to  establish  the  credibility  of  core
        aspects of her claim, there was insufficient evidence to  show  the
        appellant would be at risk per se on return or that  the  fact  she
        could return to the capital and live  with  her  mother  and  other
        family members would not suffice. Finding there is a sufficiency of
        protection both within the law and family unit has not  been  shown
        to be a finding infected by arguable legal error.
     8. As this primary finding must stand, any  failure  to  consider  the
        prospect of male protection if the appellant  internally  relocates
        is not material. The country material shows that women without male
        protectors in some parts of the country can be vulnerable to  abuse
        and isolation.  The Judge was clearly finding that the  appellant's
        employment skills and ability would enable her to relocate to towns
        such as Chittagong, the commercial  centre  of  Bangladesh,  rather
        than a remote rural and perhaps more traditional area. The  country
        material  does  not  say  that  no  single  woman  can  return   to
        Bangladesh.
     9. I find that as the primary finding of the Judge has not been  shown
        to be  infected  by  arguable  legal  error,  any  finding  in  the
        alternative is that, namely  in  the  alternative.  Arguable  legal
        error is made out.
    10. Mr Sharma thereafter challenge the conclusion  at  [68]  submitting
        that the finding of the  Judge  is  factually  incorrect.  In  this
        paragraph of the decision the Judge found :


         68.  I also note that the appellant has chosen not  to  extend  her
             student Visa (at the end of 2015). Had she feared returning to
             Bangladesh, this could have been one way of extending her time
             perfectly legally in the United Kingdom. Yet she chose not  to
             do so.


    11. It is submitted the Judge erred in inferring that  the  applicant's
        stay in  the  United  Kingdom  was  not  lawful.  It  accepted  the
        appellant entered the United Kingdom as a student lawfully 14  July
        2011 with leave extended to 16 April 2017. On 29 September 2014  it
        is said the appellants leave was curtailed with no right of  appeal
        yet the appellant failed to claim asylum until 12 September 2016.
    12. Had the appellants leave remained valid to 16 April 2017 the asylum
        application would have been made during a period  of  extant  leave
        which  would  been  extended  by  virtue  of  Section  3C  of   the
        Immigration Act. If the leave  had  been  curtailed  the  appellant
        would have no extant leave and would therefore have remained in the
        United Kingdom unlawfully.
    13. The assertion the error, if  made,  is  material  has  no  arguable
        merit.  Even if the appellant had remained in  the  United  Kingdom
        lawfully she fails to make out how this  would  have  any  material
        impact upon the assessment of country conditions.  The  appeal  was
        dismissed because the Judge  found  the  appellant  had  failed  to
        discharge the burden of proof upon her as she had failed to provide
        sufficient evidence.
    14. The third challenge is to the Judges assessment in relation to  the
        evidence the appellant provided. It is argued  on  the  appellant's
        behalf that there was material before the Judge  as  recognised  in
        [11] of the decision where it is written:


         11.  The appellant's case, as set out in  the  screening  interview
             dated 23 March 2016, her substantive interview dated  23  June
             2016, her initial witness statement dated 15 April 2016 and in
             her updated  witness  statement  dated  21  October  2016,  in
             essence is as follows.


    15. At [52] the Judge also writes:


         52.  The appellant's bundle provided an updated witness  statement,
             a complaint made by the appellant's mother to deputy  director
             Violence  Against  Women,  an  affidavit  by  the  appellant's
             brother and  an  affidavit  made  by  the  appellants  (elder)
             daughter.


    16. The assertion the Judge was saying there is no  evidence  from  the
        sources is not arguably correct, as the  Judge  was  clearly  aware
        that some evidence had been provided which was considered  as  part
        of the assessment  process.  What  the  Judge  finds  is  that  the
        evidence that was provided was not sufficient when taken  with  all
        the other material to enable the appellant to establish a case.
    17. The weight to be given to the evidence was a matter for  the  Judge
        provided the Judge  considered  that  evidence  with  the  required
        degree of anxious scrutiny and has given adequate reasons  for  the
        findings made.  Whilst  there  is  reference  to  difficulties  the
        appellant experienced in Bangladesh from these sources, it has  not
        been made out that the Judge failed to engage with the material  or
        arrived at an arguably irrational conclusion.
    18. In any event, the core findings by the Judge is  that  there  is  a
        sufficiency of protection available for the reasons set out in  the
        decision. It has not been made out that the core finding  regarding
        the ability of the appellant  to  return  and  to  live  safely  in
        Bangladesh within her family  unit  is  infected  to  any  material
        extent.
    19. The assertion the Judge's treatment of the evidence is affected  by
        lack of reasoning is not arguably made out. Nor it is made  out  in
        terms of establishing an arguable material  legal  error  that  the
        Judges conclusions are unsafe, as a result of any mistake that  may
        have been made in [68].
    20. There is also no arguable material error made out  in  relation  to
        [69] in which it was noted that the appellant, even if she  decided
        she could not return to Bangladesh in October 2015, failed to claim
        asylum for a further period of five months and having been given an
        opportunity at the hearing  to  explain  any  delay  regarding  the
        asylum claim did not put forward an answer.
    21. Although there may be a concern  made  out  in  relation  to  [68],
        having considered the remaining aspects of the  case  as  a  whole,
        together with the evidence made available to the Judge, no arguable
        legal error material to the decision to dismiss the appeal has been
        made out.

Decision

    22. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
        Judge's decision. The determination shall stand.


Anonymity.


    23. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of
        the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


        I make such order pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure
        (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.







Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 20 June 2017












