
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/10425/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at London                      |Sent to parties on:                  |
|On 16 February 2018                  |On 23 March 2018                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY


                                   Between

                                     MAA
                         (Anonymity DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms R Head  (Solicitor)
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.    This is the claimant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal, brought with the
permission of a Judge of the First-tier Tribunal, from a  decision  of  the
First-tier Tribunal (hereinafter "the tribunal")  which  it  made  after  a
hearing  of  11 October 2017  and  which  was  sent  to  the  parties  on
16 October 2017.  The claimant  had,  on  23 August 2016,  been  refused
international protection.  The tribunal had dismissed his appeal  on  asylum
and humanitarian protection grounds.  However, it had allowed the appeal  on
human rights grounds under Article 8 of the European  Convention  of  Human
Rights.  The claimant was dissatisfied with that outcome, believing  himself
to be entitled to either a grant  of  asylum  or  a  grant  of  humanitarian
protection or alternatively to a grant of  leave  under  Article 3  of  the
ECHR.


2.    I  note  that  the  claimant  was  granted  anonymity  by  the  First-
tier Tribunal.  The question of whether or  not  that  grant  ought  to  be
continued by the Upper Tribunal was not raised by either party  before  me.
Nevertheless, on the assumption  that  the  tribunal  had  good  reason  for
granting anonymity and since no one sought to persuade  me  to  depart  from
the status quo, I have decided that the grant should indeed continue.


3.    Coming on now  to  the  background  circumstances  of  the  case,  the
claimant is a national of Afghanistan.  He  was  born  on  1 January 1994.
There has been some dispute as to precisely when it was that he entered  the
United Kingdom but, whenever that was, it does appear that he entered in  a
clandestine manner. According to the Secretary  of  State  he  was  in  fact
encountered by the United Kingdom (UK) authorities  on  22 November 2012.
Quite shortly after that, indeed on 5 December 2012, he claimed asylum.  In
so doing, he said that he had previously lived with his family in a  village
in Baghlan Province.  Some years ago his uncle  had  been  killed  and  his
father, after a  long  search,  had  located  the  uncle's  killer  and  had
murdered him.  But the family of the man murdered by the  claimant's  father
were powerful and influential.  They sought revenge  and  his  father  fled.
Then in October 2007 the claimant's family  home  was  the  subject  of  an
attack.  Bombs were thrown at the house and the claimant  received  shrapnel
injuries.  His sister was killed in  the  incident.   That  represented  one
source of difficulty for the claimant.  Further, the Taliban had forced  the
claimant to assist them.  He had been made to undertake weapons training  at
a camp and on one occasion had been forced to wear a  suicide  jacket.   The
intention was that he would carry out a suicide attack but  this  could  not
take place because some vehicles intended to be the  target  of  the  attack
had to divert after encountering a check  point.   The  claimant  says  that
eventually he was able to escape from the Taliban camp and, after doing  so,
he contacted a maternal uncle in Kabul who arranged for  an  agent  to  take
him out of Afghanistan.  He thinks that it was around mid-2008 when he  left
Afghanistan.  He says that  the  authorities  in  Afghanistan  now  have  an
adverse interest in him because they have  found  out  about  his  previous,
albeit forced, involvement with the  Taliban  and  wish  to  arrest  him  in
consequence of that.


4.    As to the claimant's domestic circumstances in the  UK,  he  has  said
that he lives with his younger brother (born on 1 January 2003) and acts as
a father figure to him.


5.    The Secretary of State did not accept that the claimant  had  given  a
truthful account of events in Afghanistan.  It  was  accepted  that  he  has
physical injuries but it was not accepted that they  had  been  acquired  in
the way the claimant had contended.  So, thought  the  Secretary  of  State,
those injuries did not assist him in making out his case.


6.    As has already been mentioned, the claimant appealed to the  tribunal.
 Both parties were represented at the hearing.  The tribunal  received  oral
evidence from the claimant and from one witness a Mr Taj Khan.  Mr Khan's
evidence concerned assistance it was said  he  had  given  to  the  claimant
after he came to the UK.  That  evidence  did  not  relate  at  all  to  the
claimed events  in  Afghanistan.   The  tribunal  had  some  written  expert
evidence before it.  There were three reports by Dr Giustozzi one  of  which
specifically  addressed  the  authenticity  or  otherwise  of  "the   police
document". There was a report of 31 January 2014  prepared  by  Dr Seddon
which was also concerned with the authenticity of documents relied  upon  by
the claimant.  There was a report of 3 December 2015 from one Dr McCoubrie
which was concerned with physical and mental health issues.


7.    Like the Secretary of State, the  tribunal  disbelieved  the  claimant
with respect to the claimed events in Afghanistan.  In  explaining  why,  it
addressed the documentary evidence and the oral evidence it  had  heard  and
said this:


    "Findings of Fact


    Documents At E


    35.    I initially considered the documents  in  conjunction  with  the
    background to the Appellant's account to ascertain  whether  they  were
    consistent  with  his  claim.   I  approach  my  consideration  of  the
    documents in accordance with the principles set out  in  Tanveer Ahmed
    [2002] UKIAT 00439.  Thus, the issue for me to resolve is whether  they
    are documents upon which reliance should be  placed  having  regard  to
    their form and contents.  Have they been properly issued  and  are  the
    contents true?  They are all the type of document which can  be  easily
    fabricated.  I had the benefit of seeing the original documents and can
    thus accept the Respondent's submission that they appear to be  scanned
    documents for example the majority of the letter at E7 appeared  to  be
    on scanned/photocopied paper save that there was some writing  in  blue
    Biro and this was the position with regard to E9.  The document at  E11
    appeared to be photocopied/scanned save that the  thumbprints  were  in
    purple ink.  This does not mean that the documents are not genuine  and
    I consider them in further detail in line with the expert evidence  and
    the credibility of the Appellant's account.


    36.    However, I am able to  make  some  firm  initial  findings  with
    regard to the document at E11.  Quite  clearly  the  contents  of  that
    document are not true as the  contents  are  not  consistent  with  the
    Appellant's account and this was conceded by his  representative.   The
    document does not mention the Appellant's claim that one of his sisters
    was killed nor does it mention he was injured.  It says that his father
    was injured but it is the Appellant's claim that his father was not  at
    home (which  did  change  to  probably  not  at  home).   The  injuries
    described (loss of hands, legs and eyes) is  not  consistent  with  the
    Appellant's evidence.  The claim that the Appellant was  left  with  no
    one is plainly untrue as on his  own  account  he  had  at  least  five
    relatives at that time (including mother, father, uncle).  I have  thus
    considered why the Appellant relies on a document  whose  contents  are
    plainly wrong when I have considered  his  account  in  the  round  and
    whether it thus damages his account.


    37.    With regard to document E2, E4, E6 these are consistent with the
    Appellant's account.


    38.    The documents at E8 and E10 are consistent with the  Appellant's
    account but they are said to be letters by  the  police  and  are  both
    incomplete and do not include the summons which the Appellant says  was
    issued.  Furthermore, they were obtained from  the  Appellant's  mother
    and there was no satisfactory explanation as  to  why  she  would  have
    police correspondence of this nature.


    Dr McCoubrie's report 3 December 2015


    39.    The report is comprehensive and well  written.   It  follows  on
    from a careful and detailed examination.  I accept the findings made at
    paragraphs 61 and 62 that the scarring which is  detailed  at  D12  is
    consistent with the Appellant's account of  being  injured  in  a  bomb
    blast.  It is the Appellant's account that the injury to his left groin
    was initially dressed at home by a local nurse and then few days  later
    by a doctor visiting his uncle's house in Kabul.  The expert  concludes
    that he does not think that the repair could have  been  undertaken  as
    alleged by the Appellant because (paragraph 62):


           . The wound is surgically very neat


           . The scrotal sac is empty - which would have required a general
             anaesthetic or an accurate local anaesthetic


           . The procedure was undertaken by a highly competent surgeon


    40.    My conclusions having considered the expert's report is that the
    Appellant sustained injury from a bomb blast but his explanation as  to
    how he was treated is not consistent with the expert evidence.


    41.    This is significant because it is the Appellant's  account  that
    he could not attend a hospital because he would be perceived to be with
    the Taliban but I find that his injuries were dealt with in a  hospital
    and thus, adopting the Appellant's reasoning he would not be  perceived
    to be with the Taliban.


    42.    Further it is obvious from reading the whole  report  (including
    the biographical details of the author) that Dr McCoubrie  is  a  very
    experienced expert who has written a careful and detailed report.  This
    finding is relevant because the Appellant now says  that  Dr McCoubrie
    has made two errors in the  report,  firstly  the  Appellant  says  the
    argument resulting in his uncle's death did  not  happen  when  he  was
    eight as detailed in paragraph 5, secondly, he says that the bomb blast
    was in 2007 and not 2008 as set out in paragraph 7.


    43.    With  regard  to  the  latter  the  Appellant  gives  a  further
    explanation.  He said that the doctor specifically  asked  him  whether
    there were pains in his body in 2008  and  he  said  yes.   It  is  the
    Appellant's case that the doctor almost randomly  selected  2008  as  a
    year to ask about and then should have written that the  Appellant  was
    in pain in 2008 (and should  not  have  written  that  the  bomb  blast
    occurred then).  I do not  accept  the  Appellant's  evidence  in  this
    regard.  The doctor is well-versed in taking a detailed history.  It is
    inconceivable that the Appellant would not be in pain at  the  time  of
    the bomb blast (and the pains only became apparent in 2008 as submitted
    by his representative) because he sustained a very  significant  injury
    to his left groin necessitating the surgical removal of his testis.


    44.    There is thus an inconsistency about the date of the bomb blast.
     The Appellant's representative submits that  he  has  been  consistent
    throughout with regard to the date but this may not be correct.  In his
    interview  at  question 27  he  said  that  the  bomb  blast  was  in
    October 2007 yet he relies on a letter from the village elders at  E11
    which  his  solicitors  say  confirmed  the  bomb  attack  happened  on
    8 August 2008 (see D2), although I  am  subsequently  told  that  the
    translation is wrong and should have been 8 July 2008 (see D24 4.16).


    45.    With regard to the first discrepancy at paragraph 5  this  puts
    the date of the commencement of the blood feud and his  father  joining
    the Taliban and moving away when the Appellant was eight i.e. in  2002.
    However, the Appellant was clear in his oral evidence that his paternal
    uncle was killed  in  mid-2007.   (a  discrepancy  of  5 years).   The
    Appellant says that the doctor was wrong when he recorded this event as
    happening in 2002.  I find it is unlikely that the  doctor  would  have
    got this wrong given his experience and the fact that he was making  an
    assessment of the Appellant's mental  health  and  the  date  that  his
    father left the family home would have been  of  some  significance  in
    that assessment.


    46.    Furthermore, this report  is  dated  3 December 2015  and  the
    Appellant's representatives have had ample opportunity of going back to
    Dr McCoubrie and asking him to consider his notes and amend the report
    if he accepts that it is inaccurate.  It  is  unsatisfactory  that  the
    Appellant gives evidence that there are material errors in  the  report
    but his representatives do not appear to have given  Dr McCoubrie  the
    opportunity to comment.


    47.    There are of course other explanations as to  why  these  errors
    may have occurred.  In his oral evidence the Appellant  suggested  that
    it could have been interpretation error.  I find this to  be  unlikely.
    I know  that  dates  are  different  in  the  Afghan  calendar  but  an
    interpreter is more (not less) likely to be careful in translating them
    because this will be known to him.  There is also the possibility  that
    the Appellant may have got things wrong in  his  discussions  with  the
    doctor because of his mental  health  problem,  he  has  post-traumatic
    stress disorder and  a  moderate  depressive  illness  and  would  find
    talking about stressful events to be difficult and further  he  is  not
    literate.  However, when I have considered the very detailed statements
    the Appellant has provided in support of his appeal I do  not  conclude
    that he has given incorrect information on account of his mental health
    difficulties.


    48.    Accordingly I conclude that there  are  inconsistencies  between
    the account given to Dr McCoubrie and the Appellant's oral evidence and
    of greatest significance is his claim as to how his left  groin  injury
    was repaired and it is not consistent with the expert evidence.


    Dr Seddon's report


    49.    Dr Seddon has provided an expert  report  about  the  documents
    produced by  the  Appellant.   I  know  that  his  Expert  opinion  was
    considered in an  unconnected  case  by  the  Upper Tribunal  and  its
    shortcomings were detailed at paragraphs 172 and 173.  I have seen his
    credentials at paragraph 1 and am not satisfied that  he  is  suitably
    qualified to comment on the authenticity of the documents nor  does  he
    say for example why he knows that the format and layout is  typical  of
    notes issued by the Taliban.   The  fact  that  the  Taliban  refer  to
    Afghanistan as 'the Islamic emirate of Afganistan'  is  not  of  itself
    enough to say that the note  would  have  been  written  by  them  (see
    paragraph 4.2).


    50.    Dr Seddon does not give a proper explanation as to why he feels
    the document is genuine and authentic (4.4).


    51.    At paragraph 4.8 he says that the third document could not have
    been written when said because it is a reply to the second document but
    issued 10 days before.  He concludes this could simply be a mistake.


    52.    Dr Seddon said that the letters from the police  appear  to  be
    highly likely to be  genuine  and  authentic.   He  does  not  give  an
    adequate explanation as to the source of his expertise in this  regard.




    53.    With regard to the elders letter he says he has never  seen  one
    like it before but that nevertheless there is no good reason why it  is
    not genuine and authentic (4.18).  Thus although  Dr Seddon  concludes
    that this is beyond his expertise he then  seeks  to  give  an  opinion
    about it which is neither appropriate or helpful.


    54.    Furthermore when I consider that Dr Seddon starts his report by
    describing the appellant as an Algerian national (paragraph 3.1)  this
    causes me some small concern as to  the  contents  of  the  report  and
    further within the same paragraph there is a slightly different account
    as to who the Appellant's  father  killed.   It  is  noted  as  uncle's
    assailant and brother whereas the Appellant's evidence for  example  D4
    had been uncle's assailant and another man.


    55.    I place very little weight on Dr Seddon's report given that I am
    not satisfied  as  to  his  expertise  in  commenting  on  the  matters
    commented on and there is a significant lack of detail as to how he has
    reached his conclusions.


    Dr Giustozzi's Report (page 7 to 52)


    56.    Dr Giustozzi (see pages 7 to 15) and has travelled extensively
    to Afghanistan (see  pages 15  to 17)  and  thus  has  the  necessary
    expertise to provide expert evidence.


    57.    Blood feuds are very  common  in  Afghanistan  (page 18).   The
    expert does not specifically refer  to  the  Appellant's  family  being
    known to be involved in a blood feud.  The primary target would be  the
    perpetrator of the original office but if he is out of  reach  or  dead
    then his male relatives could become legitimate  targets  for  revenge.
    This is consistent with what the Appellant says.


    58.    The expert refers to the tribal code at page 19 and that tribal
    elders will seek to negotiate settlement but do not have  authority  to
    impose settlement.  Government authorities rarely  intervene  (page 20
    and in some provinces 95-98%  of  justice  is  delivered  by  non-state
    actors.  In response to questions in  cross-examination  the  Appellant
    was clear that the police were involved in his family's blood feud  and
    that they visited his home a few times and that  warrants  were  issued
    and delivered for his father's arrest although they  have  subsequently
    been lost.


    59.    Thus, the Appellant's oral evidence is not consistent  with  the
    expert report which suggests that government authorities  would  rarely
    intervene in the case of blood feuds.


    60.    The expert says with few exceptions there is  no  evidence  that
    the Taliban practice forced recruitment (page 20).  It is of course the
    Appellant's account that his father joined the Taliban  to  escape  the
    blood feud and protect  his  family  i.e.  forced  recruitment  is  not
    alleged.


    61.    The report then goes into considerable detail about the type  of
    individual that the Taliban would track down giving the example of  the
    Haqqani  network  focusing   on   complex   attacks   against   foreign
    installations and another in Kabul targeting those who  cooperate  with
    the government and foreigners (page 29).  Of course, the Appellant does
    not fit into any of these categories.


    62.    The expert says and I find that the Appellant's home area  Dand-
    e Ghori is the main pocket  of  support  of  the  Taliban  in  Baghlan
    (page 24).  The police provide ineffective protection to those who are
    at risk from the Taliban (page 31).  The Appellant would be unable  to
    relocate outside of Baghlan  to  avoid  a  threat  from  a  blood  feud
    (page 37).


    63.    The Appellant would be questioned  at  the  airport  and  checks
    would be made to see if he was wanted  for  any  crime  in  Afghanistan
    (page 39).


    64.    If the Appellant relocated to Kabul, he would find accommodation
    expensive  and  economic  conditions  are  difficult  with  significant
    unemployment (page 45).  There is a mental health hospital but  it  is
    understaffed and to be  admitted  a  patient  requires  a  relative  to
    accompany him (page 46).  Psychotropic  drugs  are  readily  available
    (page 47).  Antidepressants are available (page 50).


    65.    Mr Mangal was instructed  by  Dr Giustozzi  to  establish  the
    authenticity of various documents.  The  Respondent  submitted  that  I
    should approach this evidence with some caution because  Mr Mangal  is
    not independent having worked with Dr Guiustozzi before.  There is  no
    evidence before me that Mr Mangal has sought to fabricate  an  account
    because of his relationship with Dr Giustozzi although I am left in the
    unsatisfactory position where I do not have a statement of  truth  from
    Mr Mangal.


    66.    He first deals with the document as E11.   I am  not  told  that
    the letter is authentic.  I am told that an elder was shown a  copy  of
    the letter and he confirmed that the Appellant's house was attacked  by
    the  Taliban.   He  specifically  does  not  say  that  the  letter  is
    authentic.  He does not comment on the letter at all.  He does not  say
    when the house was attacked or why.  He does not say how he knows  that
    the members of the household were injured.  He does not say whether  he
    witnessed the attack or its aftermath or whether he was an elder at the
    time (is probably unlikely given that his name does not appear  on  the
    letter at E11).  Thus, this is of little if any evidential value.


    67.     Mr Mangal  was  then  instructed  in  relation  to  a  'police
    document'.  I do not know which  police  document  because  it  is  not
    described nor is it annexed to  the  expert  evidence.   The  Appellant
    relies on two police documents originals at E7 and E9.  I am told  that
    officer Ibrahimkel confirmed that the letter was genuine but I am  not
    told how he confirmed this.  This is significant because the letter  is
    dated 2nd August 2008 and he was asked to look at it over eight years
    later.  I am not told that he checked a central database or checked  it
    some other way, simply that he confirmed it was genuine.


    68.    At the hearing,  I  was  shown  the  'original'  which  was  the
    document the Appellant said his friend collected from the  family  home
    and it was quite  obviously  a  scanned/photocopied/  unclear  document
    header which someone had then  written  on.   This  may  of  course  be
    consistent with how the police in Baghlan write their  letters.   I  do
    not know.  The expert evidence does not provide an adequate explanation
    as to why the letter is genuine.  He appears to have been provided with
    a copy of this document.


    69.    Furthermore, the officer is reported as saying that  the  police
    had a report that the Appellant was planning an attack.   This  is  not
    apparent from the face of the documents and he gives no explanation  as
    to how  this  information  was  known  to  him  (as  submitted  by  the
    Respondent's presenting officer).  Again, this expert evidence  is  of
    limited value.


    70.    Mr Mangal then met with two gentlemen of the  Taliban  military
    commission.  I am unclear as to what documents were given  to  them  to
    authenticate.  Paragraph 3 refers to  'letter'  then  'document'  then
    'document' i.e. all singular not pleural.  The only sensible  inference
    that can be drawn from paragraph 3 is that one letter was shown-indeed
    the sub heading is 'Taliban night letter'.  However, at paragraph 5 he
    refers to 'letters', but then at  paragraphs 6  and 7  'letter 2  is
    referred to.  Apart from paragraph 5 'letter' is used and I  therefore
    conclude that one letter was shown to the Taliban gentleman -  but  was
    it E1 - the letter saying the Appellant is in Kandahar, E3 - the letter
    asking for the Appellant to be brought and given a suicide vest or E5 -
    asking the Appellant to attend for questioning?


    71.    Paragraph 6 refers  to  E5  which  is  the  letter  asking  the
    Appellant to attend for questioning.


    72.    Paragraph 7 refers  to  E3  which  is  the  letter  asking  the
    Appellant to be a suicide bomber.  He refers to  'viewing  the  letter'
    and the distinct impression I gained was  that  there  was  one  letter
    containing information about both matters.  But that cannot be  correct
    because E3 and E5 are 2 different letters with 2 different dates.


    73.    There is then reference to E1 a letter  which  was  said  to  be
    written after the Appellant refused to wear the suicide vest  but  this
    is also problematic because the suicide vest letter (E3) was written on
    4th July 2008 and following his refusal to wear  it  Taliban  sent  a
    letter to Kandahar (E1) but this is dated 24th June 2008.   Thus  the
    later letter has an earlier date.


    74.    This is very unsatisfactory.  I am then told that  'there  is  a
    death sentence waiting for him from the Taliban.'  But I  am  not  told
    who said this and where this information came from.


    75.    I attach little weight to this evidence.


    Credibility of the Appellant's Account


    76.    The Respondent says that the Appellant's account is not credible
    and that his credibility is damaged pursuant to section 8 of the Asylum
    and Immigration (Treatment of Claimants etc) Act 2004 because  he  has
    not claimed asylum until after he was served with  removal  directions.
    The Appellant says  that  he  claimed  asylum  in  2009  but  that  the
    Respondent has lost the papers.  I make no adverse credibility findings
    in this regard.


    77     I accept the Appellant's account that  he  was  present  in  the
    United Kingdom before 2012.  I found Mr Khan  to  be  an  honest  and
    reliable witness and he has known the Appellant from about 2010 in  the
    UK.  Given the Appellant's lack of status it  is  not  surprising  that
    there is a lack of evidence that he was in the UK before 2010 but there
    is the evidence from specs direct  that  he  became  their  patient  on
    31 December 2010.


    78.    I have considered the credibility  of  the  Appellant's  account
    separately in accordance with paragraph 339L of the Immigration Rules
    and make the following findings:


         (i & ii) All material factors  have  not  been  submitted  and  the
                Appellant has not made a genuine effort to substantiate  his
                claim.   The  Appellant  has  not   provided   an   adequate
                explanation as to why he has sought to rely on a letter from
                the village elders at E11, the contents of which on his  own
                account are inaccurate.


         (iii)    I have found Mr Ahmadzai's account not  to  be  generally
                coherent and plausible.  It is not  always  consistent  with
                the background information.


         (iv)      I  find  that  he  has  not  made  this  claim   in   the
                United Kingdom at the earliest possible opportunity.


         (v)      His general credibility has not been established.


    Specific Matters


    79.    I find that the Appellant's family were not involved in a  blood
    feud as claimed.  This is because in his oral evidence he said that the
    family had received warrants from the police about this and this is not
    consistent with the expert evidence as to how such  matters  are  dealt
    with.


    80.    Having found that the Appellant's family were not involved in  a
    blood feud then I do not find that the Appellant's  father  joined  the
    Taliban to escape the blood feud because the feud did not happen.


    81.    I have highlighted the many inconsistencies with regard  to  the
    bomb attack, including the discrepancies about the date  and  the  fact
    that the Appellant must have had expert  treatment  shortly  after  the
    attack and not as he has claimed.  In his interview and in his  witness
    statement the Appellant said that the bombing  was  undertaken  by  his
    father's enemies (i.e. in connection  with  the  blood  feud)  but  the
    expert evidence at paragraph 6 page 93 refers to a Taliban attack.  On
    the Appellant's own  account,  the  letter  at  E11  does  not  contain
    accurate information.  I find that the Appellant was badly injured in a
    bomb attack because this is clear from the medical report at section D.
     The Appellant has not been truthful about who  carried  out  the  bomb
    attack and he is not shown to the lower standard that it was either his
    father's enemies.  He has produced some evidence that it was a  Taliban
    attack.


    82.    I find that the Appellant did not join the Taliban for two weeks
    as claimed.  His father would not have recruited him because his father
    was not in the Taliban (because he did  not  need  to  escape  a  blood
    feud).  His account of escaping from them then  outrunning  his  father
    and the Taliban to Kandahar to Kabul to home and back  to  Kabul  lacks
    credibility.


    83.    The Appellant's evidence  with  regard  to  his  parents  lacked
    credibility.  He says that he has lived  with  his  brother  for  about
    12 months and his brother informed him that both  their  parents  were
    dead he did not know when they died.  As submitted by the  Respondent's
    presenting officer, it would be unusual indeed not to know  when  such
    significant events occurred.   When  pressed  the  Appellant  said  his
    father died during fighting for the Taliban 2 to 3 years ago and  his
    mother approximately two years ago.


    84.    Although the Appellant has made a very  considerable  effort  to
    prove his claim, I am not satisfied that the contents of the  documents
    produced provide genuine information  and  I  have  given  considerable
    thought and considerable findings in relation to  the  expert  evidence
    about the documents.  The contents of the document at  E11  is  plainly
    untrue.  The dates on the earliest three documents do  not  tally  with
    the timeline given by the Appellant.  The police letters are said to be
    addressed to the head office of the police station and I was not  given
    a satisfactory explanation as to why  these  were  in  the  Appellant's
    mother's possession nor why the summons referred to was not attached or
    seen.


    85.    When I consider all of the evidence in the round I am  satisfied
    that the Appellant's account is not truthful and that he has fabricated
    the account and arranged for documents to be produced with  a  view  to
    supporting his claim."


8.    The tribunal then turned to Article 8 and said it  was  allowing  the
appeal on that basis alone because it accepted that the claimant is a  full-
time carer for his brother who is a minor and who would,  were  it  not  for
the claimant, be taken into care  by  the  local  authority.  The  view  was
expressed that the claimant should, initially at  least,  be  given  limited
leave to enable him to continue to care for his brother.


9.    The claimant's representatives asked for permission to appeal  to  the
Upper Tribunal.  It was made clear that  there  was  no  challenge  to  the
tribunal's reasoning and decision as to Article 8.   That,  of  course,  is
unsurprising.  But there were, essentially, three  grounds  of  appeal  with
respect to the  international  protection  aspects.   In  ground 1  it  was
asserted that the  tribunal  had  erred  in  failing  to  attach  weight  or
"adequate weight" to documentary evidence suggesting that the  claimant  was
wanted by the authorities in Afghanistan.  In particular  it  was  contended
that the tribunal had failed to properly consider  the  expert  evidence  of
Dr. Giustozzi regarding that.   In  ground 2  it  was  asserted  that  the
tribunal  had  wrongly  held  against  the  claimant  in   its   credibility
assessment an inconsistency regarding  dates  in  circumstances  where  "the
Afghan words for  two  and  seven  have  very  similar  pronunciation".   In
ground 3 it was asserted that the tribunal had  erred  in  taking  a  point
against the claimant as to credibility through his having said that  he  had
not known when it was his parents had passed away.  It was argued  that  the
tribunal, in so doing, had failed "to consider  the  appellant's  illiteracy
and mental health condition when assessing this aspect  of  the  appellant's
claim".  After those grounds had been set out there was also a  "conclusion"
section to  the  written  grounds.   That,  though,  raised  what  might  be
regarded as a fourth ground to the effect that the tribunal had  "failed  to
apply the lower standard of proof when assessing this appellant's claim".


10.   The Judge who granted permission said this:


    "The grounds alleged that the judge made negative credibility  findings
    which were unsustainable in the face of the  appellant's  evidence,  in
    particular, expert evidence.  It was also alleged that the judge failed
    to consider the appellant's explanations for alleged credibility issues
    and failed to take into account his age, level of education and  mental
    health issues.


    I have carefully considered the judge's decision and find  that  it  is
    arguable that adequate  reasons  have  not  been  given  for  rejecting
    certain evidence, including  expert  evidence.   Although  there  is  a
    reference, at para, 29-31 to the burden and standard of  proof,  it  is
    not apparent from the judge's analysis of the evidence that the correct
    (lower) standard of proof, was in fact, applied.   There  was  a  brief
    reference to the appellant's age, level of education and mental  health
    issues at para 47 but it is  arguable  that  insufficient  weight  was
    placed upon those matters in the overall consideration of  credibility.
    There is an arguable error of law in the decision."


11.   The appeal was then listed for a hearing  before  the  Upper Tribunal
(before me) so that it could be considered whether or not the  tribunal  had
erred in law and, if so, what should  flow  from  that.   Representation  at
that hearing was as stated above and I am grateful  to  each  representative
for their assistance.  It is fair to  say  that,  before  me,  most  of  the
argument centred upon what I have identified as ground 1 but  I  shall  now
address all of the grounds below in explaining why I have decided  that  the
tribunal did not err in law.


12.   Dr. Giustozzi had been asked by  the  claimant's  representatives  to
express a view as to whether what  has  been  referred  to  as  "the  police
document" was or was not authentic.  The tribunal appeared to  be  uncertain
(understandably) as to precisely which  document,  if  there  was  only  one
police document, Dr. Giustozzi had been asked to consider.  As the tribunal
pointed out at paragraph 67 of its written reasons there are  in  fact  two
documents which might be termed police documents.  They appear at  pages E7
and E9 of the Secretary of State's bundle of documents which was before  the
tribunal.  There are translations at  pages E8  and  E10.   Both  bear  the
partial heading "Police Headquarters of Baghlan Province" according to  the
translations.  Whilst the brief wording on each is not entirely  clear  both
do read as if the police are requiring the claimant to attend  before  them.
They are, therefore, on the face of it, a type of summons.  The  content  of
the two is virtually identical.


13.   In his report of 21 May 2017 Dr. Giustozzi had said this:


    "Concerning the authenticity of the police document


    2.     Lupins Law provided me with scanned black and white copy of  the
    police document.  I e-mailed a copy to my researcher Mr Silab Mangal,
    based in Kabul.  Because of the way verification takes place, with  the
    issuing  authorities  comparing  picture  (if  any)   records   number,
    signatures, stamp and any other information contained in  the  document
    against the information they hold, the original of the document is  not
    required and a copy suffices.


    3.     Mr Mangal has extensive experience as a journalist and stringer
    and currently as a researcher in my projects.  He has  wide  access  to
    the police in the past years and has interviewed several tens of police
    officers so far.  He has also verified  several  police  documents,  as
    well as documents issue by other sources.  His CV is attached.


    4.     Mr Mangal sought to confirm the authenticity, or otherwise,  of
    the police document by contacting Officer Muneer Ibrahimkhel, of  the
    Criminal Police Department of Baghlan Province.


    5.     Officer Ibrahimkhel was  shown  the  copy  of  the  letter  and
    confirmed that it is genuine.  The police sent the letter to the elders
    of Josh Naw Ahamdzai, asking them to bring Meer Alam, son of Alan Jan,
    for interrogation.  The police had a report that Meer Alam was planning
    an attack against the police."


14.   What the tribunal had to say about that is set out from paragraph 67-
69 of the written reasons. What is argued on behalf of the claimant is  that
since the tribunal had accepted Dr. Giustozzi as  a  person  with  relevant
expertise and since it  also  accepted  that  there  was  no  evidence  that
Mr Mangal had been fabricating anything,  it  was  not  then  open  to  the
tribunal to do anything other than attach significant weight to  the  police
document or documents.  But in my judgment that fails  to  properly  analyse
and deal with the points the tribunal was making.  The tribunal  noted  that
Officer Ibrahimkhel had been asked to look at  the  document  or  documents
some eight years after it appeared (from the  translations)  that  they  had
been issued.  I suspect, although it did not say so,  the  tribunal  had  in
mind that it was unlikely, given the time lapse,  that  Officer Ibrahimkhel
even if he had had any personal involvement in the issuing of the  documents
(and it is not said he had) would now have any actual recollection of  that.
That was why some kind of check or verification was required.  The  tribunal
then went on to say, again at paragraph 67 and pertinently in my  judgment,
that it had not been told that there had been  any  check  via  any  central
data base or, indeed, via any other  sort  of  procedure.   That  legitimate
concern which the tribunal  had  is  not  linked  to  its  view  as  to  the
expertise of Dr. Giustozzi or the honesty  of  Mr Mangal.   It  is  simply
saying that in the absence of any information as to how the  document  might
have been verified, the evidence suggesting that it is genuine, or they  are
genuine, is not reliable.  In my judgment that is a view  it  was  perfectly
entitled to come to on the basis of the material before it.


15.   In short, I accept Mr Duffy's submission  to  me  that  the  tribunal
simply found the evidence unreliable for reasons which were open to  it  and
which it adequately explained.  I reject this ground of appeal.


16.   What I have identified as ground 2 relates to a discrete part of  the
tribunal's adverse credibility conclusion.  It relates specifically to  what
the tribunal had to say from paragraphs 42-45 (in particular paragraph 45)
of its written reasons.  What  the  tribunal  does  have  to  say  there  is
logical and well-reasoned.  Whatever the position might be  as  to  how  the
Afghan words for two and seven are to be pronounced  and  how  similar  that
pronunciation  is,  the  tribunal  was  entitled  to  take  the  view   that
Dr. McCoubrie was used to taking detailed histories and  had  not  been  in
error when recording the dates of events on the basis of  information  given
to him.  This was not, in any event, a ground pursued  with  any  particular
vigour before me.   Nor in fact does it seem to me to have  formed  a  major
part of the adverse credibility assessment. But I detect  no  error  of  law
anyway.  I reject this ground of appeal.


17.   What I have identified as the third ground is  directed  towards  what
the tribunal had to say  at  paragraph 83  of  its  written  reasons.   The
argument is that the tribunal should have taken into account the  claimant's
illiteracy and his mental health difficulties  before  concluding  that  the
claimant's assertion that he had not known when his parents had passed  away
lacked credibility.  But in my judgment it  was  open  to  the  tribunal  to
conclude that such important events would not be unknown  to  him.   In  any
event this again, in my judgment, did not form a major part of  the  adverse
credibility findings.  But I detect no error of law anyway.  I  reject  this
ground of appeal.


18.   As to the question of the tribunal applying too demanding  a  standard
of proof, it correctly identified the standard it had  to  apply  (known  as
the real risk test) at paragraph 29 of its written reasons.  It repeated it
at paragraph 31.   Having  identified  the  correct  standard  it  was  not
required  to  continue  to  repeat  it  throughout  the  assessment  of  the
claimant's case.  It did not say anything else in the rest  of  its  written
reasons to suggest that it had, with respect to any  aspects  of  the  case,
applied a different standard of proof.  Again this ground, if it  is  to  be
regarded as a separate ground, is not made out.


19.   The Judge who had granted permission appeared to go  somewhat  further
than the claimant's representatives in seeming to suggest that the  tribunal
might have erred through not taking proper account of the claimant's  mental
health difficulties generally in  its  credibility  assessment  rather  than
just in the specific context identified in the grounds. But  in  looking  at
its summary of the appellant's case to  it  from  paragraphs 16-28  of  its
written reasons, I cannot see that it was actually invited to  do  so.   Nor
can I see any such suggestion in the skeleton argument which had been  given
to the tribunal by the claimant's  representative.   The  tribunal,  in  the
context of a claimant with competent representation, was not required  as  a
matter of law to take the point for itself.


20.   In my judgment the tribunal's  detailed  written  reasons  demonstrate
that it approached its task with care.  It reached findings and  conclusions
which were open to it on the material before it and  which  it  went  on  to
adequately explain.  It did not err in  law  and  accordingly  its  decision
shall stand.


Decision


The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of  an
error of law.  Accordingly, that decision shall stand.


The claimant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.



Signed:                      Date: 21 March 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway




Anonymity

The first-tier  granted  the  claimant  anonymity.   I  continue  to  do  so
pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.
So, unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise the  claimant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the claimant and to the  Secretary  of  State.   Failure  to
comply could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed:                      Date: 21 March 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway





TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I make no fee award.



Signed:                      Date: 21 March 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway


