
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10696/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 27 February 2018                           |On 27 March 2018              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                                     s y
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Howells instructed by NLS Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008  (SI  2008/2009)  I  make  an  anonymity  order  prohibiting   the
    disclosure or publication of any matter likely to lead  to  members  of
    the public identifying the appellant.  A failure to  comply  with  this
    direction could lead to Contempt of Court Proceedings.





Introduction

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Iran who was  born  on  [  ]  1987.   She
    arrived in the United Kingdom on 29 March 2016 and claimed asylum.  The
    basis of her claim was that she had become interested  in  Christianity
    in July/August 2015 and had become  a  Christian  in  September/October
    2015 attending Christian  House  meetings  and  proselytising  a  close
    friend and a sister of another friend in Iran.  She  claimed  that  the
    Sepah had raided her house on 12 January 2016 and arrested her  father.
    She was not present at the time but her mother subsequently phoned  her
    aunt and told her what had happened.  As a result, on  20  March  2016,
    the appellant left Iran travelling to Turkey by land and then by  plane
    to the UK.

 3. On 23 September 2016, the Secretary of State  refused  the  appellant's
    claims for asylum, humanitarian protection and  under  the  ECHR.   The
    Secretary of State did not accept the appellant's account and that  she
    had genuinely converted to Christianity.

The Appeal

 4. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.   Judge  A  D  Baker
    dismissed the appellant's appeal.  She found  the  appellant's  account
    not to be credible and also did not  accept  that  she  was  a  genuine
    Christian convert and that, as a result, she would be at risk on return
    to Iran.

 5. The appellant sought  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal.
    Initially, permission was refused by the First-tier Tribunal but  on  6
    September 2017, the Upper Tribunal (UTJ Keki?)  granted  the  appellant
    permission to appeal.

The Appellant's Submissions

 6. Mr Howells, who  represented  the  appellant  focused  the  appellant's
    challenge (as set out in the grounds of appeal) on two issues which  he
    developed in a skeleton argument and in  his  oral  submissions.   Both
    grounds sought to challenge the judge's adverse credibility finding.

 7. In relation to the first ground, Mr Howells submitted that the  judge's
    reasoning was unsustainable and perverse when concluding  that  certain
    aspects of the appellant's account were implausible.   He  specifically
    relied upon three paragraphs in the judge's determination.

 8. First, he submitted that at para 16 the judge had found it  implausible
    that the appellant would, in travelling to the UK, not have  known  her
    identity or nationality in her travel documents including her passport.
     He submitted that the appellant's evidence in her screening  interview
    (at page A10 of the bundle) was that the documents had been held by  an
    agent and that she had been travelling on a false  passport  which  she
    had not seen.  Mr Howells submitted that the judge had failed  to  deal
    with the explanation and it was irrational to find this aspect  of  her
    evidence implausible.  Mr Howells pointed out that the judge had  found
    this reason to "strike at the root of the credibility of  her  account"
    and so undermine significant the judge's adverse credibility finding.

 9. Secondly, Mr Howells submitted that at para 17 the judge had  found  it
    improbable that the appellant's mother would have been left  unattended
    by the Iranian authorities, following the raid on the family  home,  in
    order to allow the  appellant's  mother  to  warn  the  appellant.   Mr
    Howells submitted that it was clear from the appellant's  evidence  (at
    page B19 of the bundle at question 99) that the appellant's mother  had
    made the phone call after the authorities had  left  the  family  home.
    There was, he submitted, nothing inherently implausible in that.

10. Thirdly, Mr Howells relied upon para 22 in which the  judge  had  found
    that  it  was  implausible  that  the  appellant   had   converted   to
    Christianity as a result of learning that prayers had allowed  a  young
    woman  relative  to  recover  from  a  coma.   There  was,  Mr  Howells
    submitted, nothing inherently implausible in that.  Mr Howells referred
    me to the well-known cases of HK v SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ 1037  and  Y  v
    SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ 1223 which cautioned against finding a person  not
    to be credible based upon inherent improbability without having  regard
    to the particular cultural circumstances.

11. Mr Howells submitted that cumulatively the effect of these  three  core
    findings was to  undermine  fatally  the  judge's  adverse  credibility
    finding.  Mr Howells submitted that, in fact, there were only two other
    adverse findings made by the  judge.   First,  at  para  20  the  judge
    criticised the appellant for  wrongly  identifying  the  "two  greatest
    Commandments".  When the appellant's  answer  at  question  82  of  her
    interview was consulted during the hearing, Mr Mills  (who  represented
    the Secretary of State) recognised that part of the answer given by the
    appellant was in fact not inaccurate, namely to love God with all  your
    being.  Secondly, Mr Howells submitted that at  paras  24  to  27,  the
    judge gave a further reason for disbelieving the appellant namely  that
    given her limited knowledge of Christianity in the short term since her
    conversion, it was inherently implausible that she would evangelise  to
    other people.  Mr Howells drew my attention to a letter at  page  9  of
    the appellant's bundle from a D M Saddler dated 21 January 2017, and  a
    member of her claimed church in the UK, that stated that the  appellant
    had "witnessed her faith"  to  two  friends.   The  Appellant  had,  Mr
    Howells submitted, been talking about her faith and not evangelising in
    the way that the judge was contemplating in paras 24-27  based  upon  a
    premise that she had sufficient knowledge to do so.

12. Mr Howells submitted that  even  if  these  two  latter  findings  were
    sustainable they did not outweigh the perversity of the  others  which,
    he submitted, led to a judge  reaching  a  flawed  adverse  credibility
    finding.

13. In his second ground, Mr Howells submitted that the judge had adopted a
    wrong approach to credibility.  She had, he submitted, not engaged with
    the appellant's oral evidence and interrogated it as to whether it  was
    internally inconsistent, whether the appellant had stood up  to  cross-
    examination and, in effect, the judge had made  no  assessment  of  the
    appellant's oral evidence at all.   Likewise,  he  submitted  that  the
    judge had failed properly to take into account the supporting  evidence
    from a pastor and a reverend at the appellant's claimed church, as well
    as that of Mr Saddler,  which  was  potentially  corroborative  of  the
    appellant's evidence that she was a Christian  convert.   Instead,  the
    judge had concluded, in para 29, that that evidence could not be  given
    any weight.

The Respondent's Position

14. Having heard Mr  Howells'  submissions,  Mr  Mills  on  behalf  of  the
    Secretary of State accepted that the judge's decision could not  stand.
    He accepted that ground 1 was established, namely that  the  judge  had
    been wrong to conclude certain aspects of the appellant's account  were
    implausible.  In particular, Mr Mills accepted Mr Howells'  submissions
    in relation to paras 17 and 16 of the  judge's  determination  which  I
    have set out above.  He accepted that given the  limited  reasoning  of
    the judge, once these matters were accepted to be flawed,  the  adverse
    credibility findings as a whole could not be  sustained.   He  accepted
    that the judge's decision  should  be  set  aside  and  the  appeal  be
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a re-hearing.

Decision

15. On the basis of Mr Mills' concession in relation to ground 1, I  accept
    that  the  judge  materially  erred  in  law  in  reaching  an  adverse
    credibility  finding  and  rejecting  the  appellant's   account.    In
    substance, I accept Mr Howells' submissions in relation  to  ground  1.
    The judge's reasoning, particularly in paras 16 and 17 is unsustainable
    and  fatally  flaws  her  adverse  credibility  finding.   It  is   not
    necessary, therefore, to reach any view on ground 2.

16. Consequently, I am satisfied that the  First-tier  Tribunal  materially
    erred in law in dismissing the appellant's appeal.  The decision of the
    First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

17. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a  re-hearing  de
    novo before a judge other than Judge A D Baker.




                                                                      Signed
                                                                       [pic]
                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                                              23, March 2018
