
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10504/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at the Royal Courts of Justice |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12th March 2018                   |On 21st March 2018                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    [S P]
                       (anonymity direction NOT made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Polpitiya, Polpitiya & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   Although this is an appeal by the Secretary of State, I shall refer  to
    the parties as in the First-tier Tribunal. The Appellant is  a  citizen
    of Sri Lanka born on [ ] 1981. His appeal against the  refusal  of  his
    protection claim was allowed by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Andonian  on
    15 January 2018.

2.   The Secretary of State appealed on the following grounds:

         "The only issue under consideration is the section 72 certificate.

         It is not disputed that the Appellant has committed one of the most
         serious crimes reflected in a sentence where the Appellant  has  to
         serve a minimum of 17 years. The FTTJ equates  the  fact  that  the
         Appellant has now been transferred to an open prison and  has  been
         given  permission  for  home  visits  as  an  indication  that  the
         Appellant does not constitute a threat to the public.

         In making this finding the FTTJ fails  to  take  into  account  the
         Appellant is still imprisoned and subject to strict  controls  even
         if not as a rigorous as those prior to March 2017. Additionally the
         Appellant is still imprisoned  and  cannot  be  released  prior  to
         9/12/18 so therefore is still deemed a risk to the public.

         It is respectfully submitted that the Appellant's  compliance  with
         the regime whilst imprisoned is expected behaviour  and  is  not  a
         factor that should be given any weight when considering the  threat
         to the public.

         Additionally although the risk of reoffending is low  the  risk  of
         harm is still medium to the  public  and  also  medium  to  unknown
         adults. It is respectfully submitted that even a slight  risk  that
         the appellant could commit acts of unnecessary  violence  involving
         weapons resulting in the loss of life again, constitutes a genuine,
         present  and  sufficiently  serious  threat,  that  has  not   been
         addressed by the FTTJ. Clearly there must be a risk of a  convicted
         person reoffending and in the  circumstances  of  this  appeal  the
         consequences of  any  such  reoffending  could  be  severe  in  the
         extreme.

         It is respectfully submitted in these circumstances that  the  FTTJ
         has failed to give  clear  reasons  as  to  why  the  appellant  as
         rebutted the Section 72 Certificate."

3.   Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Kelly  on
    30 January 2018 on the grounds that: "It was arguably perverse to  hold
    that the appellant did not constitute a danger to the  community  at  a
    time when he was still serving the minimum term of a sentence  of  life
    imprisonment for murder. The reasoning at paragraph 38 of the  decision
    is particularly difficult to follow."

4.   In the Rule  24  response,  the  Appellant  submitted  that  the  judge
    correctly concluded that he had rebutted the presumption under  section
    72 of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002.  The  OASYS
    report stated that his risk in the community was medium and his minimum
    tariff expired on 29 November 2016 and he was eligible for  parole.  He
    was currently in a category D open prison and had started town and home
    visits. There was no reason to believe  that  the  Appellant  would  be
    refused parole.

Submissions

5.   Mr  Jarvis  submitted  that  on  the  evidence  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal judge the Appellant had failed to rebut the presumption  under
    section 72. He had committed murder and was still  serving  his  prison
    sentence. The Appellant took revenge for damaging his car and had acted
    in a way which was beyond comprehension. He was still within the prison
    system and was still being rehabilitated. Therefore, he must constitute
    a danger to the public. There  was  also  a  lack  of  clarity  in  the
    decision. Paragraph 25 was incomprehensible, relying on a 2006  report.
    Paragraph 38 stated: 'A believer [sic] any  risk  of  concern  is  very
    low'. This was a mistake of fact. The NOMS letter assessed the risk  of
    absconding as low. The risk of harm to adults had reduced from high  to
    medium and the parole board still had to make a decision in  May  2018.
    The evidence, taken at its highest, was not capable of showing that the
    Appellant was no longer a danger to the public.

6.   Mr Polpitiya submitted that there was no reason  to  believe  that  the
    Appellant would not be released on parole. The Appellant was  currently
    on release for five days a month. The judge considered the  progressive
    nature of the assessments and the indications from  professionals:  the
    parole board, probation officers and offender managers who were all  of
    the view that the Appellant was a model prisoner who was  suitable  for
    release. The first step was his move to an open prison. The judge  took
    into account the Appellant's progress and the lack of adverse  findings
    in the reports in concluding that he was not a danger to the public.

7.   In response, Mr Jarvis submitted that the judge had  misunderstood  the
    professional  evidence  and  his   conclusion   was   irrational.   The
    professional evidence did not support  the  judge's  finding  that  the
    Appellant was not a danger to the public.

Relevant Law

8.   Section 72 of the 2002 Act provides:

         "(1) This section applies  for  the  purpose  of  construction  and
         application of Article 33(2) of the Refugee  Convention  (Exclusion
         of Protection)

         (2)  A person shall be presumed to have been convicted by  a  final
         judgement of a particularly  serious  crime  and  to  constitute  a
         danger to the community of the UK if he is:

             (a)  Convicted in the UK of an offence; and

             (b)  Sentenced to a period  of  imprisonment  of  at  least  2
             years."

9.   Paragraph 334 of the Immigration Rules provides that an applicant  will
    be granted asylum in the UK if the  Secretary  of  State  is  satisfied
    that: " ...(iv) he does not, having been convicted by a final  judgment
    of a particularly serious crime, constitute a danger to  the  community
    in the UK.

Discussion and Conclusion

10.  The Appellant's appeal against deportation was allowed on human  rights
    grounds by First-tier Tribunal Judge Herbert on 6 June 2017. There  was
    no challenge to those findings which were specifically preserved by the
    Upper Tribunal on appeal. However, the Upper Tribunal found an error of
    law in respect of the decision to allow the appeal  on  asylum  grounds
    and the matter was remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to consider only
    the section 72 certificate. That was the only issue  before  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Andonian.

11.  The relevant facts in this case are that in  June  2002  the  Appellant
    and others were involved in an attack on a car and its  occupants.  The
    Appellant's own account is that the incident arose  out  of  a  dispute
    that had already taken place and it was revenge for damaging  his  car.
    There was some preplanning and the Appellant admitted wielding  an  axe
    to smash the windscreen and windows of the car and cutting an  ear  off
    one of the victims.

12.  On 16 October 2002 the Appellant was  convicted,  after  a  not  guilty
    plea, of murder and four counts of wounding with intent to do  grievous
    bodily harm. He was sentenced to a life sentence with a minimum term of
    15 years for murder and 10 years imprisonment on the other four  counts
    to run concurrently.

13.  The sentencing judge noted that the attack  was  to  some  extent  pre-
    meditated and the group used a series of weapons. The five victims were
    unable to defend themselves,  there  was  one  fatality  and  nearly  a
    second, and two victims received disabling wounds.

14.  On the evidence before the judge at the hearing  on  8  December  2017,
    the Appellant was still serving a term of life imprisonment for murder.
    He was convicted in October 2002 to serve a minimum term of  15  years.
    He had been moved to an open prison and was awaiting a further decision
    by the parole board in May 2018. He was considered to be at medium risk
    to the public.

15.  The judge's conclusion that the Appellant had rebutted the  presumption
    was perverse. The parole board had not yet found that the Appellant was
    suitable for release. He was sentenced  to  life  imprisonment  with  a
    minimum  term.  The  expert  evidence  did  not  support  the   judge's
    conclusion that he did not constitute a danger to the public.

16.  I find that the judge erred in law in finding that  the  Appellant  had
    rebutted the presumption. This conclusion was not open to the judge  on
    the evidence before him. I set aside the decision to allow  the  appeal
    and remake it. The Appellant's appeal under section 72 is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

The Secretary of State's appeal is allowed.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal dated 15 January 2018 is set aside.

The presumption under section 72 applied.  The  Appellant's  appeal  against
the refusal of asylum under  paragraph  334  of  the  Immigration  rules  is
dismissed.

The Appellant's appeal against the refusal his protection  claim  under  the
Refugee Convention is dismissed.


     J Frances
Signed   Date: 19 March 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Frances
