
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10517/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Centre                               |                                     |
|On 19 July 2019                      |On 13 August 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    Mr J
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Holmes, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS
                             (given ex tempore)



Introduction

Mr J is a citizen of Iraq who has made a claim for international
protection.  For that reason, I make an anonymity order.

Background

Mr J appealed against a decision of the Secretary of State for the Home
Department ('SSHD') dated 8 August 2018 in which he refused his asylum and
human rights claim.  The SSHD did not accept that Mr J had a genuine and
subsisting relationship with his two children in the United Kingdom ('UK').
 Those children are both British citizens and were born in 2011 and 2013
respectively.

First-tier Tribunal (FtT) decision

Mr J appealed against that decision to the FtT.  His appellant was heard by
FtT Judge Davies and in a decision sent on 12 April 2019 he allowed the
appeal on Article 8 grounds but dismissed the appeal on international
protection grounds.

Appeal to the Upper Tribunal (UT)

The SSHD appealed against the FtT's decision, arguing that it had failed to
provide adequate reasons for its finding that the effect of Mr J's
deportation would be unduly harsh and failed to direct itself to the
appropriate principles and the high threshold required by the unduly harsh
test - see KO (Nigeria) [2018] UKSC 53.  The SSHD was granted permission by
FtT Judge Grant-Hutchison in a decision dated 3 May 2019.

Mr J cross-appealed against the FtT's decision, submitting that the FtT had
failed to deal with the international protection claim and also argued that
the Article 8 findings were not infected by an error of law.

In a Rule 24 notice dated 16 May 2019 the SSHD conceded that the
international protection claim had not been considered but continued to
rely upon the appeal against the human rights aspect of the decision.

The matter now comes before me to determine whether or not the FtT's
decision contains an error of law in relation to the findings relating to
the unduly harsh test, the matter having been conceded regarding
international protection.

Hearing

At the hearing before me Mr Bates relied upon the grounds of appeal and
invited me to find that the FtT provided inadequate reasons for the
ultimate conclusion that Mr J's deportation would be unduly harsh upon his
two children.  Mr Holmes relied upon his written response and emphasised
two particular points.  Firstly, he invited me to note that the FtT
reminded itself at [43] that the more serious the offence committed by a
foreign criminal, the greater is the public interest in deportation of the
criminal and submitted that when the decision is read as a whole the FtT
had done just enough in terms of directing itself to the unduly harsh high
threshold.

Mr Holmes also reminded me that the factual background in this case is
rather unusual because, as the FtT noted, the children reside with their
grandfather as a special guardian because of reasons relating to a
difficult history with their mother and her addiction to drugs.
Nonetheless, Mr J saw the children according to the FtT three to four times
a week.  Mr Holmes therefore invited me to conclude that because there were
these unusual facts, the FtT was entitled to find that the high threshold
required was met.

After hearing from Mr Holmes, I indicated that I did not need to hear from
Mr Bates because I was satisfied that there is an error of law in the FtT's
findings regarding Article 8.

Legal framework

Paragraphs 399 and 399A of the Immigration Rules are reflected within
section 117C of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ('the 2002
Act').  This is a case in which the FtT found Exception 2 in Section
117C(5) applies.  The correct approach to Exception 2 has recently been
considered by the Supreme Court in KO (Nigeria) (supra).  In the only
judgment Lord Carnwath said this at [23]:

"One is looking for a degree of harshness going beyond what would
necessarily be involved for any child faced with the deportation of a
parent.  What it does not require in my view and subject to the discussion
of the cases in the next section is a balancing of relative levels of
severity of the parent's offence other than is inherent in the distinction
drawn by the section itself by reference to length of sentence."

Lord Carnwath also approved of the guidance given regarding the term unduly
harsh in MK (Sierra Leone) v SSHD [2015] UKUT 223 (IAC).  In that case the
then President of the Upper Tribunal said this:

"We are mindful that unduly harsh does not equate with uncomfortable,
inconvenient, undesirable or merely difficult.  Rather, it poses a
considerably more elevated threshold.  Harsh in this context denotes
something severe, or bleak.  It is the antithesis of pleasant or
comfortable.  Furthermore, the addition of the adverb unduly raises an
already elevated standard still higher."

Discussion

The FtT summarised Mr J's relationship with his children at [34 to 35].
These paragraphs refer to Mr J having contact three to four times a week
including taking them to the park unsupervised and occasionally picking
them up from school.  The FtT was satisfied that the relationship was and
is genuine and subsisting and entirely beneficial to the children,
notwithstanding the stormy relationship Mr J clearly had in the past with
the children's mother.

The FtT went on to find that given that the children have regular contact
with Mr J there is clearly family life and if he were to be deported to
Iraq that would effectively mean an end to that family life.  The FtT then
went on to refer to a number of general matters relating to Article 8 and
concluded that because the relationship between Mr J and his children would
be terminated it would clearly not be in the children's best interest for
him to be deported.  The final paragraph relevant to Article 8 reads as
follows:

"I take into account that the evidence clearly indicates in this case that
the appellant has a genuine and subsisting relationship with two British
citizen children.  The effect of the appellant's deportation upon the
children would be unduly harsh and indeed not in the children's best
interests."

During the course of submissions, I invited Mr Holmes to take me to the
part of the FtT's decision in which there was a direction to the high
threshold required by the unduly harsh test.  Mr Holmes was only able to
take me to paragraph 43, which deals with the seriousness of the offence.
Of course, as made clear by KO (Nigeria), the seriousness of the offence
has nothing to do with the unduly harsh test itself.  The seriousness of
the offence is simply a signpost by which a foreign criminal ends up having
to meet the unduly harsh test by virtue of having a sentence of at least
twelve months, which Mr J has.

Having read the decision as a whole, there is nothing to indicate that the
FtT was aware of the elevated threshold required by the unduly harsh test.
There is nothing to indicate that the FtT directed itself to the
straightforward position on the unduly harsh test as enunciated by the
Supreme Court.  In addition, the FtT has failed to give adequate reasons
for why the high test was met.  Indeed, the FtT has done no more than
describe what would ordinarily be faced by children who are involved in a
case in which a parent is to be deported.  The FtT was of course entitled
to find that the children's best interest required their father's continued
presence in their lives but that in itself is not sufficient to meet the
unduly harsh test.

For those reasons, I am satisfied that the FtT's findings regarding Article
8 are inadequately reasoned and fail to apply the factual findings to the
elevated threshold required by the unduly harsh test as set out in section
117C(5).

Disposal

This is a case in which there will need to be fresh findings regarding Mr
J's protection claim.  It is unclear at this stage the extent to which
those findings will need to go into particular detail as to background,
family, place of origin.  The reason for that is that we are awaiting a
country guidance case on Iraq.  It may be following that case that there
may be limited fact-finding but there may also be considerable fact-
finding.  Although the matter is finely balanced I have come to the view
that it is appropriate in this case, bearing in mind that Mr J has not had
the opportunity to have his international protection claim considered in
the first instance by the FtT fairly or properly, that that should be done
again in the FtT.

I acknowledge that there will be limited findings to be made on the Article
8 aspect of the case but, drawing everything together and applying the
relevant Practice Direction, I am satisfied that in this case it is
appropriate for the matter to be remitted to another FtT Judge other than
FtT Judge Davies.

Decision

The decision of the FtT contains an error of law both in relation to
Article 8 and international protection and is set aside.

The decision shall be remade in the FtT and I remit it for those purposes
to be heard by another FtT Judge other than Judge Davies.


Direction regarding anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  respondent  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date

UTJ Plimmer                             6 August 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Plimmer

