
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10383/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 14 January 2019                            |On 14 February 2019           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 Shahid [M]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

For the Respondent:    Mr S Tariq of Messrs West London Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Secretary of State appeals with permission against  a  decision  of
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal E M M Smith  who  in  a  determination
    promulgated on 2 October 2018 dismissed the appellant's claim on asylum
    grounds but allowed his appeal on human rights grounds.

2.   Although the Secretary of State is the appellant before me I  will  for
    ease of reference refer  to  him  as  the  respondent  as  he  was  the
    respondent in the First-tier Tribunal.  Similarly I will  refer  to  Mr
    Shahid [M] as the appellant as he was the appellant in the First-tier.

3.   The appellant arrived in Britain as  a  student  on  26  May  2011  and
    received a further extension of stay  in  that  capacity  in  September
    2013, that extension being valid until 24 February 2015.

4.   In June 2014 the Home Office was informed that  his  TOEIC  certificate
    from Educational Testing Service submitted with  his  leave  to  remain
    application had been fraudulently obtained by the use of a proxy taker.

5.   In August 2014 form IS151A  was  issued  and  sent  to  an  address  in
    Nottingham  from  which  it  was  returned  as  undelivered.   It   was
    subsequently reissued on 2 September 2014.   The  appellant  failed  to
    report on 21 August 2015 (that is before  the  reissuing  of  the  form
    IS151A), and subsequently form ISE343 was issued.  He did not attend an
    asylum intake unit appointment on 7 September 2017 and was served  with
    form IS151A on 18 September that year.  However, it is recorded in  the
    papers that the applicant's claim for asylum  was  not  made  until  26
    January 2018.

6.   It is unclear from the papers before me the exact  chronology  although
    I have used the dates set out in the letter of refusal.

7.   The application for asylum was refused on 26 July 2018.  In the  letter
    of refusal not only was the appellant's asylum claim refused but it was
    also  stated  that  he  had  engaged  in  deception,  in  that  he  had
    fraudulently obtained his TOEIC certificate and furthermore it was  not
    accepted that his rights under Article 8 of the ECHR would be infringed
    by his removal.  In reaching  that  decision  the  Secretary  of  State
    considered the appellant's  marriage  to  Miss  Kanisha  Alam  Khan,  a
    British citizen and stated that he had not produced  evidence  to  show
    that the relationship with his wife was genuine and subsisting.  It was
    also considered that his wife, who was  a  British  subject  by  birth,
    could choose to relocate to Pakistan with him.

8.   The grounds of appeal argued, inter alia,  that  the  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State regarding the appellant's right under Article  8  of
    the ECHR was in error.

9.    The  judge  first  considered  the  issue  of  the  appellant's  TOEIC
    certificate and then considered the asylum claim and finally the  claim
    that the appellant could not be expected to return to Pakistan  because
    of his marriage.

10.  When considering the issue of the TOEIC certificate the judge  set  out
    the appellant's evidence and referred to the generic evidence  produced
    by the Secretary of State.  The judge found  that  the  respondent  had
    discharged the initial  burden  of  proof  and  therefore  went  on  to
    consider the appellant's account of taking the test.

11.  The judge noted that the appellant placed weight on the  fact  that  he
    had a rail ticket for the appropriate day and the judge considered that
    some  weight  should  be  placed  thereon  but  that   that   was   not
    determinative.  The judge clearly had in mind the report from Professor
    French on which the respondent has relied in other  cases  but  pointed
    out that that was not before him.

12.  He referred to relevant case law stating that where the respondent  had
    provided sufficient evidence to raise the issue of  fraud,  the  burden
    then moved to the appellant with the  burden  of  raising  an  innocent
    explanation which satisfied  the  minimum  level  of  plausibility  and
    therefore it was for the respondent to  show  the  appellant's  account
    should be rejected.

13.  The judge considered that the appellant's evidence was  not  undermined
    by the examination by  the  Presenting  Officer  and  stated  that  the
    appellant's evidence was  plausible  and  credible.   He  gave  further
    reasons for  that  decision  in  both  paragraphs  30  and  35  of  the
    determination.  He did however comment that the  appellant  could  have
    produced evidence that his college had closed but had not done  so  and
    by not doing so damaged his evidence.

14.  The judge  also  noted  that  when  the  ISI51A  had  been  served  the
    appellant was not living at the address which he had  provided  to  the
    respondent and therefore that he was unaware of the fraud allegation.

15.  The judge then considered the appellant's claim to  asylum  and  having
    referred to relevant case law and considered the evidence clearly found
    that the appellant's claim to have a well-founded fear  of  persecution
    was not credible.  Finally the judge considered the appellant's  rights
    under the ECHR and in paragraphs 54 onwards considered the  appellant's
    rights under Article 8 outside the Rules.

16.  In paragraphs 52 onwards he gave reasons for  concluding  that  Article
    was engaged and  that  it  would  be  disproportionate  to  remove  the
    appellant.  These reasons were that  he  found  that  the  relationship
    between the appellant and his wife was genuine -  in  paragraph  54  he
    said:

         "having heard Mrs  Khan  and  the  appellant  I  am  satisfied  the
         relationship is both genuine and subsisting"

    And that he placed weight on the fact that  the  appellant's  wife  was
    fourteen  years  older  than  the  appellant,  that  she  had  recently
    miscarried and that there was evidence that she and the appellant  were
    receiving advice about fertility treatment, as well as  the  fact  that
    the appellant's wife had been born in Britain and lived her entire life
    here and had not visited Pakistan since 1999 because she  suffers  from
    chronic intermittent vertigo.  He referred to a medical certificate  at
    page 36 of the bundle in that regard.  He noted  that  the  appellant's
    wife said that she could not fly and said that that  evidence  had  not
    been undermined.  He also noted that the appellant's wife was  a  carer
    for her mother and was in receipt of a carer's allowance.

17.  The judge noted that little weight should be given  to  a  relationship
    formed with a qualifying partner which was established by a person at a
    time when the person is in the United Kingdom unlawfully.

18.  Having referred to the judgment of the House  of  Lords  in  EB  Kosovo
    (FC) v SSHD [2008] UKHL 41 the judge noted the dictum that the Tribunal
    should:-

         "Recognise that it will rarely be proportionate to uphold an  order
         for removal of a spouse if there is a close and genuine  bond  with
         the other spouse and that spouse cannot be reasonably  expected  to
         follow the removed spouse to the country of removal".

19.  He also quoted that judgment as stating:-

         "The critical issue will generally be whether, giving due weight to
         the strength of the public interest in removal of the person in the
         case before it, the Article  8  claim  is  sufficiently  strong  to
         outweigh it.  In general in cases concerned with precarious  family
         life, a very strong or compelling claim is required to outweigh the
         public interest in immigration control".

    He also referred to the judgment in Agyarko [2017] UKSC 11  which  said
    that in general in cases concerned with precarious family life  a  very
    strong or compelling claim is required to outweigh the public  interest
    in immigration control.

20.  In paragraph 62 the judge stated  he  accepted  the  appellant  was  an
    overstayer who had claimed asylum on  the  basis  that  the  court  had
    rejected but that he was in a subsisting relationship with his wife who
    was a British subject and could not travel to Pakistan.  He stated that
    there was undisputed evidence that the appellant's wife could not  live
    in Pakistan because she could not fly and travel would create a discord
    with her family in Britain and she was the carer of  her  mother  which
    although was not a primary point was a matter he must consider.

21.  Having balanced these facts the judge stated that he was  satisfied  it
    would be disproportionate to remove the appellant.

22.  The Secretary of State appealed, stated that the judge  had  failed  to
    give full reasons for finding in favour of the appellant on an  Article
    8 basis.  He stated that the conclusion was lacking in reasons as there
    were no clear finding nor reasons given in relation to the ETS  element
    of the case, and that it was unclear that although the judge had  found
    that the appellant was credible and plausible with regard to the  test,
    his  credibility  had  been  damaged  by   his   lack   of   supporting
    documentation from the appellant with regard to his loss of fees.

23.  It was also argued that the judge had not given proper reasons for  his
    decisions and that he had failed to look at the  evidence  holistically
    given that the appellant had failed to make out his  claim  for  asylum
    which had been found lacking in credibility:  that clearly should  have
    been factored in to the  issue  of  the  appellant's  credibility  with
    regard to the ETOIC test.

24.  Finally it was stated that the judge had  erred  when  considering  the
    issue of the Article 8 rights of  the  appellant  in  not  taking  into
    account the fact that the appellant had employed deception with  regard
    to the TOEIC certificate and similarly with  regard  to  the  claim  to
    asylum.  It was also argued that the judge had erred  in  finding  that
    the appellant's wife would be unable to travel without any evidence  of
    such and whether or not  other  members  of  his  wife's  family  could
    support their mother.  On these bases permission to appeal was granted.



25.  At the hearing of the  appeal  before  me  Mr  Bramble  relied  on  the
    grounds of appeal.  He argued that there was a lack of clarity  in  the
    judge's decision regarding the obtaining of the ETOIC  certificate  and
    lack of evidence as to why the appellant's wife could not go  with  him
    to Pakistan or whether another member of  the  family  could  not  look
    after her mother should she do so.  It was confirmed that the Secretary
    of State had considered the marriage despite the  fact  that  no  valid
    application had been made under the provisions of Section FM.

26.   In  reply  Mr  Tariq  argued  that  the  judge  when  considering  the
    certificate had identified correct law and applied the burden of  proof
    correctly, firstly  on  the  respondent  and  then  on  the  appellant.
    Clearly, he argued, that the judge had properly issued relevant reasons
    for his decision.

27.  He argued moreover that  the  judge's  findings  regarding  credibility
    were limited in effect to the consideration of the  appellant's  asylum
    claim and that the judge had  applied  the  relevant  legal  test  when
    assessing the relationship.

Discussion

28.  I have considered first the judge's consideration  of  whether  or  not
    the judge was correct to consider whether  or  not  the  appellant  had
    discharged the burden of proof upon him to show that  the  test  result
    had not been obtained fraudulently.  The judge clearly considered  that
    issue using the appropriate logical steps:  he  accepted  that  on  the
    generic evidence the Secretary of State had discharged  the  burden  of
    proof upon him and indeed it is clear from the determination  that  the
    judge was aware of Professor French's report.  However  the  judge  set
    out in paragraphs 30 and 35 a number of  reasons  why  he  reached  the
    conclusion in paragraph 34 that the appellant's evidence  was  credible
    and plausible.  I find that that finding is not unseated by the comment
    at the end of paragraph 35 that the lack of supporting evidence damaged
    the appellant's account as I consider that that comment related to  the
    previous sentence which was about the lack of evidence  supporting  the
    appellant's claim of events surrounding the closure of his college  and
    the payment of fees that was lost.  I would comment that that remark of
    the judge indicates that he may well have had in mind the fact that  an
    issue in this case was that of the appellant's overstaying and  clearly
    the judge came down to the conclusion that the appellant had been aware
    that he had overstayed before dealing with the asylum application.

29.  With regard to the appellant's claim to asylum the judge clearly  found
    that it was not credible and gave clear reasons for doing so.  Again  I
    see that that claim - that the issue of the claim  to  asylum  and  the
    finding that it was not credible - is a separate issue from that of the
    obtaining of the TOEIC certificate.

30.  Finally the judge considered the issue of the appellant's rights  under
    Article 8 of the ECHR.  He clearly found that the appellant  was  in  a
    subsisting relationship which was genuine and said  so  in  terms.   He
    then gave reasons  for  finding  that  there  would  be  unsurmountable
    obstacles to the appellant's wife accompanying him to Pakistan  and  in
    that regard he referred to relevant case law.

31.  I do not consider that his conclusions on that issue  was  based  on  a
    lack of evidence.  I have referred to the report from the  appellant's
    wife's doctor regarding her vertigo and I note also  that  the  carer's
    allowance for her mother is in her name.  I consider that the judge had
    just sufficient evidence for reaching a conclusion regarding the  issue
    of  unsurmountable  obstacles  which  could  not  be  characterised  as
    perverse.  I note that the Secretary of  State  did  not  consider  the
    detailed question of whether  or  not  the  appellant  might  meet  the
    requirements of Appendix FM as a spouse and in that regard  that  there
    is nothing in the papers to indicate the level of income  available  to
    the appellant or his  spouse  which  would  be  required  to  meet  the
    requirements of the Rules.  Similarly although it is the case that  the
    judge noted that the appellant was an overstayer he does not appear  to
    have placed particular weight thereon.

32.  Nevertheless taking all the factors into account I find that the  judge
    did reach a  conclusion  which  was  open  to  him  and  that  he  gave
    sufficient reasons for his decision. I therefore find that there is  no
    error of law in the determination such that the decision should be  set
    aside.  The judge's  decision  allowing  the  appeal  on  human  rights
    grounds shall stand.

Notice of Decision

The appeal of the Secretary of State is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed:  [pic]                      Date: 29 January 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy
