Appeal Number: PA/10757/2017

 





	Upper Tribunal 

	(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)	Appeal Number: PA/10757/2017





THE IMMIGRATION ACTS





No hearing 

Decision and Reasons Promulgated 

On 18 July 2018

On 25 July 2018 







Before



MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT





Between



[M M]

(anonymity direction not made) 

Appellant

and



THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

Respondent



	

	DECISION AND REMITTAL

	On 21 June 2018, I wrote to the parties as follows:



“Permission to appeal to this Tribunal has been granted in the following terms:



“The grounds challenge the judge’s refusal to adjourn the hearing to enable a witness – Mr Islam – to attend the hearing.  It is arguable that the judge’s refusal to adjourn was unfair and/or that he failed to take the chronology detailed at [3] of the grounds into account when he concluded that the appellant had had “ample opportunity to prepare his witnesses”.



The judge’s reference at [10] does appear to be to rule 28 of the Procedure Rules, which was obviously irrelevant to the basis on which this application was sought; Mr Islam was not a party to the appeal.  For my part, I doubt that this error was material to the judge’s consideration of the adjournment application but the 


absence of reference to the limited time available to the appellant to marshal his witnesses for the hearing is arguably evidence that a material consideration was left out of account.”



The Respondent has indicated consent to remittal for a fresh hearing, I therefore propose without more ado to set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal for error of law, and remit the appeal for re-determination by the First-tier Tribunal.  Any submissions to the contrary will be considered if received within 14 days of the date of this letter.”

	There has been no response adverse or otherwise.

	For the reasons given above I now set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal for error of law.  I remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for the re-determination by a different judge. 





C. M. G. OCKELTON

VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER

	Date: 18 July 2018.

© CROWN COPYRIGHT 2018

2