
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10152/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12th November 2018                |On 26th February 2019                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

                                     AA
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. Schwenk, instructed by All Nations Legal
Services (Doncaster)
For the Respondent:    Mr. Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. An anonymity direction has previously been made  by  FtT  Judge  McAll.
    Although no application is made before me, the appeal concerns a  claim
    for asylum and international protection and  in  my  judgement,  it  is
    appropriate for an anonymity order to be made  under  Rule  14  of  the
    Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008.   AA  is   granted
    anonymity throughout these proceedings. No report of these  proceedings
    shall directly or indirectly identify him.  This direction applies both
    to the appellant and to the respondent. Failure  to  comply  with  this
    direction could lead to  proceedings  being  brought  for  contempt  of
    court.


 2. The appellant is an Iraqi national.  He is said to have  left  Iraq  in
    October 2007 and he claims to have entered the UK on 5th November 2007.
     He claimed asylum on 22nd November 2007.  His claim was refused by the
    respondent on 14th January 2008 and his appeal  against  that  decision
    was dismissed by FtT Judge MacDonald for  the  reasons  set  out  in  a
    decision promulgated on 17th  March  2008.   I  shall  return  to  that
    decision in due course. The appellant then made applications for an EEA
    Residence Card. The first of those applications  was  refused  on  20th
    August 2013, and the second was refused on  16  May  2014.   In  August
    2014, the appellant made an  application  for  leave  to  remain  as  a
    stateless person, but that application was withdrawn on 11th  September
    2014.  On 17th September 2014, the appellant made  further  submissions
    to the respondent and by a decision  dated  19th  September  2017,  the
    respondent again refused the appellant's  application  for  asylum  and
    humanitarian protection.


 3. The appellant's appeal against that decision was  heard  by  FtT  Judge
    McAll in November 2017 and was dismissed for the reasons set out  in  a
    decision promulgated on 23rd November 2017.  The appellant was  granted
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal, and for the reasons set out
    in a decision of Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley,  the  decision  of  FtT
    Judge McAll was set aside.  At paragraph [11] of  his  decision,  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Chalkley states:


         "At paragraph 44 the Judge made a  finding  that  he  accepted  the
         appellant's claim that he is in a  genuine  relationship  with  his
         wife, or partner. That is  a  finding  that  shall  stand  but  the
         remaining part of the determination shall be set aside ..."


 4. The appeal was retained in the Upper Tribunal and comes  before  me  to
    remake the decision.   I proceed on the basis that there was  an  error
    of law in the decision of the FtT Judge and that the  only  finding  of
    the FtT Judge that is preserved, is that the appellant is in a  genuine
    relationship with his wife  or  partner.   At  the  conclusion  of  the
    hearing before me, I reserved my decision. I said that I would give  my
    decision in writing. This I now do.


The decision of FtT Judge MacDonald promulgated on 17th March 2008


 5. As there has been  a  previous  determination  by  an  FtT  Judge,  the
    Devaseelam principles, which were approved by the Court  of  Appeal  in
    Djebbar v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2004]  EWCA  Civ
    804 apply.


 6. The evidence before FtT Judge MacDonald was set out at  paragraphs  [6]
    to [26] of his decision.  The findings and  conclusions  of  FtT  Judge
    MacDonald are set out at paragraphs [37] to [50] of  his  decision.   I
    have carefully considered all of the matters set out  but  for  present
    purposes, it is sufficient to note the following findings:


         "38. Having considered all the evidence I find that the appellant's
         account was littered  with  inconsistencies  and  implausibilities.
         Although the core of his account was basically straightforward,  he
         appeared to be unable to give a consistent account  of  the  events
         which he said caused him to leave Iraq.


         ...


         47.  In conclusion and considering all the evidence in the round, I
         am satisfied on the evidence  before  me  that  the  appellant  has
         fabricated his claim in its entirety. There is evidence to  suggest
         that the appellant was motivated to come to the United Kingdom  for
         economic reasons. This is because the appellant has referred in his
         evidence to his disappointment at the quality of the  accommodation
         he has received and his desire to  attend  college  and  be  looked
         after. He complained that he no longer was being paid.


         48.  I make an adverse credibility finding under the provisions  of
         Section 8 of the 2004 Act because of the appellant  clearly  sought
         to mislead the immigration authorities on  arrival  in  the  United
         Kingdom by pretending that he  was  under  the  age  of  18.  I  am
         satisfied  that  the  age  assessment  tests  carried  out  by  the
         respondent show  conclusively  that  the  appellant  has  not  been
         truthful about his age and that he is in fact an adult  and  liable
         to be treated as such. I also make an adverse  credibility  finding
         because of the appellant's unsatisfactory  explanation  as  to  the
         delay in why  he  claimed  asylum  after  arriving  in  the  United
         Kingdom.


         49.  I am satisfied on the evidence before me  that  the  appellant
         faces no risk on return to Iraq as a failed  asylum  seeker.  I  am
         satisfied that there would be no bar to  him  returning  to  Kirkuk
         where he would be able to live with his mother  who  still  resides
         there, and who, if I understand the appellants evidence  correctly,
         still receives income from shops and property  which  she  owns  in
         that city.


         ..."


The hearing before me on 12th November 2018


 7. At the outset, Mr Schwenk confirmed on behalf of the appellant that  he
    does not challenge, or seek to go behind any of the findings previously
    made by FtT Judge MacDonald as to the core of the appellant's  account.
    The parties agree that the issue for me to determine is the  risk  upon
    return now.


 8. The parties agree that the appellant is from Kirkuk, a contested  area.
    It is common ground that notwithstanding  the  decision  of  FtT  Judge
    MacDonald, the Country Guidance  now  in  place  establishes  that  the
    intensity of the armed conflict in the so-called "contested areas",  is
    such that, as a general  matter,  there  are  substantial  grounds  for
    believing that any civilian returned there, solely on account of his or
    her  presence  there,  faces  a  real  risk  of  being   subjected   to
    indiscriminate violence amounting to serious harm within the  scope  of
    Article 15(c) of the Qualification Directive.  The parties  agree  that
    although the appellant may not be  able  to  return  to  Kirkuk,  there
    remains the issue of internal relocation to Baghdad and the IKR.


The evidence


 9. In preparation for the hearing before the FtT previously, both  parties
    had filed documents. The appellant had filed a bundle under cover of  a
    letter dated 2nd November 2017 comprising of some 294 pages,  including
    a witness statement made by the appellant and a statement made  by  his
    partner.  Under cover  of  a  letter  dated  3rd  September  2018,  the
    appellant's representatives filed and served  a  further  short  bundle
    comprising of 10 pages.  That  bundle  included  supplementary  witness
    statement made by the appellant.  On behalf of  the  appellant  I  also
    received a skeleton argument settled by Mr Schwenk dated 7th  September
    2018.


10. In making my decision, I have carefully considered all of the documents
    submitted by the parties, even if they are not  specifically  mentioned
    in the decision.  I made a record of proceedings and I therefore do not
    intend to repeat all the evidence but shall refer to the  most  salient
    parts of the evidence before me, as relevant to the issues before me.


11. I heard evidence from the appellant and his partner.  The appellant was
    assisted by an interpreter, Mr O Hassan and gave  evidence  in  Kurdish
    (Sorani).  The appellant and the interpreter both exchanged a few words
    and the interpreter confirmed to me that he understood  the  appellant,
    and the appellant understood him.


12. Subject to two corrections, the appellant adopted his witness statement
    dated 27th  October  2017  as  being  true  and  correct.   First,  the
    appellant confirmed that he had moved address in the last two weeks and
    corrected his address.  Second, the appellant confirmed that  his  date
    of birth is 25th January 1990 and not 1989 as set out in the statement.
     The appellant stated that he had previously been disbelieved about his
    date of birth, and so he just gave the date  of  birth  that  had  been
    adopted.  Subject to the correction of his date of birth in his  second
    statement, again to 25th January 1990, the appellant also  adopted  the
    content of his statement dated 3rd September 2018, as  being  true  and
    correct.


13. The appellant confirms that when he lived in Kirkuk, he had an ID card.
     In his oral evidence, the appellant claimed that when he left Iraq, he
    was in possession of his ID card.   He  stated  that  when  he  was  in
    Turkey, he sent it back to his family using the agent  because  he  had
    been told by the agent that he should not have an ID card.  He gave his
    ID card to the 'people smugglers' to send  back  to  his  family.   The
    appellant stated that they returned the ID card  to  his  mother.  When
    asked by Mr Schwenk where his ID card is now, the appellant stated that
    it had been seized at Sulaymania airport and that he cannot now get  it
    back.  He was asked how the ID card had  come  to  be  seized,  and  he
    replied that he had come to know someone in Doncaster, who  had  agreed
    to bring the ID  card  back  to  the  appellant.   However,  when  that
    individual tried to bring the ID card back,  the  individual  had  been
    detained at Sulaymania for 3 nights, and the ID card had  been  seized.




14. In his witness statement of 27th October  2017,  the  appellant  claims
    that in 2012, he wanted to marry his girlfriend in a register office in
    the UK. He was told that he needed to  have  ID  before  he  could  get
    married. One of his friends from the UK was going back to  Iraq  for  a
    holiday. The appellant asked his friend to bring  some  documents  back
    for him. The appellant called his mother to get  the  documents  ready,
    and she arranged for  them  to  be  taken  to  Sulaymaniyah  where  the
    appellant's  friend  was  staying,  by  car.   The  appellant's  friend
    collected the appellant's ID card and a copy of the appellant's rations
    card. When the appellant's friend was on his way back to the UK, he was
    at Sulaymaniyah airport and was stopped. They checked through his  bags
    and found the appellant's documents.  The  appellant  claims  that  his
    friend was sent to prison for four days, and the appellant's  documents
    were never returned.


15. The appellant confirmed that he last spoke to  his  maternal  uncle  in
    Erbil a very long time ago.  He could not remember  when,  and  claimed
    that he is unable to contact him now because he no longer has the phone
    number.  He claimed that he had last had contact with his  mother  when
    she was living in a Camp about a year ago, and he has  been  unable  to
    contact her because "her phone is switched off".


16. In his supplementary witness statement dated 3rd  September  2018,  the
    appellant states that  on  30th  August  2018  he  attended  the  Iraqi
    Consulate in Manchester.  He explained that he needed  an  ID  Card  or
    passport, and he was told that before one could  be  issued,  he  would
    need to provide at least a copy of his ID card  or  passport.   He  was
    told that without proof of  his  ID,  he  could  not  be  given  an  ID
    document.


17. In cross-examination, the appellant confirmed that  his  mother  had  a
    mobile telephone that he would use to speak  to  her,  but  it  is  now
    switched off.  The appellant stated that his mother  was  living  in  a
    camp, in Ranya, near Erbil and within the IKR.  He stated that  he  has
    tried contacting the camp authorities but was unsuccessful.  When asked
    whether he had tried to contact the Kurdish authorities to see if  they
    could assist in putting the appellant in contact with  his  mother,  he
    replied that he did not think they would be willing  to  do  that.   He
    accepted that he had not tried.  He also accepted that he had not tried
    to make contact with his family through the Red Cross or Red  Crescent.
    The appellant stated that when he previously lived in  Doncaster  there
    was a Kurdish community that he could meet with in  a  caf�,  and  that
    could assist him, but he does not now have  access  to  that  community
    since he moved to Southport.  He does not socialise  with  the  Kurdish
    community in the same  way  that  he  did  previously.   The  appellant
    confirmed that he had recently attended the Iraqi  Consulate  but  they
    could not do anything to provide him with documents.  He  did  not  ask
    them to help trace his mother.  It was put to  the  appellant  that  he
    does not seem to be very worried about having  lost  contact  with  his
    mother.  He replied that he is concerned, but there is nothing  he  can
    do.  He accepted that it is true that he could contact the authorities,
    but had not done so.


18. By way of clarification, I asked the appellant how he knew that his  ID
    card had been returned by the agents, to  his  family.   The  appellant
    replied that when he arrived in  the  UK,  the  agents  had  asked  the
    appellant's mother for a large amount of money, and they had given  her
    the ID card.  He had been told about this in 2012, when he spoke to his
    mother asking her to send the  ID  card  to  him.   She  had  told  the
    appellant that when she had paid the money, the agents had given the ID
    card to her.


19. I referred the appellant to the answers that he gave in  his  screening
    interview.  In answer to question 7.36, when asked whether he  has  his
    own National Identity Card and where  it  is  now,  the  appellant  had
    stated that the had left it in Turkey.  The appellant  stated  that  he
    did not tell the officer that it had been sent back to  his  mother  by
    the people smugglers because he was very young at the time and  he  was
    too scared to give details about the people  smugglers.   He  explained
    that it was his mother who had found the people smugglers that assisted
    him leave, and she was therefore in contact with them,  and  they  knew
    where she would be.


20. In re-examination, the appellant confirmed that he had been too  scared
    to mention anything about the  people  smuggles  during  the  screening
    interview in 2007, because "you are told that you must not give  people
    any details because it is illegal work".  The appellant  said  that  he
    was scared that if he gave their details, they would find the appellant
    at some time in the future, and he would have to pay the price.


21. The appellant's partner, "MR" was then called to  give  evidence.   She
    adopted her witness statement dated 27th October 2017  that  is  to  be
    found at pages [18] to [19] of the appellant's bundle as being true and
    correct.  She confirmed that she has been in the  UK  since  2010,  and
    started working in 2010 at [~] in Southport.   At  the  time  was  also
    studying at Southport College.  She finished studying in 2014.  Between
    2010 and 2013 she had  worked  part  time,  and  since  2013,  she  has
    maintained a full time job.


22. MR stated that in 2013 she had two jobs.  During the day, she worked at
    the [~] and in the evenings, she worked in a  Spanish  restaurant.   At
    this time she  was  also  studying  at  Southport  College.   When  she
    finished college in 2014, she got a full time job  in  a  Polish  Shop,
    [~],  and  she  continued  working  in  the  evenings  at  the  Spanish
    restaurant.  In February 2016 she moved from Southport to Doncaster  to
    look after the mother, and in June 2016 she started working through  an
    Agency.  In April 2017 she started working as a Quality Controller  for
    [~] and since August 2018 she has been working for two GP's in the NHS,
    as a translator, secretary and receptionist.


23. MR confirmed that she has  a  number  of  family  members  in  the  UK,
    including her parents, two sisters and some aunts and uncles.  They all
    live in Southport, and it is a close family.   MR  explained  that  her
    mother lives only one street away, and that she sees her  mother  every
    day.


24. In cross-examination, MR was asked about the  appellant's  relationship
    with his own family in Iraq.  She  confirmed  that  the  appellant  has
    mentioned his mother who she understands  is  living  in  a  Camp.   MR
    stated that she had been told that by the appellant, about a year  ago,
    and that the appellant had tried to contact his mother by  calling  the
    telephone number that he has.


25. In reaching my decision, I remind myself that the burden of proof rests
    upon the appellant to show that at the date of the hearing  before  me,
    he has a well-founded fear of persecution within the meaning of article
    1A(2) of  the  Convention  and  Protocol  relating  to  the  Status  of
    Refugees.  It is for the appellant to show that there  are  substantial
    grounds  for  believing  that  he  meets  the   requirements   of   the
    Qualification Regulations and that he  is  entitled  to  protection  in
    accordance with paragraph 339C of the Immigration Rules.  That is to be
    determined objectively, in the light of the circumstances  existing  in
    Iraq.  The appellant must discharge the burden of proof  upon  him,  to
    the lower standard. This lower standard of proof can be expressed as  a
    'reasonable likelihood', 'a real risk' or a 'serious possibility'.


Findings and Conclusion


26. The appellant stated in both of his witness statements, that  his  date
    of birth is 25th January 1989.  That was corrected when he adopted  his
    witness statements before me, and the appellant now maintains  that  he
    was born on 25th January 1990 as he had previously  claimed.   For  the
    avoidance of any doubt, there is nothing before me that undermines  the
    finding made by FtT Judge MacDonald previously, and noted at  paragraph
    [48] of his decision, that the appellant has not  been  truthful  about
    his age, and was an adult.


27. In reaching my decision, I have had  regard  to  the  relevant  country
    guidance.  AA (Article 15(c))  Iraq  CG  [2015]  UKUT  00544  (IAC)  as
    amended by the Court of Appeal  in  AA  (Iraq)  [2017]  EWCA  Civ  944,
    confirmed that there is a state of internal armed conflict  in  certain
    parts of  Iraq,  involving  government  security  forces,  militias  of
    various kinds, and the Islamist group known as ISIL. The  intensity  of
    this armed conflict in  the  so-called  "contested  areas",  comprising
    inter alia Kirkuk, is  such  that,  as  a  general  matter,  there  are
    substantial grounds for believing that  any  civilian  returned  there,
    solely on account of his or her presence there, faces a  real  risk  of
    being subjected to indiscriminate violence amounting  to  serious  harm
    within the scope of Article 15(c) of the Qualification Directive.


28. As I have set out previously, it is common ground between  the  parties
    that the issue for me to determine is the risk upon return now,  noting
    that the appellant is from Kirkuk,  a  contested  area.   Although  the
    respondent accepts that the appellant may not  be  able  to  return  to
    Kirkuk, I must consider whether the appellant can relocate elsewhere in
    Iraq.  To that end, insofar as is relevant, the Court of Appeal  in  AA
    (Iraq), provided the following guidance:


         "B. Documentation and Feasibility of Return (Excluding IKR)


         5.   Return of former residents of the Iraqi Kurdish  Region  (IKR)
         will be to the IKR and all other Iraqis will  be  to  Baghdad.  The
         Iraqi authorities will allow an Iraqi national (P)  in  the  United
         Kingdom to enter Iraq only if P is in possession of  a  current  or
         expired Iraqi passport relating to P, or a laissez passer.


         6.   No Iraqi national will be returnable  to  Baghdad  if  not  in
         possession of one of these documents.


         7.   In the light of the Court of Appeal's judgment  in HF  (Iraq)
         and Others v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013] EWCA
         Civ 1276, an  international  protection  claim  made  by  P  cannot
         succeed by reference to any alleged risk of harm  arising  from  an
         absence of a current or expired Iraqi passport or a laissez passer,
         if the Tribunal finds that P's return is not currently feasible  on
         account of a lack of any of those documents.


         8.   Where P is returned to Iraq on a  laissez  passer  or  expired
         passport, P will be at no risk of serious  harm  at  the  point  of
         return by reason of not having a current passport.


         C. The CSID


         9.   Regardless of the  feasibility  of  P's  return,  it  will  be
         necessary to decide whether P has a CSID, or will be able to obtain
         one, reasonably soon after arrival in Iraq.  A  CSID  is  generally
         required in order for an Iraqi to access financial assistance  from
         the  authorities;  employment;  education;  housing;  and   medical
         treatment. If P shows there are no family or other  members  likely
         to be able to provide means of support, P is in general  likely  to
         face a real risk of destitution, amounting to serious harm, if,  by
         the time any funds provided to P by the Secretary of State  or  her
         agents to assist P's return have been exhausted, it  is  reasonably
         likely that P will still have no CSID.


         10.  Where return is feasible but P does not have a CSID, P  should
         as a general matter be able to obtain one  from  the  Civil  Status
         Affairs Office for P's home Governorate, using  an  Iraqi  passport
         (whether current or expired), if P has one. If P does not have such
         a passport, P's ability to obtain a CSID may depend  on  whether  P
         knows  the  page  and  volume  number  of  the  book  holding   P's
         information (and that of P's family). P's ability to  persuade  the
         officials that P is the person named on the relevant page is likely
         to depend on whether P has family members or other individuals  who
         are prepared to vouch for P.


         11.  P's ability to obtain a CSID is likely to be severely hampered
         if P is unable to go to the Civil  Status  Affairs  Office  of  P's
         Governorate because it is in an area where  Article  15(c)  serious
         harm is occurring. As a result of  the  violence,  alternative  CSA
         Offices for Mosul, Anbar and Saluhaddin have  been  established  in
         Baghdad and Kerbala. The evidence does  not  demonstrate  that  the
         "Central Archive", which exists in Baghdad, is in practice able  to
         provide CSIDs to those in  need  of  them.  There  is,  however,  a
         National Status Court in Baghdad, to which P could apply for formal
         recognition of identity. The precise operation of  this  court  is,
         however, unclear.


         D. Internal Relocation Within Iraq (Other Than the IKR)


         14.  As a general matter, it will not  be  unreasonable  or  unduly
         harsh for a person from a contested area  to  relocate  to  Baghdad
         City or (subject to paragraph 2 above) the Baghdad Belts.


         15.  In assessing whether it would be unreasonable/unduly harsh for
         P to relocate to  Baghdad,  the  following  factors  are,  however,
         likely to be relevant:


             (a)  whether P has a CSID or will be able to obtain  one  (see
                  Part C above);


             (b)  whether P can speak Arabic (those  who  cannot  are  less
                  likely to find employment);


             (c)  whether P has family members or friends in  Baghdad  able
                  to accommodate him;


             (d)   whether  P  is  a  lone  female  (women   face   greater
                  difficulties than men in finding employment);


             (e)  whether P can find a sponsor to access a  hotel  room  or
                  rent accommodation;


             (f)  whether P is from a minority community;


             (g)  whether there is support available for P bearing in  mind
                  there is some evidence that returned failed asylum seekers
                  are provided with the support generally given to IDPs.


         16.  There is not a real risk of an  ordinary  civilian  travelling
         from  Baghdad  airport  to  the  southern  governorates,  suffering
         serious harm en route to such governorates  so  as  engage  Article
         15(c)."


29. In AAH (Iraqi Kurds - internal relocation) Iraq CG [UKUT 212 (IAC), the
    Upper Tribunal supplemented Section C of  the  guidance  given  by  the
    Court of Appeal in AA (Iraq) with the following guidance:


         "1.  Whilst it remains possible for an Iraqi national returnee  (P)
         to obtain a new CSID whether P is able to do so, or do so within  a
         reasonable time frame, will depend on the individual circumstances.
         Factors to be considered include:


               i)  Whether  P  has  any  other  form  of  documentation,  or
                  information about the location of his entry in  the  civil
                  register. An INC, passport, birth/marriage certificates or
                  an expired CSID would all be  of  substantial  assistance.
                  For  someone  in  possession  of  one  or  more  of  these
                  documents the process should be straightforward. A laissez-
                  passer should not be counted for these purposes: these can
                  be issued without any other form of  ID  being  available,
                  are not of any assistance in 'tracing back' to the  family
                  record and are confiscated upon arrival at Baghdad.


              ii) The location of the relevant civil registry office. If  it
                  is in an area held, or  formerly  held,  by  ISIL,  is  it
                  operational?


             iii) Are there male  family  members  who  would  be  able  and
                  willing to attend the civil registry with P?  Because  the
                  registration system is patrilineal it will be relevant  to
                  consider whether  the  relative  is  from  the  mother  or
                  father's side. A maternal uncle in possession of his  CSID
                  would be able to assist in locating the original place  of
                  registration of the individual's mother,  and  from  there
                  the trail would need to be followed to the place that  her
                  records were transferred upon marriage. It  must  also  be
                  borne in mind that a significant number of  IDPs  in  Iraq
                  are themselves undocumented; if that is  the  case  it  is
                  unlikely that  they  could  be  of  assistance.   A  woman
                  without a male relative to  assist  with  the  process  of
                  redocumentation would face very significant  obstacles  in
                  that officials may refuse to deal with her case at all."


30. Insofar as return to  the  IKR  is  concerned,  section  E  of  Country
    Guidance annexed to the Court of Appeal's decision  in  AA  (Iraq)  was
    replaced in AAH with the following guidance:


         "1.  There are currently no  international  flights  to  the  Iraqi
             Kurdish Region (IKR). All returns from the United Kingdom  are
             to Baghdad.


          2. For an Iraqi  national  returnee  (P)  of  Kurdish  origin  in
             possession of a valid CSID or Iraqi passport, the journey from
             Baghdad to the IKR, whether by air or land, is affordable  and
             practical and can be made without a real risk of  P  suffering
             persecution, serious harm, Article 3 ill treatment  nor  would
             any difficulties on the journey make relocation unduly harsh.


          3. P is unable to board a domestic flight between Baghdad and the
             IKR without either a CSID or a valid passport.


          4. P will face considerable  difficulty  in  making  the  journey
             between Baghdad and the IKR by land without a  CSID  or  valid
             passport. There are numerous checkpoints en  route,  including
             two checkpoints in the immediate vicinity of the airport.   If
             P has neither a CSID nor a valid passport there is a real risk
             of P being detained at a checkpoint until  such  time  as  the
             security personnel are able to verify P's identity.  It is not
             reasonable to require P to travel between Baghdad and  IKR  by
             land absent the ability of P  to  verify  his  identity  at  a
             checkpoint. This normally requires the attendance  of  a  male
             family member and production of P's identity documents but may
             also be achieved by calling upon "connections"  higher  up  in
             the chain of command.


          5. Once at the IKR border (land  or  air)  P  would  normally  be
             granted entry to the territory. Subject to security screening,
             and registering presence with the local mukhtar,  P  would  be
             permitted to enter and reside in the IKR with no further legal
             impediments  or  requirements.   There   is   no   sponsorship
             requirement for Kurds.


          6. Whether P would be at particular risk of ill-treatment  during
             the security screening process must be assessed on a  case-by-
             case basis. Additional factors that may increase risk include:
             (i) coming from a family with a known association  with  ISIL,
             (ii) coming from an area associated with ISIL and (iii)  being
             a single male of fighting age. P  is  likely  to  be  able  to
             evidence the fact of recent arrival from the UK,  which  would
             dispel any suggestion of having  arrived  directly  from  ISIL
             territory.


          7. If P has family members living in the IKR cultural norms would
             require that family to accommodate P. In such circumstances  P
             would, in general, have sufficient assistance from the  family
             so as to lead a 'relatively normal life', which would  not  be
             unduly harsh. It is nevertheless important for decision-makers
             to determine  the  extent  of  any  assistance  likely  to  be
             provided by P's family on a case by case basis.


          8. For those without the assistance of  family  in  the  IKR  the
             accommodation options are limited:


               i) Absent special circumstances it is not  reasonably  likely
                  that P will be able to gain access to one of  the  refugee
                  camps in  the  IKR;  these  camps  are  already  extremely
                  overcrowded and are closed to newcomers. 64% of  IDPs  are
                  accommodated in private settings with  the  vast  majority
                  living with family members;


              ii) If P cannot live with a family  member,  apartments  in  a
                  modern block in a new neighbourhood are available for rent
                  at a cost of between $300 and $400 per month;


             iii) P could resort to a 'critical shelter arrangement', living
                  in  an  unfinished  or  abandoned   structure,   makeshift
                  shelter, tent, mosque, church or squatting in a government
                  building.  It would  be  unduly  harsh  to  require  P  to
                  relocate to the IKR if P will live in a  critical  housing
                  shelter without access to basic necessities such as  food,
                  clean water and clothing;


              iv) In considering whether P would be  able  to  access  basic
                  necessities, account must be taken of the fact that failed
                  asylum seekers are entitled to apply for a grant under the
                  Voluntary Returns Scheme, which could  give  P  access  to
                  �1500. Consideration should also be given to whether P can
                  obtain financial support from other sources  such  as  (a)
                  employment, (b) remittances from relatives abroad, (c) the
                  availability of ad hoc charity or by being able to  access
                  PDS rations.


          9. Whether P is able to secure employment must be assessed  on  a
             case-by-case basis taking the following matters into account:


               i) Gender. Lone women are very unlikely to be able to  secure
                  legitimate employment;


              ii) The unemployment rate for Iraqi IDPs living in the IKR  is
                  70%;


             iii) P cannot work without a CSID;


              iv) Patronage and nepotism continue to be important factors in
                  securing employment. A returnee with family connections to
                  the region will have a significant advantage  in  that  he
                  would ordinarily be able to call upon  those  contacts  to
                  make introductions to prospective employers and  to  vouch
                  for him;


               v) Skills, education and experience. Unskilled workers are at
                  the  greatest  disadvantage,  with  the  decline  in   the
                  construction industry reducing  the  number  of  labouring
                  jobs available;


              vi) If P is from an area with a marked association with  ISIL,
                  that may deter prospective employers."


31. Although the appellant was found by FtT Judge MacDonald to  have  given
    inconsistent and contradictory evidence as to where  he  had  lived  in
    Iraq, the respondent does not challenge the applicant's claim that  his
    last place of residence was in Kirkuk.  In the respondent's decision of
    19th September 2017, the respondent confirms, at paragraph  [22],  that
    the appellant will not be removed to Kirkuk.  As someone who is  not  a
    former resident of the Iraqi Kurdish Region ("IKR"), the return of  the
    appellant will be to Baghdad.  The Country Guidance confirms  that  the
    Iraqi authorities will only allow an Iraqi national entry if  they  are
    in possession of a current or expired passport or a laissez passer.  In
    his screening interview, the appellant stated [Q.7.1 & Q.7.21] that  he
    has never held a national passport.  There is nothing to  suggest  that
    the appellant is in possession of a current or expired Iraqi  passport,
    and I find on the lower standard of proof that the appellant is not now
    in possession of a current or  expired  Iraqi  passport.   However,  in
    accordance with the Country Guidance  as  confirmed  by  the  Court  of
    Appeal in AA Iraq, an international protection claim cannot succeed  by
    reference to any alleged risk of harm arising  from  an  absence  of  a
    current or expired Iraqi passport or a laissez  passer  simply  because
    return is not currently feasible on account of a lack of any  of  those
    documents.


32. The appellant is an Iraqi  national  of  Kurdish  origin,  and  I  must
    therefore consider whether the appellant has originals or copies of his
    Civil Status ID ("CSID"), or will be able  to  obtain  one,  reasonably
    soon after arrival in Iraq.


33. Even on the lower standard of proof, I  reject  the  appellant's  claim
    that he does not have an ID card.  Like FtT Judge MacDonald previously,
    I do not find the appellant to be a credible witness.


34. The appellant claims that when he lived in Kirkuk, he had an  ID  card.
    He claimed in his oral evidence, that when he  left  Iraq,  he  was  in
    possession of his ID card.  He claims that he no  longer  has  that  ID
    card because it was returned to his mother, and that when he  attempted
    to have it returned to him via a friend that had travelled to Iraq, the
    ID card and a rations card belonging to the appellant were  confiscated
    at Sulaymania airport.


35. In his screening interview completed  on  10th  January  2008,  shortly
    after his arrival in the UK, the appellant confirmed that his  ID  card
    had been issued to him in Kirkuk and he claimed that he had left it  in
    Turkey.  In his evidence before me, the appellant stated  that  he  did
    not tell the officer that it had been sent back to his  mother  by  the
    agent because he was very young at the time, and he was too  scared  to
    give details about the people smugglers.  I  reject  that  explanation.
    During the screening interview [Q.7.17  to  7.21],  the  appellant  was
    asked about the agent  used  to  arrange  the  trip  to  the  UK.   The
    appellant was asked for, and gave  the  name  of  the  agent  [Q.7.18].
    Having been prepared to give the name of the agent, and confirming that
    the appellant had only met people working for  the  agent,  it  is  not
    credible that  the  appellant  would  have  been  afraid  to  tell  the
    interviewer that his ID documents had been returned to  his  mother  by
    the agent.


36. The appellant's evidence is that it was not until 2012 that he was told
    by his mother that his ID Card had been returned to her by the  agents.
    That is notwithstanding the appellant's evidence that the ID  card  was
    handed to the agent in 2007 when the appellant was in  Turkey.   It  is
    not credible that the appellant would have waited until  2012  to  make
    enquiries of whether his ID card had been returned to his mother.


37. The appellant claims that  in  2012  he  attempted  to  have  the  CSID
    document returned to him via a friend that had travelled to Iraq.  That
    is a claim that is made by the appellant, and is one that  is  entirely
    unsupported.  I accept that corroborative evidence is  often  difficult
    to provide, but here, the appellant claims that it was a friend of  his
    from the UK that was going to Iraq for a holiday, that  he  sought  the
    assistance of.  There is no good reason why the appellant's friend, who
    on the appellant's account of events had been  detained  in  Sulaymania
    for three nights when the documents were confiscated,  could  not  have
    been called  to  give  evidence  to  support  the  claim  made  by  the
    appellant.  Notwithstanding the fact that the appellant has moved  from
    Doncaster, the appellant, who was well aware  that  he  has  previously
    been found not to be credible, provides no good explanation for failing
    to provide evidence that would be available to support his account that
    his friend had indeed travelled to Iraq, and was detained in Sulaymania
    as the appellant claims.


38. Furthermore, the appellant's claim that he had attempted to obtain  his
    CSID card from his mother in 2012 is not a claim that  formed  part  of
    the further submissions made by the appellant in September  2014.   The
    further submissions that were relied upon by the appellant are set  out
    in  the  respondent's  decision  of  19th  September  2017.   They  are
    summarised at paragraphs [1] to [7] of that decision, and it is  to  be
    noted that the appellant made no reference to his  attempts  to  obtain
    his CSID, and his claim that a friend of his  had  been  detained  when
    attempting to bring documents  to  the  UK,  for  the  appellant.   The
    failure to refer to these events, that  had  occurred  only  two  years
    before those further submissions  were  made,  further  undermines  the
    appellant's credibility and his account of events.


39. Having carefully considered the evidence before me,  I  find  that  the
    appellant has access to his CSID and has fabricated this  part  of  his
    claim, in an attempt to present a further obstacle  to  his  return  to
    Iraq.  Even on the lower standard of proof, the appellant has failed to
    establish that he does not have the CSID or that he would not  be  able
    to obtain his original identity documents from his mother  or  extended
    family members who are now in Erbil. I find the appellant already has a
    CSID and a rations card, that can be obtained and sent to him.  I  find
    that the appellant most likely left the  original  documents  with  his
    mother when he left Iraq and that his mother or extended family members
    will be able to obtain and send these original documents to him.


40. Should it be necessary for the appellant to obtain a new  CSID  because
    his previous one has expired, on the lower  standard,  I  am  satisfied
    that the  appellant  has  an  expired  CSID,  and  the  process  should
    therefore be straightforward.


41. The appellant states in his most recent statement that he has  attended
    the Iraqi Consulate.  I accept that the appellant may have attended the
    Iraqi Consulate on 30th August 2018 as he claims, but there is  nothing
    before me to confirm anything that was  said  by  those  at  the  Iraqi
    Consulate.  It is perhaps unsurprising that they would be unwilling  to
    provide any document to an individual who simply claims to be an  Iraqi
    national seeking some form of document.  The  appellant  has  taken  no
    steps to try and obtain any supporting evidence or documents  from  his
    mother or other members of his family that remain in the IKR, that  may
    be capable of supporting his identity to establish his  entitlement  to
    an ID document.


42. Having found that the appellant has a CSID or will be  able  to  obtain
    one, reasonably soon after arrival in Iraq, I turn to the  question  of
    internal relocation.   The  Country  Guidance  establishes  that  as  a
    general matter, it will not be  unreasonable  or  unduly  harsh  for  a
    person from a contested area to  relocate  to  Baghdad  City.   I  have
    already found that the appellant has a CSID or will be able  to  obtain
    one.  The appellant claims, and  I  accept,  that  he  does  not  speak
    Arabic. That would not be implausible for an Iraqi Kurd from Kirkuk and
    he was not challenged about his inability to speak  Arabic  before  me.
    The Country Guidance establishes that those who  cannot  speak  Arabic,
    are less likely to find employment.  The appellant has never resided in
    Baghdad and there is no evidence linking him to any family  contact  in
    Baghdad. The appellant accepts that his father may have had friends  in
    Baghdad, but he does not know them.  The appellant left  Iraq  in  2007
    when he was 18 years old, and on the lower standard, I am  prepared  to
    accept that the appellant has no family members or friends in  Baghdad,
    that would be able to accommodate him.  Similarly given the lack of any
    connection to Baghdad, there is no evidence that he would  be  able  to
    find a sponsor to access a  hotel  room  or  rent  accommodation.   The
    appellant is, as a Kurd, from a minority  community,  and  is  a  Sunni
    Muslim.  I accept the submission made by Mr Schwenk that the fact  that
    the appellant is a Sunni Muslim, enhances the risk  that  he  would  be
    exposed to in Baghdad.  The  appellant  will  have  access  to  initial
    support given to IDPs.  Taking all these factors  into  account,  I  am
    satisfied that it would be unreasonable or unduly harsh to  expect  the
    appellant to relocate in Baghdad.


43. I do however find that it would be reasonable and not unduly harsh,  to
    expect the appellant to relocate in the IKR.  I  note  that  there  are
    currently no international flights to the IKR and that all returns from
    the United Kingdom are to Baghdad.  The Tribunal confirmed in AAH  that
    for an Iraqi national of Kurdish origin in possession of a  valid  CSID
    or Iraqi passport, the journey from Baghdad to the IKR, whether by  air
    or land, is affordable and practical, and can be made  without  a  real
    risk of the individual suffering persecution, serious harm.


44. The appellant's evidence is that his mother was living in Kirkuk at the
    time that the appellant left Iraq, but she has since moved to Erbil  in
    Kurdistan. He claims that she is living  in  a  camp.  The  appellant's
    maternal uncle is also said to be living in Erbil with his family.  The
    appellant has been in the UK since 2007 and even on his own account, he
    maintained contact with his mother.  In  his  witness  statement  dated
    27th October 2017 he claims that his mother had moved to Erbil  "around
    one month ago".  That is, in or about September 2017.  He claims in his
    statement that he is not close to his  maternal  uncle,  but  that  his
    mother is in  contact  with  him.   In  his  evidence  before  me,  the
    appellant confirmed that his mother had a mobile telephone and that  he
    last spoke to her, about a year ago.  He claims that her phone  is  now
    "switched off".  I reject the appellant's evidence that he is no longer
    in contact  with  his  mother  and  maternal  uncle.   The  appellant's
    evidence about his contact with his mother  and  uncle  was  vague  and
    unconvincing.  It is simply incredible that the  appellant  would  have
    been able to maintain contact with his mother for  several  years,  and
    the contact between mother, and son would then simply stop because  her
    phone is "switched off". It is incredible that  even  if  his  mother's
    phone was "switched off", the appellant has done very  little  to  find
    and get in touch with his mother.   It is equally incredible  that  the
    appellant no longer has the phone number for his maternal uncle, as  he
    claims.


45. If the appellant is unable to leave the UK with his CSID,  I  am  quite
    satisfied that the appellant's mother or maternal uncle  members  would
    bring his existing CSID or a replacement to  the  appellant,  upon  his
    arrival in Baghdad. The appellant's mother and maternal uncle remain in
    Erbil and, I have found, remain in contact with the appellant.  I  find
    that the appellant has a CSID or will be able to obtain one, reasonably
    soon after arrival in Iraq so that  he  could  make  the  journey  from
    Baghdad to the IKR, without a real risk of him  suffering  persecution,
    serious harm, or Article 3 ill treatment.


46. Once at the IKR border, the appellant, as is normal, would  be  granted
    entry  to  the  territory,  and  subject  to  security  screening,  and
    registering his presence with the local mukhtar, the appellant would be
    permitted to enter  and  reside  in  the  IKR  with  no  further  legal
    impediments or requirements. There is nothing in  the  evidence  before
    me, or as  to  the  profile  of  the  appellant,  that  is  capable  of
    establishing that he would  be  at  particular  risk  of  ill-treatment
    during the security  screening  process.   I  remind  myself  that  the
    appellant's account of the events that led to his departure from  Iraq,
    were comprehensively rejected by FtT Judge MacDonald previously.  There
    is nothing to suggest that the appellant would be perceived  as  coming
    from a family with a known association with ISIL, and in any event,  he
    would to be able to evidence the fact of recent arrival  from  the  UK,
    which would dispel any suggestion of having arrived directly from  ISIL
    territory.  Cultural norms would require that  the  family  accommodate
    the appellant. When interviewed in 2008, the appellant claimed that his
    family was well off, and  earned  a  rental  income  from  shops.   The
    appellant  stated  in  interview  [Q.16]  that  his  mother  had   been
    supporting  herself  from  the  rent  they  were  getting  from  shops.
    Although matters will have moved on since then, not least  because  the
    appellant's mother is now in Erbil, I am satisfied that  the  appellant
    will have sufficient assistance  from  the  family  so  as  to  lead  a
    'relatively normal life', which would not be unduly harsh.


47. It follows that in my judgment, the appeal cannot succeed on the  basis
    of the Refugee Convention or on Humanitarian Protection grounds.


48. At to the appellant's Article 8 claim, FtT Judge McAll found  that  the
    appellant is in a genuine relationship  with  his  partner,  MR.   That
    finding was preserved by Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley.


49. On behalf of the appellant, Mr Schwenk submits that the  applicant  can
    satisfy the requirements of paragraph EX.1.(b) of  Appendix  FM.   That
    is, the applicant has a genuine  and  subsisting  relationship  with  a
    partner who is in the UK and is a British Citizen, settled in the UK or
    in the UK with refugee leave or humanitarian protection, and there  are
    insurmountable obstacles to family life with  that  partner  continuing
    outside the UK.  He submits that the appellant and MR  could  not  live
    together in Iraq.  He submits that the applicant meets the requirements
    of the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2016 ("the  EEA
    Regulations") because for the purposes of Regulation 8,  the  appellant
    is an 'Extended family member' of MR.  It is said that the appellant is
    the partner of, and in a durable relationship  with  an  EEA  national.
    That is, Mr Schwenk submits, an exceptional circumstance and  that  the
    facts here, provide compelling reasons for the grant of leave to remain
    in the UK on Article 8 grounds.


50. Regulation 15 of the EEA Regulations confirms that an EEA national  who
    has resided in  the  UK  in  accordance  with  the  Regulations  for  a
    continuous period of five years, acquires the right to reside in the UK
    permanently.  MR is a national of Poland and I accept her evidence that
    she has lived in the UK since July 2010.  I accept  her  evidence  that
    she started working in 2010 and that she has  remained  employed  in  a
    number of jobs during her time in the UK.  Mr Diwnycz did not challenge
    the evidence of MR regarding her employment  history  and  there  is  a
    wealth of evidence before me in the form of wage slips  confirming  the
    employment history outlined by MR in her evidence before  me.   I  find
    that MR has resided in the UK in accordance with  the  EEA  Regulations
    for a continuous period of five years, and has acquired  the  right  to
    reside in the UK permanently.


51. I must therefore consider whether there are insurmountable obstacles to
    family life between the appellant and MR continuing outside the UK.  In
    her  witness  statement  dated  27th  October  2017,  MR  confirms,  at
    paragraph [8], that if the appellant had to leave the UK, she would  go
    with him, but she does not want to.  MR confirms that she  is  able  to
    speak some Kurdish, but not very well.  She  is  concerned  that  as  a
    Christian, she would be unable to live freely in Iraq.   I  accept  her
    evidence that her family live in the UK and that it is a close family.


52. The correct approach to the "insurmountable obstacles"  test  in  EX.1,
    must be examined in the light of the  Supreme  Court's  decision  in  R
    (Agyarko) -v- SSHD [2017] UKSC 11, which  considered  the  meaning  and
    application of the "insurmountable obstacles" test in EX.1 to  Appendix
    FM.  In Ayarko, the appellants had each entered the UK as visitors  and
    had overstayed after their limited leave to enter had expired. They had
    each formed relationships with British citizens. Neither  had  children
    from the relationships. Their applications for  leave  to  remain  were
    refused by the SSHD on the grounds that  they  failed  to  satisfy  the
    requirement in the Immigration Rules Appendix FM s.EX.1(b)  that  there
    be insurmountable  obstacles  preventing  them  from  continuing  their
    relationships  outside  the  UK,  and   there   were   no   exceptional
    circumstances under Article 8.


53. Lord Reed gave the only  judgment  of  the  Court,  and  at  [42],  her
    referred to the decision of the  Grand  Chamber  in  Jeunesse  -v-  The
    Netherlands (2014) 60 EHRR 17.  He noted at  [43],  that  the  European
    court intends the words "insurmountable obstacles" to be understood  in
    a practical and realistic sense, rather than  as  referring  solely  to
    obstacles which make it literally impossible for  the  family  to  live
    together in the country of origin of  the  non-national  concerned  but
    recognised that the court's application of it indicates that  it  is  a
    stringent test.  Lord Reed's consideration of the domestic position  is
    to be found at paragraphs [44] to [45] of the judgment.   He  confirmed
    that interpreting the expression in the same sense as in the Strasbourg
    case law, leave to remain would not normally be granted in cases  where
    an applicant for leave to remain under the partner route was in the  UK
    in breach of immigration laws, unless the applicant  or  their  partner
    would face very serious difficulties in continuing  their  family  life
    together outside the UK, which could not be overcome  or  would  entail
    very serious hardship.  Lord Reed noted, at  [54]  to  [57],  that  the
    European court has said that, in cases concerned with precarious family
    life, it is "likely" only to be in exceptional circumstances  that  the
    removal of the non-national family member will constitute  a  violation
    of Article 8.


54. I have already found  that  it  would  not  be  unduly  harsh  for  the
    appellant to return to the  IKR  where  he  has  family.   Although  no
    specific reference was made to the background  material  before  me,  I
    have carefully considered the 'Country Information and  Guidance  Iraq:
    Religious minorities' published by the Home Office in August 2016.  The
    section dealing with religious minority groups, at [4.2.1]  to  [4.2.3]
    in particular, provides information about Christians in  Iraq.   It  is
    noted that there has been  a  significant  decline  in  the  number  of
    Christians living in Iraq.  It is noted that     in the wake of the US-
    led invasion, community  members  were  targeted  for  their  religious
    differences as well as their perceived ties to the West, resulting in a
    large exodus of Christians from the country as  refugees.  It  is  said
    that only around 350,000 Christians are still based in Iraq, mostly  in
    Baghdad, Mosul and the Ninewa plain, Kirkuk, Basra as well as the three
    governorates in the Iraqi Kurdish Region.  Insofar as the  position  in
    the IKR is concerned, the report states:


         'Kurdistan Regional Government (KRG)


         7.2.1 The Internal Displacement Monitoring Centre (IDMC)  noted  in
         its June 2015 report that the Kurdistan Region  of  Iraq  (KRI)  is
         historically a haven for religious minorities. The  UNHCR  Position
         Paper on Returns observed that religious minorities were  generally
         admitted to the KRI, despite the increasing access restrictions for
         other groups. The US Commission report observed: 'Since  2014,  the
         semi-autonomous Kurdistan region  and  its  government  (KRG)  have
         played a significant role in providing a safe haven  for  religious
         minority communities fleeing ISIL's advancements and attacks.'.  On
         1 March 2016, the Kurdistan  Regional  Government  (KRG)'s  foreign
         affairs department quoted Izsak-Ndiaye Rita, UN Special  Rapporteur
         on minority issues: "What the  KRG  has  done  for  minorities  and
         different ethnic and religious groups who have fled to this  region
         is very well appreciated and recognized internationally.".'


55. The background material establishes that  although  there  has  been  a
    decline in the number of Christians in Iraq, there remains a  Christian
    community in the IKR.  There is no evidence before me  that  Christians
    in general are persecuted in the IKR for practising their faith and the
    fact that MR is a Christian, is not in itself sufficient for me to find
    that there are insurmountable obstacles  to  family  life  between  the
    appellant and MR continuing outside the UK, in the IKR.


56. Having considered the evidence of MR and even accepting as I  do,  that
    she has a close relationship with her family in the UK, I do not accept
    that there are insurmountable obstacles preventing the appellant and MR
    from continuing their relationships outside the UK.


57. The fact that the appellant is unable to establish  an  entitlement  to
    remain in the UK on Article 8 grounds under Appendix FM  and  paragraph
    276ADE of the Immigration Rules is not  the  end  of  the  matter.   Mr
    Schwenk submits the appellant is an 'Extended family member' of MR, and
    is in a durable relationship with an EEA national.  He submits that  is
    an exceptional circumstance, and a compelling reason for the  grant  of
    leave to remain in the UK on Article 8 grounds.


58. I find that the appellant enjoys family life with MR. I also find  that
    the  decision  to  refuse  the  appellant  leave  to  remain  may  have
    consequences of such gravity as potentially to engage the operation  of
    Article 8.  I accept that the interference is in  accordance  with  the
    law, and that the interference is necessary  to  protect  the  economic
    well-being of the country. The issue in this appeal, as  is  often  the
    case, is whether the interference is proportionate  to  the  legitimate
    public end sought to be achieved.


59. I have  carefully  considered  the  claim  that  the  appellant  is  an
    "extended family member" because he is in a durable  relationship  with
    MR in accordance with the definition of extended family member  in  the
    EEA Regulations.  However,  the  EEA  Regulations  draw  a  distinction
    between the rights of 'family members' and 'extended  family  members'.
    Unlike full family members, who, under Regulation 18(1), have  a  right
    to receive a residence card, extended family members have no such right
    but only an entitlement to require the SSHD to exercise his  discretion
    and, in so doing, the respondent would have to "undertake an  extensive
    examination of the personal  circumstances  of  the  applicant"  before
    issuing such residence card.  Importantly, an  extended  family  member
    can only be issued with a residence card on the basis  of  his  durable
    relationship with an EEA national if the respondent has undertaken  "an
    extensive examination of the personal circumstances of the  applicant".
    That can only happen after an application for a residence card is made.
     The further submissions that were advanced by the  appellant  did  not
    refer to his relationship with MR and, unsurprisingly, the SSHD did not
    consider whether any discretion vested in him should  be  exercised  in
    favour of the appellant  on  the  grounds  that  he  is  in  a  durable
    relationship with an EEA national.  It is not open to the  Tribunal  to
    exercise the discretion conferred on the respondent.  In my  judgement,
    the fact that the appellant may be able to establish that he  is  in  a
    durable relationship, when taken together  with  my  findings  set  out
    previously,  is  not  such  as  to  make  his  removal  from   the   UK
    disproportionate to the legitimate aim.  If he has an entitlement to  a
    residence card under the EEA Regulations, he is entitled to  make  that
    application to the respondent.


60. I remind myself that the appellant's appeal before FtT Judge  MacDonald
    was dismissed on 17th March 2008 and the appellant  had  exhausted  his
    right of appeal by 27th March 2008.  He remained in the United  Kingdom
    unlawfully and his relationship with MR  commenced  and  has  developed
    since 2012.  I accept  that  MR  and  the  appellant  would  prefer  to
    continue their relationship together in the UK.  I can well  understand
    that MR, would, as she states in her statement, not want to go to Iraq,
    but that does not equate to an entitlement to continue the relationship
    in the UK on Article 8 grounds.  In the end, she accepts  that  if  the
    appellant has to leave, she will go with him.  Having considered all of
    the evidence, I conclude that the removal of the appellant from the  UK
    disproportionate to the legitimate aim.


61.  I  therefore  dismiss  the  appeal  on  asylum  grounds,  humanitarian
    protection grounds and also on human rights grounds. (Article 8 of  the
    European Convention on Human Rights).


NOTICE OF DECISION


62. The appellant's appeals on asylum grounds, humanitarian protection  and
    Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights are dismissed.


Signed                                  Date          16th January 2019

       Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia




FEE AWARD


I have dismissed the appeal.  In any event, as no fee is  paid  or  payable,
there can be no fee award.


Signed                                  Date          16th January 2019


    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia
