


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)           Appeal Number: PA/10806/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 21st  September 2018         |On 5th October 2018              |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JM HOLMES


                                   Between

                                    S. A.
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Cleghorn, Counsel, instructed by Aman Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

        1. The Appellant, a citizen of Iraq, entered the United Kingdom  by
           air on 13 May 2017 and claimed asylum  on  the  basis  that  she
           faced a real risk of honour killing at the hands of  members  of
           her family, and, as a single woman would return to Iraq  without
           the support of male family members, and thus face an  Article  3
           risk of harm. The Respondent refused that claim  on  13  October
           2017.
        2. An appeal against this decision to refuse a protection claim was
           heard and dismissed by First Tier  Tribunal  Judge  Hands  in  a
           decision promulgated on 5 December 2017. In the course  of  that
           decision the Judge concluded that the Appellant had not told her
           the truth. She rejected as untrue the claim that  the  Appellant
           was at risk from members of her family, and concluded that  with
           their assistance she could return to Erbil to make a life as the
           educated professional woman she was.
        3. Permission to appeal was refused against the decision  of  Judge
           Hands by Designated Judge McClure on 9 January 2018.
        4. The Appellant renewed her application to the Upper Tribunal, and
           permission was granted by Deputy Upper Tribunal  Judge  McGeachy
           on 5 March 2018 in the following terms;
           Although  this  is  a  detailed  and  carefully   reasoned   ...
           determination I consider that  the  grounds  of  appeal  may  be
           arguable insofar as they assert that the judge may have erred in
           her consideration of the ability of the appellant to  internally
           relocate in Iraq
        5. No Rule 24 Notice has been lodged in response to  the  grant  of
           permission to appeal. Neither party has applied pursuant to Rule
           15(2A) for permission to rely upon further evidence.
        6. Thus the matter came before me.


      The hearing
        7. When the appeal was called on for hearing Ms  Cleghorn  was  not
           disposed to accept that the grant of permission was  limited  to
           only one of the grounds advanced, although in my judgement  that
           was quite plainly the language used by DUTJ McGeachy. However  I
           do accept that  the  complaint  that  the  Judge  erred  in  her
           approach to the issue of internal relocation is a  nonsense,  if
           the Judge's adverse  credibility  findings  stand  unchallenged.
           Thus, either DUTJ McGeachy did not intend to grant permission at
           all, or, he intended a wider grant than his  language  suggests.
           That must follow, because as a former resident of Erbil, if  the
           Appellant faces no risk of harm in Erbil, and is on  good  terms
           with her family, the question of internal relocation simply does
           not arise.
        8. As DJ McClure had noted when refusing permission to appeal,  the
           Appellant had accepted that she had  been  issued  with  both  a
           passport and a CSID, and the Judge concluded that both  were  in
           the possession of her family. Thus  the  Appellant  is  able  to
           obtain whilst in the UK both a passport and CSID from her family
           in Erbil, or, as replacements from the Iraqi  authorities,  with
           the assistance of the family, could return to her  family  fully
           documented in safety, and then pursue  the  medical  career  for
           which she had trained in Erbil.
        9. Two complaints about the credibility findings were raised in the
           grounds (drafted by the Appellant's former Counsel). First  that
           the Judge had failed to  demonstrate  that  she  had  considered
           objective evidence about the prevalence of honour killings, and,
           second that the Judge had denied the Appellant  the  opportunity
           to respond to matters that had been relied upon in reaching  her
           adverse credibility findings.
       10. The first complaint plainly has no merit.  The  Judge's  adverse
           credibility findings  did  not  rely  to  any  degree  upon  the
           incidence  within  the  KRG  of  either  "honour",  or,   gender
           violence. They were well  open  to  her  on  the  evidence,  and
           adequately reasoned. It is also difficult to see  any  merit  in
           the second complaint. Of the fourteen reasons given by the Judge
           for disbelieving  the  Appellant,  criticism  is  made  in  this
           respect of only four. Neither  the  Appellant,  nor  her  former
           Counsel, have offered any evidence to substantiate the assertion
           that these four reasons concerned matters that were never raised
           in the course of the hearing. Moreover  it  is  plain  from  the
           decision that the Judge would  have  reached  exactly  the  same
           overall conclusion that the Appellant was pursuing a  fictitious
           account, had no reference been made to these four reasons.  They
           are plainly very far from being determinative.
       11. It follows that I dismiss the appeal. I  am  satisfied,  and  Ms
           Cleghorn did not seek to persuade me otherwise, that  the  other
           two complaints raised in the grounds simply fall away as without
           substance. The Judge's decision is consistent with  the  current
           country guidance to be found in  AAH  (Iraqi  Kurds  -  internal
           relocation) Iraq CG [2018] UKUT 212 and AA  (Iraq)  [2017]  EWCA
           Civ 944 and BA (Returns to Baghdad) Iraq CG [2017] UKUT  18.  As
           the Judge found, the Appellant did not  rely  upon  any  "family
           life" formed in the UK, and the evidence did not  establish  any
           "private life" had been created of any  consequence,  sufficient
           to engage Article 8  [58].  Even  if  it  did,  it  was  plainly
           proportionate to remove  the  Appellant  in  the  light  of  the
           relevant public interest in  doing  so,  in  the  light  of  the
           adverse credibility findings because she would be returning to a
           professional career and her family in Erbil.





   DECISION


   The Determination of the First Tier Tribunal which was promulgated on  5
   December 2017 contained  no  error  of  law  in  the  dismissal  of  the
   Appellant's appeal which requires that decision  to  be  set  aside  and
   remade, and it is accordingly confirmed.





Direction regarding anonymity - Rule 14 Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008
      Unless and until the Tribunal  directs  otherwise  the  Appellant  is
        granted anonymity throughout these proceedings. No report of  these
        proceedings  shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  him.   This
        direction applies both to the  Appellant  and  to  the  Respondent.
        Failure to comply with this direction  could  lead  to  proceedings
        being brought for contempt of court.


   Signed

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes

Dated 21 September 2018

