
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10198/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Employment Centre        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 27 February 2018                          | On 24 April 2018             |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McCARTHY


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     Z T
                         (anonymity order continued)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms H Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M Moksut, instructed by International Immigration
                    Advisory Services


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is the Secretary of State for the Home  Department.   She
    was the respondent in the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The appellant appeals with permission to the Upper Tribunal against the
    decision and reasons statement of First-tier Tribunal Judge  M  A  Hall
    that was promulgated on 20 March 2017.

 3. The appellant challenges only one part of Judge Hall's  decision.   The
    appellant disagrees that the fact the  respondent's  eldest  child  was
    preparing for GCSE exams in the summer of 2017 was a compelling  factor
    that required a short period  of  leave  to  be  granted.   Judge  Hall
    indicated that once the exams had been taken, it would be reasonable to
    expect the respondent and her children to return to Nigeria.

 4. There is no challenge by the appellant to the other  findings  made  by
    Judge Hall.  Judge Hall decided the respondent was  not  a  refugee  or
    otherwise  in  need  of  international  protection.   By  analogy,  the
    respondent's claim under article 3 ECHR failed.

 5. Judge Hall decided the respondent enjoyed family life  with  her  three
    children  in  the  UK.   All  were  overstayers.   At   the   date   of
    promulgation, the children had been living in the UK for six years  and
    four months.  Judge Hall found the respondent could  not  benefit  from
    any provision of the immigration rules.  This meant  there  was  public
    interest in her expulsion with her children because it was necessary to
    maintain effective immigration controls.  Judge Hall also found none of
    the children was a qualifying child and therefore  the  respondent  did
    not benefit from s.117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum
    Act 2002.

 6. Having heard from Ms Aboni and Mr Moksut, I concluded that  Judge  Hall
    erred in finding that the pending GCSE exams was  a  compelling  factor
    that outweighed the public interest.  I reach this  conclusion  because
    there is no indication in the decision and reasons statement that Judge
    Hall had in mind the following factors, although  he  was  required  to
    take them into consideration.

      i) The child was being educated at public expense, meaning it  was  in
         the public interest to expel her because  her  presence  undermined
         the economic wellbeing of the UK.

     ii) The child had  no  right  to  be  educated  in  the  UK,  being  an
         overstayer.  Education is  part  of  a  person's  private  life  as
         clearly expressed by Lord Carnworth in Patel & Ors v  Secretary  of
         State for the Home Department [2013] UKSC 72, [2014] Imm AR 456.

    iii) Sections 117B(4) and (5) specify that little weight must  be  given
         to a person's private life established when the person was  in  the
         UK unlawfully or whilst the person's status was  precarious.   This
         applied not only to the respondent, but  to  her  eldest  child  as
         well.

 7. By not considering these factors, I find Judge Hall failed to  properly
    balance the public interest factors with  the  best  interests  of  the
    child in question and therefore  with  the  respondent  and  her  other
    children.

 8. I am fortified in this conclusion by  the  fact  Judge  Hall  does  not
    explain why it was necessary for the child to  take  the  exams  before
    leaving the UK.  Judge Hall clearly had in mind that the child's future
    would be in Nigeria.  There was no evidence from  the  respondent  that
    her oldest child would not be able to enrol as  an  external  candidate
    for the same exams; or to take similar exams in  Nigeria,  or  postpone
    them.  There was no evidence the child would suffer any detriment  from
    such actions.  It was for the respondent to provide such  evidence  and
    she did not.  To this extent, the best  interests'  assessment  carried
    out by Judge Hall was incomplete.

 9. It follows from the above that I set aside the erroneous conclusion.

10. I indicated to the representatives that this was a case where it  would
    not be appropriate to remit to the  First-tier  Tribunal.   I  reminded
    them that directions had been issued on 8 September 2017,  paragraph  4
    of which reminded the parties that it was presumed that  the  re-making
    of the decision would take place at the same  hearing.   The  remaining
    directions addressed the submission of further evidence.

11. Mr Moksut advised that the respondent  had  not  provided  any  further
    evidence in support of her own or her children's situations.  Mr Moksut
    suggested the respondent had only  recently  been  represented  in  the
    case, not having had legal representation at the hearing  before  Judge
    Hall.  I realise Mr Moksut was instructed as an agent and may not  have
    been aware that the respondent has had  access  to  legal  advice  from
    International Immigration Advisory Services throughout  all  stages  of
    her appeal.  It was her choice  not  to  have  a  legal  representative
    present at the earlier appeal hearing, as confirmed  in  correspondence
    to the First-tier Tribunal.  Given the directions issued and the  legal
    advice available, there is no reasonable explanation for the failure to
    submit further evidence.

12. Mr Moksut pointed out that at the date of hearing in the Upper Tribunal
    the children had all resided in the UK for  over  seven  years.   I  am
    aware that I must have regard to the fact they are qualifying  children
    for the purposes of s.117B(6).  Mr Moksut said he had up  dated  school
    reports for the children.  I declined to admit them because  they  were
    not submitted in accordance with directions.  I also pointed  out  that
    they would add nothing  material  to  the  case  because  none  of  the
    children has a right to be  educated  at  public  expense  in  the  UK,
    remembering the issues I have already identified and discussed above.

13. Mr Moksut had no explanation why the appellant had not left the UK with
    her children after her eldest child  completed  her  GCSE  exams.   The
    respondent was present at the hearing.  I can only  conclude  that  the
    respondent is not willing to  cooperate  with  the  legitimate  aim  of
    immigration control.  I also infer from the submissions made  that  the
    respondent may think she automatically derives a benefit from s.117B(6)
    now her children have lived in the UK for over seven years.  If that is
    her belief, or the advice she has been given,  then  she  is  mistaken.
    The law requires me to consider whether it is reasonable to expect  the
    children to leave the UK.  Only if I  find  it  is  not  reasonable  to
    expect them to leave will the respondnt draw a benefit.

14. To answer this question, I must follow the guidance given by the  Court
    of Appeal in R (MA (Pakistan) & Ors) v Secretary of State for the  Home
    Department & Anor [2016] EWCA Civ 705, [2017] Imm AR 53.   In  summary,
    the question of reasonableness is not limited to the best interests  of
    the  children  but  requires  me  to  consider  the  entirety  of   the
    circumstances.

15. It is evident from Judge Hall's decision (and  the  findings  on  these
    issues are unchallenged) that there is significant public  interest  in
    expelling the respondent and her children.  Nothing has  changed  other
    than the passage of time.  The only factor that has in fact changed  is
    that the eldest child has taken her exams.  Judge  Hall,  at  paragraph
    86, found that it would be  appropriate  for  the  respondent  and  her
    children to return to Nigeria.

16. I have no evidence to suggest that assessment is no  longer  valid.   I
    conclude that on all the available evidence it is reasonable to  expect
    the qualifying children to leave the  UK.   Therefore,  the  respondent
    draws no benefit from s.117B(6).

17. It follows that I substitute a decision to dismiss the  appeal  against
    the decision to refuse  a  protection  and  human  rights  claim.   The
    decision is not unlawful under s.6 of the Human Rights Act 1998.

Notice of Decision

NB The respondent is ZT, who was the appellant in the First-tier Tribunal.

There is no legal error in First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Hall's  decision  in
relation to the protection claim.  His decision to dismiss that part of  the
respondent's case is upheld.

There is legal  error  in  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Hall's  decision  in
relation to the article 8 ECHR rights of the respondent  and  her  children.
That decision is set aside.

I remake the decision in relation to the article 8 rights of the  respondent
and her children and substitute "dismissed" for the outcome of that part  of
the respondent's appeal in the First-tier Tribunal.


Signed                              Date         28 February 2018

Judge McCarthy
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


Order regarding anonymity

I make the following order.  I prohibit the  parties  or  any  other  person
from disclosing or publishing any matter  likely  to  lead  members  of  the
public to identify the respondent or her children.  The  respondent  can  be
referred to as "ZT".


Signed                              Date         28 February 2018

Judge McCarthy
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
