
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10978/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 28 February 2019                           |On 22 March 2019              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN


                                   Between

                                    m h a
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Short, Counsel instructed by Elder Rahimi
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Pal, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 12 February 1988 whose
    application for asylum was refused by the respondent on 16 August 2018.
     The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal where his appeal was
    heard by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Meah.  In a decision
    promulgated on 25 October 2018 the judge dismissed the appeal.  The
    appellant is now appealing against that decision.

 2. The appellant claims to be from a strict fundamentalist Muslim family.
    He claims that after entering the UK in 2012 (as a foreign student) he
    became disillusioned with Islam and developed an interest in atheism
    and communism, after being introduced to these ideas by his landlord.
    He claims that his family were informed by his friend (who showed them
    a photograph of him in prostration to a statue of Karl Marx) that he
    has turned away from Islam.  He says that he is at risk from his
    family, the police and Jamaat-e-Islami in Pakistan.

 3. The appellant claims that his maternal grandfather's and sister's home
    was raided in Pakistan when the authorities searched for him in 2013
    after his apostasy was revealed.

Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 4. The judge did not accept the appellant's claim to have embraced atheism
    and communism and to be at risk on return as a consequence.

 5. The judge gave several reasons for not finding the appellant's claim
    credible.  These include:

    (a)  The judge did not accept that in 2013 the authorities searched for
         the appellant as there was no arrest warrant or other corroborating
         evidence to support that it occurred.  The judge stated at
         paragraph 16 that:-

             "Whilst I am fully aware that I do not require such
             corroborative evidence, I have severe doubts about the overall
             credibility of this appellant hence I cannot afford him the
             benefit of doubt in this regard."

    (b)  The judge found the appellant's claim that he remains in regular
         contact with his sister despite her having threatened to kill him
         as lacking plausibility.  The judge noted that the appellant
         claimed to speak frequently to his sister about general welfare and
         wellbeing.  The judge stated that this indicates that he has a
         relationship with his sister that is inconsistent with the claim
         that she has threatened to kill him.

    (c)  The judge found damaging to the appellant's credibility that there
         was no witness statement from his sister confirming his claim about
         the 2013 raid on her home, given that they appear to have a
         'perfectly normal sibling relationship'.

    (d)  The judge found damaging to the appellant's credibility his claim
         that his sister tries to persuade him to return to Islam when, if
         she genuinely believed he was an apostate from Islam, she would
         have shunned him.

    (e)  The judge found that the appellant had been inconsistent about the
         photographs of him in prostration to a statue of Karl Marx.  The
         judge stated that the appellant had originally claimed that his
         friend had taken the pictures but later stated that his friend
         downloaded them from his Facebook profile.

    (f)  The judge also found damaging to the appellant's credibility that
         no evidence was adduced to support his claim to have a Facebook
         profile with pictures and posts that show his atheism.  The judge
         considered it unlikely that the appellant would have posted
         pictures on Facebook which would have been highly offensive to his
         family members, given the likelihood that they would have seen it.



    (g)  The judge considered the provocative picture of him in prostration
         before a statue of Karl Marx to be "a very strong indication that
         he has made all of this up and that it is nothing more than a
         fabrication to secure regularised status in the UK".  The judge
         also found that the photographs of the appellant in prostration
         before a statue of Karl Marx do not show his face and therefore
         could be of any person.

    (h)  The judge also found damaging to the appellant's credibility that
         he entered the UK as a student but did not in fact engage in any
         studies and instead worked; and that he sought to project the image
         that he was a student when this was not in fact the case.

    (i)  The judge found the appellant's claim to have attended two
         communist meetings whilst in the UK to be contradicted by the
         evidence of his friend, Dr Tariq, who stated that he had attended
         four or five meetings.

    (j)  The judge described the evidence of the appellant's friend, Dr
         Tariq, as problematic.  The judge stated that Dr Tariq claimed to
         be a medical doctor when in fact he is a secretary at a GP
         practice.

 6. At the hearing the appellant sought to rely on tweets from his Twitter
    accounts which were said to be critical of Islam and offensive to the
    authorities in Pakistan.  The judge directed that the appellant should
    provide evidence of the tweets within 24 hours of the hearing if he
    wished to rely upon them.  In respect of the tweets the judge stated at
    paragraph 33:-

         "There is no evidence of the appellant's tweets (evidence of which
         was not provided within 24 hours of the hearing despite my stating
         that I would allow for this to be submitted in this time
         immediately after the hearing) have been seen or exposed to anyone
         in Pakistan, hence I do not find that this creates a risk for the
         appellant.  Furthermore, the overall evidence presented to me is
         highly suggestive that the appellant is in fact still a Muslim who
         is feigning transition to atheism/communism hence I do not find
         that the tweets in themselves, if they do exist, will create any
         risk for him upon return."

Grounds of Appeal and Submissions

 7. The grounds of appeal argue that the judge failed to provide sufficient
    or sustainable reasons for the adverse credibility findings.  It is
    argued that the judge erred by:

    (a)  Failing to give reasons for rejecting the appellant's claim that
         the family home in Pakistan was raided in 2013.

    (b)  Placing undue weight on the absence of corroboration of the 2013
         raid on the family home.

    (c)  Failing to recognise that it is plausible that the appellant has a
         complicated relationship with his sister where they would maintain
         regular contact despite her threatening to kill him on account of
         his apostasy.

    (d)  Failing to recognise that the absence of a statement from the
         appellant's sister can be explained by the ambivalence of their
         relationship.

 8. The grounds also argue that the judge erred by holding against the
    appellant that there was no evidence of the photographs of him in
    prostration before the grave of Karl Marx being posted on Facebook when
    that issue was not raised by either the judge or the respondent.

 9. The grounds also contend that the judge failed to recognise that the
    appellant is easily identifiable from the photographs of him in
    prostration before the statue of Karl Marx.

10. It is also contended in the grounds that the judge erred by failing to
    consider the evidence of the appellant engaging in personal study in
    the UK and being a member of the Marx Memorial Library & Workers'
    School.

11. The grounds also submit that the claimed discrepancy between the
    appellant and his witness, Dr Tariq, as to attendance at Socialist
    Worker & Community Party meetings was a result of them having a
    different interpretation of what constitutes a meeting.  The grounds
    also contend that the discrepancy is only slight and is not sufficient
    to justify dismissal of the claim.

12. A further submission made in the grounds is that the judge erred by
    failing to have regard to the tweets by the appellant concerning
    atheism and Islam which, according to the grounds, would be considered
    blasphemous by the regime in Pakistan.  The grounds contend that the
    'tweets' were sent by courier to Taylor House on 17 October 2018,
    arriving within the 24 hour time limit imposed by the judge and that
    they constitute compelling corroborative evidence.

13. At the start of the error of law hearing Ms Short provided me with a
    copy of a fax to Field House dated the day of the hearing (28 February
    2019).  The fax enclosed an e-mail from a receptionist dated 17 October
    2018 to a solicitor at Elder Rahimi Solicitors, saying that a bundle
    for the appellant has been ordered to be sent by courier, as well as
    eleven pages of what appear to be tweets either written by or forwarded
    to others by the appellant.  I asked Ms Short to highlight the tweets
    which would, in her view, result in the appellant being at risk in
    Pakistan.  She identified a tweet which is offensive, inflammatory and
    would no doubt be considered blasphemous.  This tweet was sent shortly
    after the First-tier Tribunal hearing.  However, there are no tweets
    from before the date of the First-tier Tribunal in which criticism of
    Mohammad was made or in which inflammatory language was used.  Ms Short
    identified a tweet on 27 May 2018 stating that "Lighthouses are more
    useful than churches, mosques and temples" and a tweet on 20 May
    stating that "Science will admit when its wrong, while religion will
    kill to prove its right".   There is also a tweet showing a picture of
    a t-shirt with a list of religions and atheism on the front where a box
    next to "Atheist" has been ticked.

14. In her submissions, Ms Short argued that the judge repeatedly erred in
    the assessment of the appellant's credibility and failed to take into
    account tweets are plainly blasphemous.

15. She also argued that the only reason the judge did not accept the
    appellant's evidence as to the raid on his family home in 2013 was a
    lack of corroboration, which was not a sufficient reason.

16. She also maintained that the appellant's relationship with his sister
    is not implausible as siblings can love each other despite significant
    differences and a strained relationship.  She also argued that the
    judge's analysis of the relationship between the appellant and his
    sister contained pure speculation that was never put to the appellant
    and it is simply not the case that their relationship is intrinsically
    implausible.

17. A further point made by Ms Short was that the appellant's sister sent
    an e-mail on 8 October 2018 in support of the appellant that was not
    considered by the judge. I could not locate this email in the bundle
    that was before the First-tier Tribunal (which is dated 11 October
    2018) or in the Tribunal's file; and Ms Short did not have a copy,
    other than an electronic version on her phone. As this email was not
    before the First-tier Tribunal, an application would need to be made
    for it to be admitted. No such application was, or has been, made. In
    any event, as the email was not before the First-tier Tribunal, I do
    not see how any error can arise from the failure to consider it.

18. Ms Short argued that the judge was incorrect to state that the
    appellant's face could not be seen in the photograph of him prostrating
    before Karl Mark's grave.  She argued that the respondent had accepted
    that it was the appellant in that photo and submitted that he was
    easily identifiable.

19. As to the absence of evidence concerning the appellant's presence on
    Facebook, Ms Short contended that this had not been put to the
    appellant at the hearing.  She also argued that there was no meaningful
    discrepancy between the witnesses as to attendances at Socialist Worker
    and Communist Party meetings, given that the appellant's witness took a
    wider view of what a meeting involved.

20. Ms Pal's response was that the judge's credibility findings were
    supported by sufficient reasoning and the judge was entitled, for the
    reasons he gave, to reject the appellant's account as not credible.

21. With respect to the tweets, Ms Pal did not accept that there was
    evidence that these had been submitted to the Tribunal within 24 hours
    as required by the judge as there was no record from a courier company.
     As to their substance, Ms Pal thought that they were self-serving and
    argued that any risk could be obviated by deleting them.  She also
    noted that the only tweet that mocked Islam was sent after the hearing.



22. Ms Short maintained that the appellant's tweets were relevant for three
    reasons.  Firstly, they affect the appellant's risk profile, as even
    those that may appear benign would put him at risk because they show
    his interest in and adherence to atheism.  Secondly, they indicate his
    atheism is genuine because he has been tweeting about atheism for five
    months.  Thirdly, the tweets would become available to the authorities
    or vigilantes.


Analysis

23. The appellant's claim can be summarised as:

    (a)  He would be at risk in Pakistan because he is a genuine atheist
         and apostate from Islam who should not be expected to hide his
         beliefs; and


    (b)  Even if his atheism is not genuine, he will be at risk in Pakistan
         because the authorities may see tweets by him, and images of him,
         which are blasphemous.


24. The judge gave numerous reasons for rejecting the appellant's claim to
    have become an atheist.  He found parts of the appellant's account
    inconsistent (such as the discrepancy between saying his friend
    downloaded photographs of him from Facebook and saying that his friend
    took the photographs).  He found other parts of the appellant's account
    as lacking in plausibility (for example, the appellant's claim that he
    had essentially normal relations with his sister despite her threat to
    kill him).  And he found the appellant to be vague and ambivalent in
    response to cross-examination.  The judge also found the evidence of Mr
    Tariq - a man who, according to the appellant's account, played a
    critical part in his transition to atheism - to be problematic and
    unimpressive.  Taken together, the judge's reasons are sufficient to
    explain why he reached the conclusion that the appellant is not a
    genuine apostate or atheist.  The appellant's "reasons" challenge to
    the decision cannot stand.

25. I accept that the appellant has tweeted a blasphemous tweet about Islam
    (although this was done after the hearing) and that his identity is
    discernible in a photograph of him prostrating before a statue of Karl
    Marx.  However, the judge was entitled to find that the appellant would
    not be at risk because of this. There was no evidence before the First-
    tier Tribunal to show that there was a reasonable degree of likelihood
    that the appellant's tweets have been seen (or would in the future be
    seen) by the authorities in Pakistan.  Nor was there evidence to show
    (to the lower standard of proof) that a Facebook account with
    photographs offensive to Islam had been (or would in the future be)
    seen by the authorities in Pakistan.

26. In any event, there is nothing preventing the appellant from deleting
    the tweets and removing the offensive photographs. Although, no doubt,
    the technology exists for the authorities in Pakistan to see what the
    appellant has posted in the past on social media even if it is later
    deleted, there was no evidence before the First-tier Tribunal to
    indicate that the authorities would, upon the appellant returning to
    Pakistan, search his social media accounts, let alone that they would
    investigate whether he had previously posted offensive material that
    had since been removed.  A genuine atheist cannot be expected to hide
    (or be discrete about) his atheism, or expected to remove blasphemous
    tweets and photographs that reflect his beliefs in order to reduce the
    risk he would face in the country of return.  However, in this case the
    appellant was found to not be a genuine atheist or apostate and his
    tweets and photographs were found to not reflect his genuine beliefs.
    It is therefore reasonable (and not contrary to the Refugee Convention)
    for the appellant to be expected to remove these tweets and photographs
    in order to avoid potential risk in Pakistan.

27. I am satisfied, for the reasons set out above, that the judge was
    entitled to find that (a) the appellant is not a genuine atheist or
    apostate; and (b) he will not face a risk of persecution because he has
    posted tweets and images that are offensive to Islam. The appeal is
    therefore dismissed.


Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed and the decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the appellant is
granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
indirectly identify him or any member of their family.  This direction
applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.  Failure to comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


|Signed                                  |  |   |                             |
|                                        |  |   |                             |
|                                        |  |   |                             |
|Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan    |  |   |Dated:  20 March 2019        |

