
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10683/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford (via skype)        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On19 March 2021                      |On 01 April 2021                     |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                     GMK
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Khan instructed by Legal Justice Solicitors.

For the Respondent:    Mrs Pettersen Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS


    1. The appellant is a citizen  of  Iraq  born  on  5  March  1996  whose
       application  for  international  protection  was  rejected   by   the
       Secretary of State and whose appeal against that  decision  dismissed
       by a judge of the First-tier Tribunal in a decision promulgated on 24
       December 2019.
    2. Permission to appeal was  granted  by  another  judge  of  the  Upper
       Tribunal on a renewed application on the 2 March 2020 and the  First-
       tier Tribunal judge found to have made an error of law in a  decision
       of Upper Tribunal Judge  Coker  promulgated  on  3  July  2020.   The
       operative part of that decision is in the following terms:

           Error of law


           8.     The FtT  judge  does  not  reject  the  evidence  of  the
                appellant that he is no longer in possession  of  his  CSID;
                nor does he provide any explanation on what  basis  for  how
                long, temporary absence of contact  with  his  family  would
                assist or not assist in obtaining replacement documents.


           9.     The judge is required to take a decision at the  date  of
                the hearing. As of the date of the hearing  the  appellant's
                evidence was that he was not in contact with his family  and
                he did not have his  CSID.  It  is  on  the  basis  of  that
                evidence, the judge should have reached a decision. Firstly,
                whether the appellant had a CSID and secondly whether he was
                in contact with his family. Having made those findings,  the
                judge should have reached a decision whether  the  appellant
                was at risk of being persecuted.


           10.    The judge failed to make relevant findings. He  erred  in
                law, such that the decision is set aside to be remade.


           Conclusions:


           The making of  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did
           involve the making of an error on a point of law.


           I set aside the decision insofar as it relates to his  CSID  and
           thus risk on return.


Discussion

    3. An issue  arose  in  this  appeal  in  relation  to  the  appellant's
       documentation. Judge Dunne in the First-tier Tribunal referred to the
       appellant's ID card. At [34] of that earlier decision it  is  written
       "The appellant brought an Iraqi ID card with him to the UK.  That  ID
       card was on his account taken from him  when  he  was  detained.  The
       appellant's solicitors wrote to the respondent seeking the return  of
       that ID card on 27 November 2019. As of the date of the  hearing  (10
       December) they had not received a response, but I am not persuaded to
       assume that the appellant's ID card has been permanently lost on that
       basis alone.".
    4. In the appellants further submissions, made in response to directions
       given by the Upper Tribunal following  the  grant  of  permission  to
       appeal, it is written:

           4.     Judge McWilliam further states the Appellant was confused
                in that  the  grounds  referred  to  CSID  but  Judge  Dunne
                referred to ID documents. It is respectfully submitted  that
                there is no confusion in the grounds when considered in  the
                context of this case. The only ID  documents  the  Appellant
                has ever referred to were his CSID. Judge Dunne reduced  the
                reference to these documents as  ID  documents.  The  ground
                simply used the full title of CSID as  set  out  in  country
                guidance cases.

    5. In his more recent witness  statement  dated  16  December  2020  the
       appellant refers to  his  having  obtained  a  CSID  and  Nationality
       Certificate from a young  age  and,  at  the  age  of  18,  an  Iraqi
       passport. The appellant stated in his screening interview that he had
       lost his passport at sea during his journey to the UK and at [5 -  7]
       of his latest statement writes:

           5.     Approximately 2016 in Autumn,  my  CSID  and  Nationality
                Certificate were replaced with an  INID.  My  father  called
                while I was at work, he told me  to  join  the  rest  of  my
                family to apply for an INID. It was a big hall and my father
                told me to sit with Mother  and  sister.  We  were  given  a
                number, and when our number was called my parents  went  in,
                then after my sister and I  went  in.  We  were  given  some
                sanitiser to use on our hands and we placed our  hand  in  a
                series of different ways on glass screen. I  was  then  told
                look ahead at  camera;  I  was  told  to  look  at  it  very
                carefully as it is going to read the eye  print.  They  then
                asked me to sign, which was to be placed  on  my  ID.  After
                this I went back to work, the INID were  issued,  later  and
                father collected them from the office.


           6.     Following the Home Office decision to  refuse  my  asylum
                claim, I attended the Iraqi Consulate in Manchester on the 5
                November 2019. I was told they cannot issue any  replacement
                ID  documents  without  the  original  or  photocopies.  The
                consulate told  me  that  they  cannot  provide  me  with  a
                replacement INID as they cannot be issued outside of Iraq.


           7.     Upon being detained on the second occasion in 2018, I was
                stripped of my belongings. They took my ARC, INID, my wallet
                and mobile &  charger.  Upon  my  release  I  was  given  an
                envelope with my belongings back. I was elated  that  I  was
                being  returned  to  Huddersfield  that  I  signed   without
                checking the envelope contents. It  was  only  afterwards  I
                noticed that my INID was not included.

    6. Copy emails have also been provided, dated 3 July 2020, sent  by  the
       appellant's representative to Yarlswood Detention Centre,  confirming
       the  appellant  was  detained  there  and  seeking  a  list  of   his
       possessions that were checked in when he was  detained,  and  stating
       that his ID document was not  returned.  The  reply  from  Yarlswood,
       dated 3 July 2020, records  the  appellant  being  at  Yarlswood  IRC
       between 30 August 2017 and  31  August  2017,  during  which  time  a
       screening interview was conducted by the Midland Intake  Unit  (MIU).
       An email from the MIU, also dated 3 July 2020, states that whilst the
       appellant was at Yarlswood certain listed documents were  taken  from
       him but there was no recorded ID document. Enquiries to date have not
       produce any evidence that the Secretary of State is in possession  of
       an INID taken from the appellant.
    7. Ms Khan in her submissions referred to the fact  that  the  appellant
       did have items removed from him when he was detained,  which  is  not
       disputed and accords with normal practice, and that it was  plausible
       that he would have an INID which the country  information  refers  to
       being rolled out by the authorities  in  Iraq  from  2016  and  which
       replaced the CSID. This too is not disputed. It is also noted that in
       the appellant's witness statement of 25 November 2019,  prepared  for
       the  hearing  before   the   First-tier   Tribunal,   the   appellant
       specifically stated at [14] "In response to paragraph 60 of the  Home
       Office refusal letter, I would like to explain that  I  do  not  have
       CSID any more as both CSID and National Certificate was replaced with
       a National ID. I have  tried  to  apply  for  National  ID  and/or  a
       passport in the Iraqi Consulate in Manchester. However, they are  not
       able to issue me  anything  as  I  did  not  have  any  documents  or
       photocopies". It appears therefore that what Judge Dunne referred  to
       as 'ID document' is not a reference to a CSID  as  suggested  in  the
       submissions, but to  the  INID  that  the  appellant  stated  in  his
       evidence he had obtained. The reference in the  grant  of  permission
       and Judge Coker's error of law finding to a CSID  must  therefore  be
       treated as being inaccurate.
    8. The appellant has been consistent in relation to his  claim  to  have
       been issued with an INID in Iraq,  and  clearly  made  an  effort  to
       secure that document by contacting his family and  having  them  send
       the same to him in the United Kingdom. The appellant  has  also  been
       consistent throughout in relation to his claim that the document  was
       in his possession when he was detained by the Immigration Service  in
       the UK and not returned to him. Despite this being an issue known  to
       the respondent for some time, and despite a previous listing of  this
       appeal before me at Bradford on the  23  December  2020  having  been
       adjourned to  enable  further  enquiries  to  be  made,  insufficient
       evidence has been provided to warrant a finding that the  appellant's
       account in relation to this document is not credible.
    9. This is a case in which the loss of original documents could  have  a
       bearing on credibility findings as the loss of the INID prevents  the
       appellant from producing the  same,  although  if  he  did  it  would
       undermine his claim that he is undocumented. The appellant  could  do
       no more in relation  to  the  documents  as  he  does  not  have  the
       original. The appellant is therefore entitled to the benefit  of  the
       doubt on this issue.
   10. It was also not explored  in  evidence  whether  as  the  appellant's
       family had sent his original INID by international posts  to  him  in
       the UK they would not have kept a copy, which appears a sensible  and
       logical thing to have done. The emails referred to  above  have  also
       been sent to the stated recipients with  no  evidence  of  whether  a
       formal document such as an INID would have been passed to them or  to
       another department within the Home Office, such as that which retains
       official identity documents pending  removal.  At  the  time  of  the
       appellants detention the respondent was intending to remove him  from
       the UK for which  a  valid  identity  document  would  have  been  of
       assistance to the removal team.
   11. The nature of the document held by the appellant is  of  considerable
       importance as the Iraq CPIN June 2020, Annex I: Information  obtained
       from the Home Office's Returns Logistics Department - April 2020,  it
       is written:

           CSID cards are being phased  out  and  replaced  by  INID  (Iraq
           National Identification) cards. It is not currently possible  to
           apply for an INID card outside of Iraq. As a result,  the  Iraqi
           embassy in London are advising their  nationals  in  the  UK  to
           apply instead for a 'Registration Document  (1957)'  which  they
           can use to apply for other documents such  as  passports  or  an
           INID card once they have returned to Iraq.


           The registration document (1957) must  be  applied  for  on  the
           applicant's behalf by a nominated  representative  in  Iraq.  In
           order  to  start  the  application,  the  individual   requiring
           documentation would normally provide at  least  one  copy  of  a
           national identity document (see above list Q1, FAS) and complete
           a power of attorney (to nominate a representative  in  Iraq)  at
           the Iraqi embassy along  with  the  embassy  issued  application
           forms. If they have no copies of identity  documents  they  also
           would need to complete a British power of attorney validated  by
           the FCO and provide parents names, place and date  of  birth  to
           their nominated representative in Iraq.


           Once  issued  the  nominated  representative   will   send   the
           registration document (1957) to the applicant  in  the  UK.  The
           process takes 1-2 months.


           The HO cannot apply for documentation other than Laissez Passers
           on someone's behalf but the embassy is willing to check  to  see
           if the individual already holds documents and provide copies  if
           necessary.

   12. Despite the evidence relating to the registration document  1957  and
       provision of copies of documents already held  being  available,  the
       appellant has failed to  provide  anything  of  substance  addressing
       these issues and the impact of the same upon his claim.
   13. In her submissions Ms Khan stated that the emphasis by the respondent
       on the ability of the appellant to trace family members is irrelevant
       so far as it relates to the ability of the  appellant  to  obtain  an
       INID as such a document cannot be obtained by a  person  unless  they
       are in Iraq, according to the country material.
   14. It is accepted an Iraqi national will be unable  to  obtain  a  first
       INID if they are outside Iraq at this time due to the requirement  to
       provide biometric data, as confirmed by  the  appellant,  with  there
       being no established procedure for such to be taken in overseas Iraqi
       embassies or consulates. What is not clear is whether,  if  a  person
       has already provided their biometric information and been issued with
       an INID, as this appellant has, that will fall within  the  group  of
       documents already held by  an  appellant,  copies  of  which  can  be
       provided to a relevant recipient on application by the Home Office as
       part of the laissez passer application as indicated  in  the  country
       material referred to above.
   15. The ability to trace family members may also be relevant in light  of
       the requirements to obtain a registration document (1957),  which  is
       accepted in the country material is an official recognised  document,
       and which an individual can use to apply for other documents, such as
       a passport or replacement INID card once they have returned to  Iraq.
       Nothing in the evidence provided by the appellant supports a  finding
       to the contrary.
   16. In relation to the criticism of Judge Dunne in the grounds of  appeal
       on the basis the judge was somehow restricted to only considering the
       factual matrix at the date of the appeal hearing as if this created a
       time specific ring fenced body of evidence  requiring  the  Judge  to
       have considered the hypothetical question of what would happen to the
       appellant if he was returned to Iraq  on  the  date  of  the  hearing
       without more, at which point he claims to have no  contact  with  his
       family which it is suggested he did not need to show was a  permanent
       state of affairs,  the Court of Appeal in J1 v Secretary of State for
       the Home Department [2013] EWCA Civ  279  at  [42]  found  "Decisions
       concerning asylum, risk on return to  deportees  and  similar  issues
       involve an evaluation of likely future events on the basis of present
       evidence. Such decisions will not always turn out to be correct. They
       represent the best that the court can do on the basis of the material
       presented to  it.  Because  of  the  drastic  consequences  if  those
       judicial decisions turn out to be wrong, both  tribunals  and  courts
       adopt  a  cautious  approach  to  the  evidence.  This  approach  has
       sometimes been described as "anxious scrutiny"." The required  degree
       of anxious scrutiny has been adopted in assessing the merits of  this
       appeal. There is nothing arguably unfair,  irrational,  or  unlawful,
       even if an individual claims at the date of the hearing  to  have  no
       contact with family members for a judge to assess whether that  is  a
       credible claim, something that is likely to be permanent or long term
       as a result of an inability to trace family members, or whether it is
       a claim relied upon to enhance  an  assertion  an  individual  cannot
       redocument themselves. All those issues fall within the  'undertaking
       evaluation of likely future events'. It is not legal error so to do.
   17. It is not disputed that to obtain a registration  document  1957  the
       appellant will need the assistance of family  members  in  Iraq.  The
       appellant claims he has tried to contact his family but  been  unable
       to do so, stating specifically in his more recent witness statement:

           8.     I wish to explain that I have no contact with my  family.
                I was informed that my appeal that was dismissed in  January
                2020. I was informed by my legal representatives  that  they
                will be seeking permission to appeal and that it could  take
                some time to receive a  decision.  My  legal  representative
                applied to the First Tier Tribunal for permission, this  was
                eventually refused and therefore they applied to  the  Upper
                Tribunal for permission, which was granted in March 2020.  I
                intended to contact the Red  Cross  to  see  if  they  could
                locate my family, but in May 2020 I contracted  coronavirus.
                My GP was not taking any appointments, I called the helpline
                who ran through the symptom list and determined  I  had  the
                virus, I must isolate. I had no sense  of  smell  or  taste.
                After eventually recovering from the virus, I  was  informed
                that my legal representative was placed on furlough for  six
                months, so I was unable to seek the correct advice with  how
                to proceed with appeal and whether my appeal was going ahead
                due to the virus.

   18. Whilst it is understandable that the appellant will have be unable to
       venture out of his property if he was isolating this  does  not  made
       out that  other  means  of  communication  which  the  appellant  had
       previously employed would not be  available  to  him.  The  appellant
       specifically contacted his family in Iraq to send him his INID and in
       his screening interview he specifically confirmed  he  was  still  in
       contact with his family and that he had last spoken to them  at  that
       time 25 days prior to the date of the interview.
   19. The appellant was asked whether his family had been harmed in any way
       which he stated initially they had by the family he fears continually
       telling them that he cannot hide forever and  that  they  would  find
       him. Despite this the  lines  of  contact  with  family  are  clearly
       established, not only by the appellant's own evidence  but  also  the
       sending of the identity card to him.  Whilst Ms Khan  submitted  that
       due to the evidence confirming the existence of the  tribe  of  which
       those the appellant has of credible fear of are  members,  and  their
       use of force in certain circumstances, the appellants claim they have
       left  their  home  and  gone  elsewhere  is   plausible,   there   is
       insufficient evidence to support a finding  the  appellant's  parents
       have left their home in Sulaymaniyah and gone to live elsewhere.  The
       suggestion made in submissions  this  might  have  occurred  is  pure
       speculation not supported by adequate evidence. It also is  also  not
       made out that if  the  appellant's  parents  have  moved  residential
       address, they would not have informed the appellant or  other  family
       members or that the contact details  such  as  telephone  numbers  or
       email addresses will have changed.
   20. It is also not made out  the  appellant  has  exhausted  all  avenues
       properly open to him to contact his family members in Iraq. It is not
       a case of the family in Iraq just having  the  appellant's  telephone
       numbers and email address but also  with  him  having  their  contact
       details. It is also noted the evidence shows the appellant  also  has
       other  relatives  in  Iraq,  including  three  married   sisters   in
       Sulamaniyah and it was not made out that they could not be contacted.
       The submissions  focused  on  the  plausibility  of  threats  to  the
       appellants parents, with no specific mention of his  married  sibling
       being threatened, and no evidence of any  threat  to  his  uncle  who
       lives in Hawler or of his family having to  move  or  change  contact
       details. The appellant's claim not  to  be  able  to  contact  family
       members in  Iraq  has  not  been  shown  to  be  credible.  There  is
       insufficient evidence to support a finding that such  family  members
       cannot be contacted or to show they would not be  willing  to  assist
       the appellant, as they  clearly  have  in  the  past,  to  redocument
       himself both in the UK and in Iraq.
   21. It is also of significance that  the  family  in  Iraq  includes  the
       appellant's father who is the male head of the household and a person
       who could be appointed as the appellant's nominated representative in
       Iraq and a paternal uncle.
   22. The comment in the CPIN set out above relating to the willingness  of
       the Embassy to obtain copies of existing documents makes it plausible
       that the appellant  can  also  obtain  a  copy  of  his  passport  if
       requested by the respondent, meaning he will be in  possession  of  a
       copy of a required identity document. Family members will know  their
       personal INID identification number and family book details,  if  the
       appellant cannot recall his own,  to  assist  in  his  records  being
       traced. They are stored on a central server in Baghdad  according  to
       the country information for all those issued with the new INID.
   23. It is not made out the  appellant  will  not  be  able  to  obtain  a
       registration document (1957). This is an official document issued  by
       the authorities in Iraq as confirmation of an individual's status  as
       an Iraqi national. It is also clear that the stated intention of  the
       Iraqi authorities is that possession of such a document is a means to
       enable an individual to obtain further  identity  documents  required
       which, in light of the up-to-date country information, must refer  to
       the new Identity Document, in Iraq.
   24. It is not made out the appellant will not be issued  with  a  laissez
       passer to enable him to be returned to Iraq.  There is no reason made
       out for why the appellant should not agree to return  voluntarily  to
       Erbil, which will mean he can fly there directly from the  UK.  There
       are international flights to Erbil International  Airport  (EBL)  and
       Sulamaniyah International Airport (ISU).
   25. In SMO, KSP & IM (Article 15(c); identity documents) (CG) [2019] UKUT
       400 at [375] the Tribunal in its analysis of the evidence write:

           The Laissez Passer has been a feature of the Iraq  CG  landscape
           for  years.   In  AA  (Iraq),  the   Tribunal   considered   the
           feasibility of return in some detail, which in turn necessitated
           consideration of the ways in which an individual might obtain  a
           passport or a Laissez Passer.  At that stage, Dr Fatah explained
           that an individual who wished to obtain  a  Laissez  Passer  was
           required to produce "either a CSID or INC or a  photocopy  of  a
           previous Iraqi passport and a police report noting that  it  had
           been lost or stolen is required in order to  obtain  a  Laissez-
           passer".  Further enquires made  by  Dr  Fatah  with  the  Iraqi
           Consulate in London suggest that this is no longer the case, and
           that an individual  must  simply  be  able  to  establish  their
           nationality in order to obtain a Laissez Passer.  In the absence
           of documentation, an Iraqi national can request  family  members
           in Iraq to present documents to the Ministry of Foreign  Affairs
           to prove the individual's nationality or, failing  that,  "legal
           procedures will then be started to prove the  Iraqi  nationality
           of the failed asylum seeker  through  a  list  of  questions  in
           relation to their life in  Iraq".   These  details  are  checked
           against Iraqi records, and once verified the individual will  be
           issued with a document enabling  the  individual  to  return  to
           Iraq.  Dr Fatah goes on to state in his report that the  website
           of the  Iraqi  Ministry  of  Foreign  Affairs  states  that  the
           resulting document is valid for six months and that it  'permits
           a single entry into Iraq'.

   26. It is not made out the appellant will be unable to obtain a  laissez-
       passer which he can use to fly to either Erbil or Baghdad. In SMO  at
       [376] it is recorded that Dr Fatah had not heard of  a  person  being
       returned to Iraq on a Laissez Passer being able to use that  document
       for onward travel.  He had personal experience of  his  sister  using
       such a document to return to Iraq because she had lost her  passport.
       He said that the document was taken from her at the  airport  in  the
       IKR.
   27. In SMO at [369] Dr Farah is recorded as having stated: "You had to go
       to your local Civil Status Affairs Office to  get  the  INID.   There
       were flights from the UK to Sulaymaniyah on Wednesdays and  to  Erbil
       on Thursdays.  A person who flew to one of these airports with only a
       Laissez Passer would not be allowed to leave the  airport  without  a
       CSID but he might be allowed to use the telephone in order to contact
       people who could vouch for him". In this appeal it is  not  made  out
       the appellant is unable to contact family members who will be able to
       vouch for him or that he will not be able to  leave  the  airport  on
       arrival.
   28. It is also not made out that the appellant will not be able to travel
       to his place of relocation within Erbil, which it is suggested in SMO
       will be expected to be with a family members although I  accept  this
       will not be possible in  this  case  for  some,  as  the  appellant's
       evidence  is  that  his  parents  and  sisters  live  in  Sulamaniyah
       (screening interview reply to questions 33 and 34).   The  appellants
       paternal  uncle  lives  in  Hawler  (screening  interview  reply   to
       questions 35), which is  the  Kurdish  name  for  Erbil  meaning  the
       appellant will have a senior male member of the family present in the
       place to which he can relocate.  It is not made out  the  appellant's
       uncle would not be able to meet him at the airport to vouch  for  his
       identity.
   29. The Iraqi Embassy website in London contains details of how an  Iraqi
       citizen can report a lost passport and  obtain  authorisation  for  a
       replacement whilst in the UK. The appellant has failed  to  establish
       that with the assistance of copy  documents  he  will  be  unable  to
       secure a replacement passport.
   30. Iraqis have freedom of movement,  travel  and  residence  inside  and
       outside Iraq provided for under Article 44 of the Iraqi Constitution.
       The  Constitution  also  provides  that  'no  Iraqi  may  be  exiled,
       displaced, or deprived from returning to the homeland'.
   31. If the appellant travels  with  a  laissez  passer  and  registration
       document (1957) or  a  replacement  passport  or  copy  of  his  lost
       passport, it is not made out that as an Iraq Kurd  from  the  IKR  he
       will not be admitted to the territory,  especially  as  there  is  no
       evidential reason why the appellant should  not  return  directly  to
       Erbil International Airport, as it is not made out he has any need to
       refuse to return voluntarily.
   32. In the alternative, if the appellant is removed to Baghdad it is  not
       made out he speaks Arabic or  has  any  form  of  contact  or  social
       network in Baghdad or knowledge of living there, or  any  ability  to
       find employment and support himself there once any initial funds that
       are available to him run out, making it unreasonable to expect him to
       internally relocate to that city on a long-term basis. It is not made
       out, however, that it is unreasonable for the appellant to remain  in
       the city whilst arrangements are made for him to travel  to  the  IKR
       with family assistance and a replacement passport or replacement INID
       if the same can be obtained.
   33. Insufficient evidence has been provided by the appellant to  show  he
       cannot obtain a replacement INID where the  biometrics  and  required
       data is secured on a central server in Baghdad  and  where  there  is
       clear evidence that an individual can obtain copies of their INID  if
       lost. The Landinfo Report on issuance  of  the  new  Iraqi  ID  card,
       published by the Danish Immigration Service in November  2018  refers
       to the price for a new ID card being 5,000  Iraqi  dinars  (IQD).  In
       case the ID card get lost, the price for a reissued ID card is 25,000
       IQD; in case the ID card gets lost a second time, the price for a new
       card will be 50,000 IQD. This is not a case  of  a  change  in  civil
       status as may occur on marriage or  divorce  which  will  require  an
       application for a new card to be  issued  which  may  require  a  new
       application and further biometrics.  The method of data retention for
       an INID is different from that for a CSID as noted in  SMO  at  [182]
       there it is written "UNHCR-Iraq  told  Dr  Fatah  that  there  is  no
       database or any electronic system in place to  issue  CSIDs.  Scanned
       copies of local paper records are archived in the General Directorate
       of Civil Status Affairs in Baghdad. Having  discussed  the  situation
       with Landinfo Dr Fatah concluded that registration is  undertaken  in
       the local area and that  the  Civil  Status  Affairs  Directorate  or
       central population registry  in  Baghdad  does  not  generally  issue
       CSIDs". I find This is because the  arrangements  for  the  CSID  are
       regional/local whereas those for the INID are national.
   34. It is accepted it was found in SMO, that the evidence  of  the  Iraqi
       authorities, as currently presented, falls very short of establishing
       that there  is  a  realistic  route  for  an  otherwise  undocumented
       individual in Baghdad, who is not from that city, to acquire  a  CSID
       or INID there  but  the  appellant  will  be  undocumented  and  only
       requires a copy of an exiting INID already issued to him.
   35. Further correspondence noted by the Upper Tribunal in SMO includes:

           361.   There was  yet  further  correspondence  with  the  Iraqi
                authorities thereafter.  This  is  described  in  a  witness
                statement from a third official  in  the  Returns  Logistics
                Team named Declan O'Neill.  There are two emails, the  first
                of which is from Ms Drew to Counsellor  Alrobaaie  dated  13
                June 2019, expressing concern  that  without  an  answer  to
                certain questions the Home Office might 'lose  the  [country
                guidance] case, which could  have  serious  consequences  on
                being able to return to Iraq  in  future'.   Eight  detailed
                questions, composed by counsel, were put.  The response from
                the counsellor was exactly as follows:


                    I hope this email finding  you  well,  in  general,  any
                    person can visit the Civil Status Office in his city and
                    provide them with the page number and  reference  number
                    of their records as family, usually it's the same number
                    for him, brother sister, and father.  So in this case he
                    can get any copy from his family ID or only  submit  the
                    family number for the ID, and then can ask them  to  get
                    new National ID card or something  called  Civil  Status
                    electronic document which includes all his details  with
                    new national ID  reference  or  something  called  Civil
                    Status document for 1957 includes the  page  number  and
                    reference number of his records.  This is just a step to
                    the next step to issue a new National ID.


                    The individual does not need  any  prior  permission  to
                    visit any Civil Status Office and he can  go  in  person
                    with his relatives or without to follow  his  case  with
                    the official Departments.


                    If an individual is able  to  find  their  Civil  Status
                    Records in the central archive, they use this  to  apply
                    for a new national ID card in  his  local  Civil  Status
                    office and while the case is in process, they will  give
                    him the Civil Status document for 1957 or  Civil  Status
                    electronic document as I explained above.


                    After the stability and the  liberation  now,  the  work
                    resumed in all Civil Status Affairs  Offices  and  Civil
                    Status Records offices for Mosul, Anbar  and  Saluhaddin
                    and  the  activities  now  in  a  normal  way  in  their
                    provinces and the individuals can apply directly in  the
                    [sic] their offices and they will be  dealing  with  the
                    request according to the law, any application will  only
                    take the  normal  time  (maybe  1  to  5  working  days)
                    according to each request without any delay.


                    As we explained before, we can assure you that we didn't
                    see any problem or issue for all individual returned  on
                    a Laissez Passer, and all  of  them  returned  to  their
                    homes without any problem and  they  didn't  submit  any
                    request to the MFA or to the  return  logistic  team  in
                    Baghdad for assistance to issue new documents  and  this
                    is a very clear message that they have  no  difficulties
                    in the process of issuing new Iraqi documents.


                    In all the previous  cases,  there  was  no  problem  or
                    obstacles  at  Baghdad  International  Airport  to   the
                    individuals who had retuned to Iraq already, and all the
                    process  went  smoothly  and  they  returned  to   their
                    families with out any issues.

   36. In SMO at [385 - 386] it is also written:

           385.    There  are  a   number   of   relevant   considerations.
                Potentially the most important is the location  in  which  a
                person is able to apply for a new  or  replacement  CSID  or
                INID.   The  clear  expectation  -  and  this  strand   runs
                consistently through the country  guidance  decisions  -  is
                that an individual should apply for  a  new  or  replacement
                document in the place where their family is registered, that
                being the location of the Family Book ledgers in  which  the
                family  record  is  made  and  retained.   That  expectation
                remains clear in the more recent  evidence  before  us.   Dr
                Fatah refers in his first report to an individual  going  to
                'the local office' in order to obtain  a  replacement.   The
                DIS and Landinfo report which is quoted by EASO refers to an
                individual applying (for an INID) in their place of  origin.
                One of the sources quoted by  the  DIS  stated  that  if  an
                individual 'lost their documents, they must  travel  to  the
                area of origin to have them re-issued'.  We  note  that  the
                respondent's evidence serves  generally  to  reinforce  that
                expectation.  Dr Ali  refers  in  his  letter  to  a  person
                attending their 'local office' and Dr Alroobaaie states that
                an individual should attend the Civil Status Office in their
                "home city" in his letter and in his email of 17 June  2019.
                That expectation is underpinned by the way in which  records
                are generally kept and accessed in Iraq.   As  explained  in
                previous country guidance decisions, this  process  has  for
                decades taken place at a very localised level, at one of the
                hundreds of CSA offices around the country.


           386.   There is  no  evidence  before  us  which  satisfactorily
                establishes that a returnee who is not from Baghdad would be
                able to apply for a CSID  or  an  INID  in  that  city.   Dr
                Fatah's oral evidence was that only those from Baghdad would
                be able to  apply  for  replacement  documents  there.   The
                Danish Immigration Service report of November  2018  records
                the Kafkaesque consequence of the requirement to apply for a
                replacement document in one's  own  area  in  the  following
                paragraph:


                    In order for the IDPs to  return,  they  must  have  ID-
                    documents that are issued in the  areas  of  origin.  If
                    they have lost their ID-documentation, they must  travel
                    back to the area  of  origin  to  have  them  re-issued.
                    However, without  documents  it  is  very  difficult  to
                    travel anywhere and pass the checkpoints, because people
                    without documents more often face arbitrary arrests  and
                    detentions.

   37. Whilst the evidence considered  in  SMO  indicated  a  reluctance  on
       behalf of the  authorities  to  assist  returnees  in  light  of  the
       considerable number of internally displaced persons in  the  IKR  who
       fled the conflict caused by the activities  of  ISIL  in  Kirkuk  and
       elsewhere, the situation is now much calmer,  with  fewer  internally
       displaced persons. The Civil Status Office, attended by the appellant
       and his family was likely to  be  in  Sulaymaniyah  but  the  country
       information refers to the  ability  of  an  individual  to  apply  to
       transfer their records to a different office, which in this case will
       be to Erbil. There was nothing in the appellant's evidence to show he
       would not be able to make such  a  request,  that  it  would  not  be
       actioned within a reasonable period of time, that  he  would  not  be
       able to obtain a replacement INID as a result, or that  in  light  of
       family support, he will face a  real  risk  of  destitution  or  harm
       sufficient to entitle him to a grant of international protection.
   38. The history of displaced persons in Iraq over the years  has  enabled
       that country to have effective responses to  dealing  with  displaced
       persons and insufficient evidence  was  provided  in  the  appeal  to
       establish that the appellant will be a person who would not  be  able
       to adequately redocument himself.
   39. It is not made out that appellant faces a real risk of ill  treatment
       if he remains in Baghdad during the requisite period of time required
       to enable him to travel to his eventual place of  relocation,  Erbil,
       sufficient to warrant a grant of international protection. Relocation
       will be to Erbil as a result of the difficulties appellant will  face
       on return relating only to his home area of Sulaymaniyah as a  result
       of it being found he faces a credible risk of serious harm, including
       death as a result of being a victim of a blood feud within  his  home
       area.
   40. Although Ms Khan referred to  information  concerning  the  tribe  in
       question and activities they have undertaken. It is not made out they
       would have sufficient influence within the whole of the IKR  to  make
       internal relocation to Erbil unreasonable for the appellant.
   41. It is not made out with the assistance of family members  within  the
       IKR that the appellant will not be able to re-establish  himself.  No
       insurmountable obstacles or difficulties to him re-establish  himself
       in Erbil are made out on the evidence, by reference to SMO and/or the
       country evidence. Although the appellant left Iraq in June 2017 there
       is insufficient evidence of negative changes within Erbil  sufficient
       to mean that he will effectively be an outsider, stranger or a person
       unable to re-adapt to life there. The appellant speaks the  language,
       is of Kurdish ethnicity, has family in that area whom it has not been
       shown he could not establish contact with. His three sisters are said
       to  be  married,  indicating  possible  wider  available   assistance
       together with the paternal uncle and aunt specifically  mentioned  by
       the appellant in reply to question 35 of the screening interview. The
       appellant was a blacksmith worker, according to the  reply  given  in
       his screening interview, indicating that he  has  skills  in  working
       metal.  It is not made out that he will not be  able  to  pursue  the
       same or similar employment on return.
   42. I therefore find the appellant has failed to discharge the burden  of
       proof upon him, even to the  lower  standard,  to  show  it  will  be
       unreasonable or unduly harsh to expect him to internally relocate  to
       Erbil in the IKR or to show he cannot be re-documented. The appellant
       has another part of Iraq away from his home area in which it has been
       found he faces no real risk, to which he can return without  hardship
       in either  the  return  process  or  on  arrival,  and  which  it  is
       reasonable in all the circumstances  to  expect  him  to  voluntarily
       avail himself of.
   43. The appellant has not established that, notwithstanding  the  general
       conditions in Erbil, it would not be reasonable for him  to  relocate
       there.

Decision

   44. I dismiss the appeal.

  Anonymity.

   45. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to  rule  45(4)(i)  of
       the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.

       I make such order pursuant to  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
       (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.



Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated 25 March 2021
