
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/10984/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House            |Decision and Reasons Promulgated|
|On 19th September 2018          |On 22nd October 2018            |
|                                |                                |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON


                                   Between

                                   WKARDC
                         (Anonymity Direction Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Hayward, instructed by Montecristo LLP
                    Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Deller, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a national of Sri Lanka born on 9th December 1986, and
    he was granted permission to appeal against a  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge R L Walker, promulgated on 16th May 2018, dismissing the
    appellant's appeal against the decision of the Secretary of State dated
    23rd September 2018 refusing his asylum,  humanitarian  protection  and
    human rights (ECHR) claim.

 2. The appellant is Sinhalese and he  entered  the  United  Kingdom  as  a
    student on 8th October 2007.  He applied for further leave  in  October
    2010 which was granted but his further application was refused, and  he
    became appeal rights exhausted on  the  7th  August  2015.  He  made  a
    further application on the basis of his family and private life,  which
    was refused.

 3. On 15th January 2016 he claimed asylum. He asserted his problems in Sri
    Lanka stemmed from an imputed political opinion and he feared  the  Sri
    Lankan government because his stepfather was accused of working for the
    LTTE while working as  an  intelligence  officer  for  the  Sri  Lankan
    police.  The stepfather was used to  infiltrate  the  LTTE  and  whilst
    doing so defected.  The appellant claimed he was at risk from  the  Sri
    Lankan authorities because of his association with his stepfather.

 4. The respondent did not accept that he was the son of his stepfather and
    his mother, or related as claimed or his parents were wanted by the Sri
    Lanka authorities.

 5. The appeal against the respondent's decision was refused by the  first-
    tier Tribunal Judge but nonetheless, he made the following findings

    (i)    the DNA report showed a mother (wife of the stepfather) and  son
    (appellant) relationship.

    (ii)    a  previous  first-tier  Tribunal  judge's  decision   on   the
    stepfather's appeal hearing on 27 April 2011 found that the appellant's
    stepfather was the subject of arrest  and  detention  on  suspicion  of
    involvement with the LTTE.  The judge stated

         'I also accept that the Sri Lankan authorities would  have  a  very
         special  interest  in  the  appellant's  stepfather  as  he  was  a
         Sinhalese police officer working in intelligence and therefore with
         a very detailed knowledge of the working procedures  and  a  person
         who would be capable of providing very damaging information to  the
         enemies of that state. As well as being  considered  a  traitor,  I
         accept that the Sri Lankan authorities would be very interested  in
         deed to trace him or any member of his family'

    (iii)  the appellant's account of being detained tortured and taking to
    the church was rejected. It was not accepted that the  attackers  would
    be deterred by local  residents  who  were  said  to  have  forced  the
    abductors to flee from  the  church  which  enabled  the  appellant  to
    escape. No information about the priest said to  have  helped  him  had
    been provided and this undermined the appellant's account.

    (iv)   the delay in claiming asylum and the failure  to  claim  in  his
    appeal hearing of 2015 damaged the appellant's credibility. He had been
    living with his stepfather and his mother's 2007 and  would  have  been
    aware of how to claim asylum.

    (v)    it was strange that the step-father and mother  had  no  contact
    with their children in Sri Lanka, likewise the appellant had no contact
    with his siblings.

    (vi)   the judge  refused  to  accept  the  appellant's  claim  of  the
    inconsistencies in the VAF in 2007 because  it  was  undertaken  by  an
    agent.

    (vii)  that  the  appellant  was  able  to  leave  Sri  Lanka  via  the
    international airport and without experiencing any problems damaged his
    claim.

    (viii) because the appellant was not found credible, no  weight  should
    be attached to the country expert report from Dr Gil Daryn

 6. On these findings, the judge dismissed the appeal because he found  the
    appellant did not fall within  the  categories  identified  in  GJ  and
    others (post-civil war: returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC)
    as being at risk.

Application for Permission to Appeal

 7.  The  application  for  permission  to  appeal   contended   that   the
    determination contained material errors of law specifically

    (i)     the  judge  irrationally  relied  upon  the  rejection  of  the
    appellant's account of abduction and escape to apparently  resile  from
    his own conclusions that the relatives of the appellant's  step  father
    were at risk in Sri Lanka.

    (ii)   in the alternative the judge irrationally failed to have  regard
    to his own clear finding that the appellant would be at risk of special
    interest to the Sri Lankan authorities on return.

 8. Permission to appeal was  granted  by  Judge  Landes  who  stated  that
    although  the  judge  found  against  the  appellant  on  a  number  of
    credibility issues that did not explain why the appellant might not  be
    at risk if the authorities wanted to trace the  step  father's  family.
    There was either an inconsistency or the judge had  failed  to  explain
    adequately the circumstances that would make the appellant not to be at
    risk.

The Hearing

 9. At the hearing, Mr Haywood identified the unusual factors in the  case,
    not least, that the appellant was Sinhalese,  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    had promulgated a decision in relation to the stepfather  granting  him
    article 3 status owing to his position as a senior  police  officer  in
    the Sri Lankan government and  his  defection.  He  was  excluded  from
    protection under the Refugee Convention because of  his  activities  in
    Sri Lanka.

10. I was handed MP v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 829 and ME v  SSHD  [2018]  EWCA
    Civ 1486 on which Mr Haywood relied. There was an undischarged interest
    in the father who would be considered a  traitor  and  that  fact,  the
    first-tier Tribunal judge, in this appeal, accepted. That the judge did
    not accept an incident of abduction or the history of the contact  with
    the family over time or the delay in  the  claim,  did  not  alter  the
    findings of the judge in relation to the authorities'  interest  family
    members of the stepfather.  The judge's approach was inconsistent  with
    his findings or alternatively, he failed to explain adequately why  the
    appellant would not be at risk on return.

11. I was also taken to the Country Policy  and  Information  Note  on  Sri
    Lanka dated March 2017 specifically section 12 which dealt with returns
    of failed asylum seekers to Sri Lanka.  This highlighted the 'stop' and
    'watch'  lists  maintained  by  the  Sri  Lankan  authorities  and  the
    treatment on arrival.

12. Mr Deller very candidly accepted that there was an  error  of  law  the
    decision.  He also noted that the decision also appeared to be contrary
    to Mibanga [2005] EWCA Civ 367, because the judge had failed to  assess
    credibility in the round with the assistance of the expert  report.  He
    accepted that in view of the findings of the judge, and which were  not
    challenged by the Secretary of State, it would  be  difficult  to  find
    against the appellant.

Conclusions

13. The grounds of challenge to the determination are made out. There is an
    error of law as conceded by Mr Deller, in the decision. The  judge  did
    not heed his own  findings  set  out  at  4(i)  and  (ii)  above,  and,
    proceeded without explaining why the appellant would not  be  at  risk,
    bearing in mind the findings of the previous tribunal that  the  father
    was a former intelligence officer who had defected. As the judge found,
    that would be considered traitorous.

14. The criticisms of the appellant's credibility go no way to  diminishing
    the finding in relation to the risk to the stepfather and his relations
    of which the appellant was clearly an immediate one. In relation to the
    abduction, it would appear that the stepfather's experience (he came to
    the UK in 2004) pre-dated the appellant's claimed abduction in 2007 but
    this is not referenced in  the  decision  of  the  first-tier  Tribunal
    judge.  The judge proceeded to make his findings without any  reference
    to this.

15. GJ and others (post-civil war: returnees)  Sri  Lanka  CG  [2013]  UKUT
    00319 (IAC) and confirmed by the Court of Appeal in MP, accepts at  (4)
    of the head note that if  a  person  is  detained  by  the  Sri  Lankan
    security services, there remains a real risk of ill-treatment  or  harm
    as follows:

         (4) If a person is detained by the  Sri  Lankan  security  services
         there remains a  real  risk  of  ill-treatment  or  harm  requiring
         international protection.

         (5) Internal relocation is not an option within  Sri  Lanka  for  a
         person at real risk from the  Sri  Lankan  authorities,  since  the
         government now controls the whole  of  Sri  Lanka  and  Tamils  are
         required to return to a named address  after  passing  through  the
         airport.

         (6) There are no detention facilities at the airport.   Only  those
         whose names appear on a "stop"  list  will  be  detained  from  the
         airport.  Any risk for those in whom the Sri Lankan authorities are
         or become interested exists not at the airport, but  after  arrival
         in their home area, where their arrival will be verified by the CID
         or police within a few days.

16. At 7 of the head note, the current categories of persons at  real  risk
    of persecution or serious harm  on  return  to  Sri  Lanka  whether  in
    detention or otherwise include

         (7)

             '(a)      Individuals who are,  or  are  perceived  to  be,  a
             threat to the integrity of Sri Lanka as a single state because
             they are, or are perceived  to  have  a  significant  role  in
             relation to post-conflict Tamil separatism within the diaspora
             and/or a renewal of hostilities within Sri Lanka'.

             ...

              (d)      A person whose name appears on a computerised "stop"
             list accessible at the airport, comprising  a  list  of  those
             against whom there is an extant court order or arrest warrant.
              Individuals whose name appears  on  a  "stop"  list  will  be
             stopped at the airport and handed over to the appropriate  Sri
             Lankan authorities, in pursuance of such order or warrant.

17. The sophistication of surveillance and the relevance  of  past  history
    (which for these purposes will include the step father) are expanded at
    head note 8:

         (8)       The  Sri  Lankan  authorities'  approach  is   based   on
         sophisticated intelligence, both as to activities within Sri  Lanka
         and in the diaspora.  The Sri Lankan authorities know that many Sri
         Lankan Tamils travelled abroad as economic migrants and  also  that
         everyone in the Northern Province had  some  level  of  involvement
         with the LTTE during the civil war.  In post-conflict Sri Lanka, an
         individual's past history will be relevant only to the extent  that
         it is perceived by the  Sri  Lankan  authorities  as  indicating  a
         present risk to the unitary Sri Lankan  state  or  the  Sri  Lankan
         Government.

18. What is of concern to the government is where a person is considered to
    be involved in a possible resurgence of  the  LTTE  or  contacting  the
    active diaspora. GJ is quite clear that it is a  question  of  fact  in
    each case.  From paragraph 237 and 290 of GJ it was accepted that UNHCR
    guidelines might be taken into account and those 'with  more  elaborate
    links to the LTTE' can vary but may include 'persons with family  links
    who are dependent on or otherwise closely related to persons  with  the
    above profiles'.

19. The profile of someone who has defected to the LTTE, particularly  with
    the profile of the appellant stepfather a former intelligence  officer,
    is clearly likely to be of interest. Therefore, as a starting point,  I
    accept that the appellant has links, as the stepson  of  a  former  Sri
    Lankan police officer who it was accepted by  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    may well be considered a traitor, and these links may be classified  as
    "more elaborate" on an objective basis.

20. The report of Dr Gil Daryn dated 23rd April 2018 confirmed at paragraph
    that 'People who are suspected of treason and cooperation with the LTTE
    were, and probably still are expected to be punished in Sri Lanka.  She
    recorded that 'it may be plausible to expect that he still  remains  on
    the list of wanted people (be it stop list or any other) from the  time
    of the conflict'.  She further considered that 'it may well be expected
    that those who  have  defected  and  betrayed  their  country  (as  the
    appellant's step father appears to be suspected  by  the  authorities),
    are not yet forgiven'.  She added that the although  the  human  rights
    record had improved it was 'still tainted  by  serious  human  right[s]
    violations, particularly towards those who are suspected  of  any  past
    association with the LTTE.  This certainly makes the scenario in  which
    the appellant will be persecuted in lieu of his stepfather, plausible',
    (paragraph 18).  The expert added that a recent UN report observed that
    returnees  who  had  been  refused  asylum  in  other  countries  faced
    increased security surveillance, harassment and detention.

21. As indicated in the Country Policy and  Information  Note:  Sri  Lanka:
    Tamil Separatism at 12.2.7 and 12.2.10 the appellant was likely  to  be
    questioned  because  'most  Sri  Lankan  returnees...  are   questioned
    (usually at the airport) upon  return'.  Rather,  the  Immigration  and
    Refugee Board of Canada reported in February 2015 that: 'Sources report
    that individuals returning from  abroad  are  particularly  subject  to
    screening'.  The appellant would not be expected to lie under any  such
    interrogation.

22. The appellant will be returning from London and has a stepfather living
    in the United Kingdom with whom he has lived for  some  years  who  has
    been granted refugee status and who has been  accepted  as  of  'active
    interest to the authorities' and there is nothing to conclude that this
    interest has  diminished.     In  ME,  as  Mr  Hayward  submitted,  the
    appellant's claim was allowed despite the detention  taken  place  long
    after  the  cessation  of  hostilities.   The  stepfather's   role   is
    particularly important. I can appreciate that the interest  in  someone
    with a lesser position may  have  abated  but  that  is  not  what  was
    accepted or found by the First-tier Tribunal.  As the judge found,  the
    interest would extend to the appellant.

23. Despite the separate credibility findings, the  discrete  finding  with
    regard to the stepfather and the relationship,  which  I  preserve,  is
    sufficient, to confirm that the father is at real risk of serious  harm
    should he return. That the appellant was the son of the  woman  married
    to the former police officer and whom had been granted  refugee  status
    was not disputed by the Secretary of State in the hearing before me.

24. Given the close connection that the appellant has with  his  stepfather
    with whom he has lived in the  United  Kingdom  some  years,  and  from
    whence he will return, I consider there does remain a real risk that he
    would be of interest on return. I accept he has no previous role within
    the LTTE, but owing to his links and connections, I find he would be at
    real risk and return of detention. This places him in  accordance  with
    GJ squarely at risk of ill-treatment on return.  I  repeat  nothing  in
    the findings of the judge undermine those  particular  findings.    The
    appellant's case was that he assisted  in  his  removal  by  an  agent.
    Certainly, the findings of not accepting  one  incident  of  a  claimed
    abduction and criticism of delay in the claim,  do  not  undermine  the
    force of  the  emphatic  and  discrete  findings  in  relation  to  the
    stepfather and family members.  The relevance of  contact  between  the
    step father and mother and children/siblings in Sri Lanka do not  touch
    on the fundamental point and far from  being  not  'natural'  may  even
    enhance it

25. I therefore allow the appeal on asylum grounds and under article 3.  As
    I have allowed his appeal in relation  to  asylum  I  do  not  consider
    humanitarian protection relevant.

26. In view of  the  very  significant  difficulties  the  appellant  would
    experience  and  return  to  Sri  Lanka  I  found  that  it  would   be
    disproportionate to remove him, and I therefore also allow  the  appeal
    on article 8 grounds.

27. The Judge erred materially for the reasons identified.  I set aside the
    decision pursuant to Section  12(2)(a)  of  the  Tribunals  Courts  and
    Enforcement Act 2007 (TCE 2007), save for the preserved  findings  4(i)
    and (ii) and remake the decision under section 12(2) (b)  (ii)  of  the
    TCE 2007.  For the reasons given above I allow the appellant's  appeal.



Order

I allow the appeal under the Refugee Convention

I allow the appeal on human rights grounds (Article 3 and Article 8).

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed      Helen Rimington  Date: 12th October 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington

