

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
PA/10596/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |        Decision & Reasons          |
|                                       |Promulgated                         |
|On 23 October  2017                    |        On 25 October 2017          |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SOUTHERN

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                    D. S.
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs U. Sood, of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms Z. Ahmad, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                                  DECISION

   1. The respondent, who is a  citizen  of  Guyana,  moved  to  the  United
      Kingdom in 1983, then aged 14, to join his mother who had been  living
      here since 1977. He was granted indefinite leave to remain on arrival.
      On 14 December 2012 he was convicted  of  offences  of  conspiracy  to
      supply Class A drugs and of cultivation  and  possession  of  Class  B
      drugs and was sentenced to 8 years' imprisonment. A deportation  order
      was signed on 23 February 2015 and he appealed against a  decision  of
      the Secretary of State to  refuse  his  protection  and  human  rights
      claims, the Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  refusing  to
      revoke the deportation order.


   2. By a lengthy and detailed  determination,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      Saunders allowed the respondent's  appeal  on  human  rights  grounds,
      finding that the public  interest  did  not  require  his  deportation
      because there were very compelling circumstances over and above  those
      required to satisfy the Exceptions of s117C(3) and (4). She  dismissed
      his appeal against refusal of his protection claim  and  he  does  not
      pursue any challenge to that aspect of her decision.

   3. The parties are, of course, well aware of all the  facts  relevant  to
      that decision and of the reasons given by the judge  for  arriving  at
      her conclusions and it is not necessary, for present purposes, for  me
      to reproduce here all that has been discussed  by  the  judge  in  her
      determination.


   4. Although the determination of the judge has been written with  evident
      care, I am entirely satisfied that in  reaching  her  conclusions  she
      made several errors of law and I have no doubt at  all  that,  despite
      Mrs Sood's valiant efforts to persuade me otherwise, those errors  are
      plainly material to the outcome of this appeal.  Therefore,  as  there
      will have to be a fresh determination of this appeal, I shall say only
      that which is necessary to identify the nature of the  errors  of  law
      made by the judge and make clear the scope of the hearing that  is  to
      follow.


   5. Plainly, as is evidenced by the length of the sentence of imprisonment
      imposed upon the respondent and the sentencing remarks  of  the  judge
      who imposed it, his offences were particularly serious  ones  so  that
      the public interest in his deportation was significant. This  is  made
      unambiguously clear by the opening provisions of Section 117C  of  the
      Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002:
        117C. Article  8:  additional  considerations  in  cases  involving
        foreign criminals


        1) The deportation of foreign criminals is in the public interest.
        2) The more serious the offence committed by  a  foreign  criminal,
           the greater  is  the  public  interest  in  deportation  of  the
           criminal
           ...

      When one takes together the fact that the sentencing judge  considered
      the offences sufficiently serious to merit  a  sentence  of  8  years'
      imprisonment, the fact that the offending  involved  a  conspiracy  to
      supply Class A drugs and that this  was  not  the  respondent's  first
      offence, he having previously been convicted in 1990 of possession  of
      a Class B drug and in 1993 of supplying a Class B drug  (which  latter
      offence the judge felt  able  to  describe  as  a  "relatively  minor"
      offence) it is readily apparent that the respondent faced a formidable
      challenge in demonstrating that the right to respect for  private  and
      family life should outweigh the public interest arguments  in  support
      of his deportation.
   6. The case advanced by the  respondent  before  the  judge  disclosed  a
      number of matters that the judge found weighed heavily in his  favour.
      Although the respondent had denied the offence and was convicted after
      a trial, he now had a real insight into his  offending  and  had  been
      rehabilitated  such  that  there  was  no  continuing  risk   of   him
      reoffending. Further, he had done rehabilitative work with the  prison
      community and continued to do so after being released on  licence.  He
      played an important role with his two minor children, caring for  them
      while his former partner, their mother, was at work and he  often  saw
      those children at weekends as well. His three adult children live with
      him and family life exists, despite them being adults. He  cared  also
      for an elderly mother, who lived in sheltered accommodation.


   7. The judge found that the respondent had put forward "unusually  strong
      evidence of positive and reparative behaviour whilst in  prison";  his
      remorse  for  his  previous  offending  behaviour  was  "genuine   and
      significant"; that his bond with his  adult  children  was  "unusually
      strong"; and that the deportation of their  father  would  be  "highly
      damaging" for the minor children. The judge  identified  the  evidence
      indicating that there had been a detrimental  effect  upon  the  minor
      children while he was in prison and that "the  children  were  happier
      now that their father was out of prison". The respondent enjoyed  also
      "a  particularly  close  relationship"  with  his  mother.  The  judge
      accepted also that the respondent has not  retained  close  ties  with
      Guyana, although he had returned  there  twice  for  family  funerals.
      Although the  judge  found  him  to  be  "undoubtedly  a  resourceful,
      intelligent and motivated man", given the time he has been  living  in
      the United Kingdom, moving back to Guyana would, the judge  found,  be
      an "extremely difficult transition to make".


   8. The judge set out a detailed self-direction as to the legal  framework
      in play and recognised that:
           "In the light of his 8-year sentence, therefore,  the  Appellant
           must establish that there  are  very  compelling  circumstances,
           over and above those envisaged in the statue and the rules...."
      Having examined the evidence the judge concluded that the  deportation
      of the respondent "would be little short of devastating" for  the  two
      minor children. That is because the deportation would spell an end  to
      any meaningful parental relationship because contact by the occasional
      visits and other electronic means of communication, in the view of the
      judge could not replace the parental  relationship  now  enjoyed.  The
      judge concluded:


           "I concluded that on the facts as I have found them to be,  this
           damage is likely to be of such severity,  for  all  the  reasons
           already set out hereinabove, that on the strength of these facts
           alone  that  the  Appellant's  deportation  would  have  overall
           consequences  that  are   very   compelling   and   which   very
           significantly  exceed  the  "unduly  harsh"   threshold...   and
           applying MAB (para 399; "unduly harsh") USA  [2015]  UKUT  00435
           (IAC)"
      This discloses the first error of law made by the judge. The  approach
      applied by the judge to her assessment of whether the  effect  on  the
      children would be unduly harsh was that set out in  MAB.  But  as  was
      found by the Court of Appeal in MM (Uganda) v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 617
      (see para 26) that approach was legally incorrect as it  left  out  of
      account the important public interest considerations that must  inform
      that assessment. This means that the judge took  a  legally  incorrect
      starting point for her assessment. As the judge has  made  clear  that
      she applied the MAB approach I cannot  be  confident  that  she  would
      necessarily have reached the same conclusion if not for that error.
   9. I should make clear that this was an issue that arose in discussion at
      the hearing and was not a point taken specifically in the Secretary of
      State's grounds, but Mrs Sood did not suggest that she was  unable  to
      respond to this point and did not seek to suggest that the  judge  did
      not, in that respect, fall into legal error.


  10. The second error of law  made  by  the  judge  is  identified  in  the
      Secretary of States grounds as follows:


           "Deportation is not one dimensional in its effect.  It  has  the
           effect not only of removing the  risk  of  re-offending  by  the
           deportee himself, but also of deterring other foreign  nationals
           in a similar position."


      Mrs Sood accepts, as indeed she must, that nowhere in the decision  of
      the judge is to be found any indication, at  all,  that  she  had  any
      regard to the public interest in the  deterrence  of  others  that  is
      achieved by deporting foreign criminals. I am  unable  to  accept  Mrs
      Sood's submission that this error by the judge was not a material one.
      The consequence of this error is  that  the  judge  has  left  out  of
      account  what  is  perhaps  the  most  significant   public   interest
      consideration in this case. It is the respondent's case  that  he  now
      represents no risk of re-offending or of causing harm to  the  public.
      Therefore, the only public  interest  that  would  be  served  by  his
      deportation would be the deterrent effect that  may  have  on  others.
      Indeed, it may be thought that  the  deportation  of  a  rehabilitated
      foreign criminal sends a particularly powerful message  of  deterrence
      to  others  that  even  if,  following  conviction,  they  are   truly
      remorseful and have no further propensity to  offend,  deportation  is
      still a probable consequence.
  11. Although that error alone is sufficient to establish that the decision
      of the judge to allow this appeal cannot stand and must be set  aside,
      the Secretary of State does advance  one  further  ground  upon  which
      permission  to  appeal  was  sought  and  was  granted.  That  ground,
      distilled to its essence, is that  the  reasons  given  by  the  judge
      simply do not justify a finding  that  there  had  shown  to  be  very
      compelling circumstances over and above those required to qualify  for
      the statutory exceptions to mandatory deportation of foreign criminals
      where the sentence imposed is less than four years. As was observed in
      SSHD v CT (Vietnam) [2016] EWCA Civ 488:
           "The starting point in considering exceptional circumstances  is
           not neutral: SS (Nigeria and MF (Nigeria).  Rather,  the  scales
           are heavily weighted in favour of deportation and something very
           compelling is required to swing  the  outcome  in  favour  of  a
           foreign criminal whom Parliament has said should be deported.
           The best interests of the child, always a primary consideration,
           are not sole or paramount  but  to  be  balanced  against  other
           factors, in this case that only the strongest Article  8  claims
           will outweigh the public interest in deporting someone sentenced
           to at least four years' imprisonment. It will almost  always  be
           proportionate to deport, even taking into account as  a  primary
           consideration the best interest of a child."
      The position in this case was that the respondent had contact with his
      minor children, and an active role in their lives  but  they  did  not
      live together as a nuclear family. The respondent submits that if they
      did, the fact that the father cared for the children while the mother,
      being the main breadwinner of the family, was at  work  was  something
      not at all exceptional or compelling, rather it was a routine  example
      as to how families operate. Similarly, it will very often be the  case
      that distress at being separated from a parent who is  being  deported
      will be experienced by children who  remain  behind  but,  again,  the
      Secretary of State submits it was not reasonably open to the judge  to
      find that this amounts to the very compelling circumstances  over  and
      above that required by the statutory exceptions.
  12. Given that for the other reasons I have set out above, the  judge  has
      made a material error of law, and that the  appeal  will  need  to  be
      determined afresh, it seems to me  that  it  is  neither  helpful  nor
      necessary for me to  express  a  view  upon  this  submission  of  the
      Secretary of State as that will be something to  be  assessed  by  the
      judge before whom this remitted appeal is listed.


  13. I accept Mrs Sood's submission that, having found that the  judge  did
      make a material error of law, the appeal  should  be  remitted  for  a
      fresh hearing. That is because the appellant seeks to  rely  upon  the
      oral evidence of a number of witnesses and it will be  well  over  six
      months from the date  of  the  last  hearing  before  any  substantive
      hearing could be convened,  so that the position may or may not be the
      same as it was at the date of the hearing before Judge Saunders.


   Summary of decision:
  14. First-tier Tribunal Judge Saunders made an error of law  materials  to
      the outcome of this appeal and her decision to allow the appeal is set
      aside.

  15. The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed to  the  extent  that  the
      appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be determined afresh.


Signed           [pic]


                               Upper Tribunal Judge Southern
                               Date: 24 October 2017
