
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10162/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                      |Determination & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 1 April 2019                          |On 29 April 2019                   |
|                                         |                                   |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                             mr Tafadzwa Musiiwa
                       (ANONYMITY direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No legal representation
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Aboni (Senior HOPO)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against a determination of First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Andonian, promulgated on 31 January 2018, following  a  hearing  on  12
    January 2018.  In the determination, the judge dismissed the appeal  of
    the appellant, whereupon the appellant subsequently  applied  for,  and
    was granted, permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal, and  thus  the
    matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Zimbabwe, and  was  born  on  8th
    March 1983.  He appealed against the decision of the Secretary of State
    dated 27th September 2017, refusing his application for asylum and  for
    humanitarian protection, pursuant to paragraph 339C of HC 395.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The Appellant came to this country on 4th April 2001.  He did not claim
    asylum for the following eleven years.  When he did, he  feared  return
    to Zimbabwe because of alleged MDC affiliations.   A  feature  of  this
    appeal is his relationship with a Ms [SP], from whom there were several
    letters before Judge Andonian, but importantly, with respect to  which,
    the Secretary of State had  already  granted  the  Appellant  leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom on 4th October 2017.  That being so, there
    was no issue in relation to the Appellant's  Article  8  rights  to  be
    determined in the appeal before the judge.

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge went on  to  consider,  however,  not  only  the  Appellant's
    protection claim, but also his Article 8 claim.  With respect  to  both
    claims, the judge repeatedly  drew  attention  to  the  fact  that  the
    parties were not present, in what was  a  "paper"  hearing  before  him
    (which the Appellant is entitled to appeal on the basis of).  The judge
    refused the asylum claim (see paragraph 20).  The judge also went on to
    dismiss the Article 8  claim  on  the  basis  that  was  hopeless  (see
    paragraph 17).

Grounds of Application

 5. The grounds of application state that the judge erred, by  misdirecting
    himself,  on  the  basis  that  he  considered  the  Article  8  claim,
    notwithstanding the fact that the Appellant had been granted  leave  to
    remain on 4th October 2017, on the basis of his  relationship  with  Ms
    [P].  The grounds of application do not  address  at  all  the  judge's
    decision on the protection claim.

Submissions

 6. At the hearing before me on 1st April 2019, the Appellant, who appeared
    in person, agreed that he had not made an  appeal  against  the  asylum
    decision of the judge.  Indeed,  he  said  he  found  it  difficult  to
    quibble with that decision.  Mrs Aboni, however, on  her  part,  relied
    upon the Rule 24 response, to the grant  of  permission  given  on  4th
    March 2018, that the Respondent Secretary of State did not  oppose  the
    Appellant's appeal because the Appellant had already been granted leave
    on the basis of his Article 8 claim, and that  was  not  a  matter  for
    determination in an appeal before Judge Andonian.  However, the judge's
    findings  with  respect  to  the  asylum  claim,  which  had  not  been
    challenged, should not be set aside, as they stood.



Decision

 7. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law (see Section 12(1) of TCEA 2007) such that  I  should
    set aside the decision and remake the  decision.   My  reasons  are  as
    follows.

 8. This is an appeal where the appellant had already been granted leave to
    remain on the basis of his family life with his UK partner.  There  was
    no Article 8 issue to be determined  by  the  judge.   The  only  issue
    related to his asylum claim.  The  judge  decided  that  asylum  claim.
    That decision has not been appealed.  The appellant  who  has  appeared
    before me in person today has  openly  stated  that  he  is  not  in  a
    position to  appeal  it.    The  judge,  however,  ought  not  to  have
    proceeded to determine the Article 8 claim when it was not before  him.
    He had no jurisdiction to do so.

 9. I, accordingly, remake the decision on the basis of the findings of the
    original judge, the evidence before him, and  the  submissions  that  I
    have heard today.  The appeal of the appellant on  Article  8  grounds,
    having been allowed, I remake the decision and hold that the  appellant
    cannot succeed on his asylum claim for the reasons that were  given  by
    Judge Andonian.  The appeal of the Appellant is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

10. The Appellant's appeal is dismissed.

11. There is no anonymity order.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 25th April 2019








