
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10629/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided on the papers            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|                                 |On 10 August 2020                |
|                                 |                                 |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BLUNDELL


                                   Between

                                     aHA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant was born on 1 August 1983.  His nationality has  been  in
    dispute since his arrival  in  the  United  Kingdom  in  October  2014.
    Throughout, he has  claimed  to  be  an  Iranian  national  of  Kurdish
    ethnicity who spent some years living in the Independent Kurdish Region
    ("IKR") of Iraq.  For reasons which  I  will  explain  in  due  course,
    however,  the  respondent  decided  that  the  appellant  is  an  Iraqi
    national, and the stage was set for six years of litigation.

Background

 2. There was initially some consideration given to removing the  appellant
    to Romania on Third Country Grounds, under  the  Dublin  Convention  in
    force in 2014.  Ultimately, however, the appellant underwent interviews
    with the respondent and described a claim for asylum  which  I  propose
    only to summarise very briefly.

 3. The appellant said that his father had been  arrested  by  the  Iranian
    authorities in June 2004, accused of supporting the Kurdish  Peshmerga.
    He was released nearly a year later, on condition that the family would
    relocate to Baneh, the capital city of the Kurdish  province  in  Iran.
    Instead,  in  June  2005,  the  family  crossed  the  Iran/Iraq  border
    illegally and began to live in Sulaymaniyah in the IKR.  The  appellant
    formed a relationship with a woman.  They married without  the  consent
    of her family and decided that it would be safest to relocate away from
    her  family.   When  the  appellant  returned  to   Sulaymaniyah   (for
    medication) some years later, he was confronted by  his  father-in-law.
    In 2014, the appellant's wife left the appellant and their two children
    to fight for the PKK against ISIL.   She  was  subsequently  killed  in
    combat and her family was notified of her death.

 4. The appellant claimed to fear the Iranian authorities. He had left  the
    country illegally; he had been involved with a party called  Komala  in
    the UK; his father had been involved with the peshmerga; and  his  wife
    had been involved with the pro-Kurdish PKK.  He also claimed to  be  at
    risk in Iraq from his wife's family.

    First Refusal Letter

 5. The respondent refused the appellant's claim for  asylum  on  30  March
    2018.  She considered his knowledge of Iran to be  poor  and  she  also
    relied on a language analysis report from Sprakab  in  concluding  that
    the appellant was not an Iranian national.  Sprakab had concluded, with
    a high level of  certainty,  that  the  appellant  had  the  linguistic
    background  of  someone  from  Iraq.   The  respondent  had   therefore
    determined to remove the appellant to Iraq and his fear of the  Iranian
    authorities was immaterial.  As for the  asserted  risk  in  Iraq,  the
    respondent did not consider it to be truthful, not  least  because  the
    appellant had untruthfully denied having been in Romania, where it  was
    established that he had been fingerprinted en route to the UK.

    First Appeal

 6. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal and  his  appeal  was
    heard by Judge Graham, sitting in Birmingham on  15  May  2018.   In  a
    lengthy reserved decision which was  issued  on  22  June  2018,  Judge
    Graham dismissed the appellant's appeal on all grounds.  She  concluded
    that the appellant  was  an  Iraqi  national  [28];  that  he  had  not
    established a risk  arising  from  sur  place  activities  against  the
    Iranian regime in the UK [30]-[31]; and  that  he  had  fabricated  his
    account of the events in Iraq [33]-[40].  Judge Graham  concluded  that
    the appellant could return to the  IKR,  where  he  had  'his  parents,
    sisters, and brothers and his own  children',  who  would  be  able  to
    assist him in obtaining a replacement Civil  Status  Identity  Document
    upon return: [41].

 7. Permission to appeal against that  decision  was  refused  by  the  FtT
    (Judge Martins) and by the Upper Tribunal (Judge Jordan).   The  latter
    decision was issued on 3 January 2019.

    Fresh Claim

 8. Seven months  later,  the  appellant  made  further  submissions  under
    paragraph 353 of the Immigration Rules.  He submitted, in summary, that
    he could establish his nationality by an Iranian identity document  and
    that he had been engaging in more sur place activity, as  a  result  of
    which he would be at risk on return to  Iran.   In  a  statement  which
    accompanied the submissions, he said that he had managed  to  obtain  a
    copy of his Iranian ID (known as a shenasnameh) from contacts in  Iran,
    who had sent it through a mobile phone app called Viber.   He  detailed
    his activities for the pro-Kurdish Komala Party in the UK and submitted
    that the Iranian government would not like the things he had posted  on
    his Facebook account.  Reference  was  also  made  to  the  appellant's
    mental health because his GP,  Dr  Parmar  of  the  Handsworth  Medical
    Centre, had stated that he  had  been  started  on  an  anti-depressant
    medication.

    Second Refusal Letter

 9. The  respondent  accepted  that  the  appellant's  further  submissions
    amounted to a fresh claim under paragraph 353 of the Immigration  Rules
    but not that he was in need of  international  protection.   She  noted
    that the appellant had not produced the original of the shenasnameh and
    she did not accept that the copy established his  nationality.   Having
    considered  the  evidence  submitted  in  support  of  the  sur   place
    activities, the respondent did not accept  that  the  appellant  was  a
    member of the Komala Party.  Nor did she accept that  he  would  be  at
    risk as a result of that activity, or his postings on  Facebook,  which
    were critical of the Iranian regime.  The respondent intended to return
    the appellant to Iraq, so these remained  immaterial.   The  respondent
    then considered the situation to which the appellant  would  return  in
    Iraq and did not accept that it would  breach  the  UK's  international
    obligations.  The respondent considered that  the  appellant  would  be
    able to secure the documentation required to facilitate his safe return
    to, and settlement in, Iraq.  The respondent did not  accept  that  his
    return to  Iraq  would  be  in  breach  of  the  1951  Convention,  the
    Qualification Directive or the ECHR.

The Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

10. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal for  a  second  time.
    His appeal was heard by Judge  French,  sitting  in  Birmingham  on  20
    January 2020.  In a reserved decision which was  sent  to  the  parties
    eight days later, Judge French dismissed the  appeal  on  all  grounds.
    His decision is concise.

11. The judge recounted the appellant's immigration  history  at  [1].   He
    gave  himself  directions  on  the  law  at  [2].   He  summarised  the
    documentary evidence  before  him  at  [3]  and  the  appellant's  oral
    evidence at [4].  Submissions from both representatives appeared at [5]
    and [6].  He reminded himself of Devaseelan [2003] Imm AR 1 and R  (MW)
    v SSHD [2019] UKUT 411 (IAC) at [7] and  concluded  that  what  he  was
    required to consider was whether there was a 'principled  and  properly
    reasoned basis on which he could depart  from  Judge  Graham's  earlier
    conclusions.  He then said this:

         "I have looked at what has changed in terms  of  the  evidence  put
         before me that was not available to the previous judge. This  seems
         to be limited to a translated birth certificate and the  fact  that
         he is now a member rather than just a supporter of Komala and  more
         active politically than he had been before. I do  not  accept  that
         Mrs Saadnia is an expert whose views are conclusive. I raised  with
         the  appellant's  advocate  what  the  provenance  of   the   birth
         certificate  was,  in  particular  how  it  had  been  obtained   ,
         supposedly from Iran, and how it had been brought to the UK and why
         it contained as part of the document a  recent  photograph  of  the
         appellant. The advocate said that  he  did  not  have  instructions
         about the photograph incorporated in the birth  certificate.  I  do
         not accept that the birth certificate is a valid document. The only
         other changes were the claims of political activity, but Mr Ghaderi
         said that even members of Komala did not do very  much,  and  there
         was evidence of attendance  at  only  two  public  meetings.  I  am
         conscious  that  copy  Facebook  postings  are  not  necessarily  a
         reliable source of evidence, since  it  is  possible  to  amend  an
         account to produce a misleading  impression  about  what  has  been
         published. Bearing in mind all the above I am satisfied that  there
         is not a principled and properly reasoned basis to depart from  the
         findings of the previous judge."

12. At [8], the judge stated that  he  proceeded  on  the  basis  that  the
    appellant was an Iraqi citizen and that he would be required to  return
    there.  In those circumstances, he reasoned, the appellant would not be
    at risk as a result of his Komala activities.  He did not consider that
    the appellant would encounter significant  obstacles  in  returning  to
    Iraq: [9].  He is fluent  in  Kurdish  Sorani  and,  even  on  his  own
    evidence, he had lived there for nine years before coming  to  the  UK.
    There was no reason to think that he would be unable to find employment
    in Iraq and he could fund his own accommodation  and  lifestyle  there.
    In any event, he had  extensive  family  living  there,  including  his
    mother, 3 brothers, 2 sisters and his 2 children,  all  of  whom  could
    assist him upon his return. Balancing the appellant's  limited  private
    life, including his medical conditions against the public  interest  in
    his  removal,  the  judge  found  the  appellant's  removal  to  be   a
    proportionate  course.   In  so  finding,  the  judge  noted  that  the
    appellant did not have a significant mental health problem  because  he
    was not under the care  of  a  mental  health  specialist  and  greater
    treatment had not been considered necessary: [10].

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

13. Seven (misnumbered) grounds of appeal were advanced by the  appellant's
    previous solicitors.  It was submitted that:

      i) The judge had 'pre-determined in his mind  that  there  is  no  new
         evidence' and that he had failed to consider the new evidence which
         had been adduced.

     ii) The judge was unsure of the evidence  and  should  have  given  the
         appellant the benefit of the doubt.

    iii) The judge had failed to give adequate  reasons  for  rejecting  the
         expert and other evidence.

     iv) The judge had made no real findings on the appellant's claim.

      v) The judge had failed to consider internal relocation.

     vi) The judge had failed to consider the country guidance  decision  in
         SMO & Ors (Iraq) CG [2019] UKUT 400 (IAC).

    vii) The judge had failed to take expert evidence (from the  appellant's
         GP) into account.

14. Judge Saffer extended time and granted permission to appeal on each  of
    the grounds.  He considered it arguable  that  inadequate  and  unclear
    reasons had been given for  rejecting  a  report  prepared  by  someone
    claiming to be an expert.  The rest of  the  grounds  were  weaker,  he
    stated, but could nevertheless be argued.

15. Judge Saffer's decision was sent to the parties on 21 April,  by  which
    stage the country was obviously in 'lockdown' as a result of the global
    pandemic.  The papers were placed before me on 30 April, with a view to
    a judge considering whether any progress could properly be made in  the
    appeal despite the temporary closure of Field House to the  public.   I
    formed the provisional  view  that  the  Upper  Tribunal  could  decide
    without a hearing whether the FtT had erred in law and, if so,  whether
    its decision fell to be set aside.  I drafted directions to the parties
    that written submissions should be made on the merits of the appeal and
    that submissions could also be  made  on  the  procedural  question  of
    whether there should be a hearing.

16. The respondent lodged written submissions by  email  on  5  June.   The
    papers were  placed  before  me  on  17  July.   The  Upper  Tribunal's
    administrative staff noted that there had been  no  response  from  the
    appellant's solicitors (Optimus Law).  I was concerned by  the  absence
    of a response.  I suspected that there  might  have  been  no  response
    because the  respondent's  submissions  had  not  been  served  on  the
    appellant's solicitors.  I directed that the  respondent's  submissions
    should be served upon the appellant's within 72  hours  and  that  they
    should have a further week within which  to  respond.   The  respondent
    duly served her submissions and, on 28 July 2020, the  appellant's  new
    solicitors  (Hanson  Law)  filed  and  served  written  submissions  in
    accordance with my amended directions.

17. The respondent was content  for  the  Tribunal  to  proceed  without  a
    hearing.  The appellant was not.   It  was  submitted  that  'the  case
    should be decided at a face to face hearing, given  the  importance  of
    the same and the fact that this is a protection claim.'

18. Rule 34(1) gives the Upper Tribunal a discretion to make  any  decision
    without a hearing.  By rule 34(2), the Upper Tribunal must have  regard
    to the views expressed by the parties in deciding  whether  to  hold  a
    hearing.  Obviously, any decision must also be informed  by  the  over-
    riding objective of dealing with cases fairly and justly.  I  have  had
    regard to the views expressed by the parties.  I have  also  considered
    what was said by the Supreme Court in Osborn v Parole Board [2014] 1 AC
    1115.  I accept what is said by the appellant's  solicitors  about  the
    importance of the issues but there is no requirement for all protection
    proceedings to be the subject of an oral hearing.  All must  depend  on
    the context.  At this stage, the only questions to  be  determined  are
    whether the FtT erred in law and whether its decision falls to  be  set
    aside.   There  are  no  disputed  questions  of  fact,  nor  does  the
    credibility of the appellant or a witness fall to  be  assessed  before
    me.  I consider that I can fairly and justly consider the appeal to the
    Upper Tribunal on the basis of the written submissions which have  been
    made.

    Submissions

19. The appellant's solicitors submitted in the grounds of appeal that  the
    judge had 'pre-determined' that there was limited evidence and that  it
    was not capable of belief.  The appellant's birth certificate  was  not
    'limited evidence' and it  proved  the  appellant's  nationality.   The
    judge had failed to give any or any adequate reasons for rejecting that
    document, or the  other  documents  which  bore  on  the  risk  to  the
    appellant.  As to  ground  two,  the  judge  had  stated  that  he  was
    'conscious'  of  the  possibility  that  Facebook  accounts  could   be
    manipulated.  He should have given the appellant  the  benefit  of  the
    doubt in that respect.

20. As to ground three, it was submitted that the judge had not  given  any
    reason for rejecting the opinion of Mrs Saatnia.  As to ground four, it
    was submitted that the judge had failed to 'consider any aspect of  the
    appellant's claim at all' and had failed to consider  Article  3  ECHR.
    In respect of ground five, it was submitted that the judge  had  failed
    to apply the test in Januzi [2006] 2 AC 426  to  the  consideration  of
    internal relocation.  The judge had noted  that  the  appellant  had  a
    better prospect of securing employment in Iraq than he did  in  the  UK
    but that was not the correct test. In respect of  ground  six,  it  was
    submitted that the judge had failed to mention or to apply the  country
    guidance in SMO (Iraq) [2019] UKUT 400 (IAC); it mattered  not  whether
    the decision had been drawn to the attention of the  FtT.  Finally,  in
    relation  to  ground  seven,  it  was  submitted   that   the   judge's
    consideration of the GP's letter had been legally inadequate; he was  a
    medical professional who would not simply have  taken  the  appellant's
    account at face value.  And the judge had failed  to  consider  whether
    the appellant's depression might, in the minds of a Muslim  population,
    be indicative of demonic possession.

21. Written submissions in defence of the judge's decision were filed by Ms
    Jones, a Senior Presenting Officer.  She focused on what she considered
    to be the principal basis on which Judge Saffer had granted  permission
    to appeal.  She submitted that the judge's  treatment  of  the  medical
    evidence from the appellant's GP had been precisely in accordance  with
    the reported decisions in which it  had  been  held  that  the  more  a
    diagnosis is dependent on  assuming  that  the  account  given  by  the
    appellant was to be believed, the less likely it  is  that  significant
    weight will be attached to it.  In respect of the remaining grounds, Ms
    Jones submitted that the judge had given proper and sustainable reasons
    for his decision to reject the  appellant's  account  and  the  grounds
    amounted to nothing more than a disagreement with the decision.

22. In reply, the appellant's solicitors submitted that the judge had erred
    in his treatment of the medical evidence.  In particular, the judge had
    erred in concluding that the appellant's condition was not  significant
    due to the absence of specialist referral; the judge was not an  expert
    and there could be  other  plausible  reasons  for  the  absence  of  a
    referral.  The judge had erred in his approach to Devaseelan [2003] Imm
    AR 1.  The respondent's submissions had focused  on  only  one  of  the
    appellant's complaints, whereas all had been said by Judge Saffer to be
    arguable.  In the circumstances, the appeal fell  to  be  allowed,  the
    decision of the FtT set aside, and the appeal remitted to the FtT to be
    heard 'de nova'.

Discussion

23. Some of the appellant's grounds  of  appeal  are  simply  misconceived,
    others require rather fuller analysis.  Grounds one and two  fall  into
    the former category.

24. By ground one, it is submitted that the judge  somehow  approached  the
    case with a closed mind.  I  see  no  proper  basis  for  that  serious
    allegation.  It is not based on anything said  or  done  by  the  judge
    during the hearing (contrast Dorman v Clinton [2019]  EWHC  2988  (QB))
    but, seemingly, on the judge's comment in his decision that  there  was
    'limited'  further  evidence  adduced  by  the  appellant  after  Judge
    Graham's decision.  That was the judge expressing his analysis  of  the
    evidence in a reserved decision; it provides no indication of a  closed
    judicial mind.  Also within this ground, it is submitted that the judge
    gave no reasons for rejecting the  appellant's  shenasnameh.   That  is
    simply wrong; the judge gave a very clear  reason  for  rejecting  this
    document.  He did not accept that  a  document  which  was  purportedly
    issued in 1983 would bear a recent photo of the appellant.

25. By ground two, it is submitted that the judge  should  have  given  the
    appellant the benefit of the doubt in respect of the Facebook postings.
     With respect to the appellant's solicitors, I am not sure that I  even
    understand this ground of appeal.   The  judge  was  circumspect  about
    attaching weight to the appellant's Facebook postings  because  he  was
    conscious that they  could  be  manipulated  to  present  a  misleading
    account of what had been published online.  The appellant is a man  who
    had been found incredible by Judge Graham,  and  who  (on  the  judge's
    findings) had  presented  a  shenasnameh  to  which  weight  could  not
    properly be attached.  I cannot understand  why  it  is  said  that  he
    should have been afforded the benefit of the doubt in  respect  of  the
    Facebook postings.  As a senior division of the Upper Tribunal held  in
    KS (benefit of the doubt) [2014] UKUT 552 (IAC),  that  principle  adds
    nothing of substance to the lower standard  of  proof.   And  I  cannot
    understand why paragraph [4] of the grounds of appeal  cites  WM  (DRC)
    [2006] EWCA Civ 1495, which obviously relates not  to  the  substantive
    determination of protection appeals but to the consideration of whether
    further submissions might amount to a fresh claim.  This  ground  fails
    to establish any error on the part of the judge.

26. Ground three requires rather  more  detailed  analysis.   It  was  this
    ground, to my mind, which prompted Judge Saffer to grant permission  to
    appeal on the basis that 'inadequate  and  unclear  reasons  have  been
    given for rejecting a report prepared by  someone  claiming  to  be  an
    expert'.  Ms Jones was wrong, however, to conclude that  the  focus  of
    Judge Saffer's remarks was the judge's treatment of  the  short  letter
    from  the  appellant's  GP;  he  evidently  had  in  mind  the  judge's
    consideration of the report from Mrs Saatnia.

27. The appellant's nationality has been at the centre of this  case  since
    the appellant claimed asylum.  He was thought by Sprakab to be an Iraqi
    national.  The respondent adopted that view and Judge Graham found  for
    the respondent in that  respect.   When  the  appellant  came  to  make
    further submissions, he supported his claim to be an  Iranian  national
    by submitting to  the  respondent  a  copy  of  a  shenasnameh  with  a
    certified translation.  This document was said to have been  issued  by
    the Baneh Civil Status Registry  on  17  October  1983.   It  gave  the
    appellant's details and those of his mother and father.  It contained a
    finger (or thumb) print and a photograph of the appellant  was  stapled
    to the original.  The appellant stated that this copied version of  the
    shenasnameh had been sent to him from Iran  through  the  Viber  mobile
    phone app.  The respondent declined to attach weight to the document on
    account of the fact that it was only a copy.  The copied  document  and
    the translation appeared at Annex D of the respondent's bundle.

28. The  appellant  made  reference  to  the  shenasnameh  in  his  witness
    statement before the FtT.  He said that he 'had an  expert  report  who
    considered my birth certificate and confirmed it is original': [3].  He
    stated that he had not had the original birth certificate at  the  time
    that he made further submissions but that he would 'provide  an  expert
    report to show that the Birth Certificate has been considered and it is
    original'.  The statement was signed on 13 January 2020.

29. The expert report to  which  the  appellant's  statement  referred  was
    seemingly that of Mrs  Saatnia,  which  was  sent  to  the  appellant's
    solicitors on 14 January.  Mrs Saatnia described herself  as  being  of
    dual Iranian /British nationality and being a  qualified  solicitor  in
    Iran and a member of Iranian ICBAR.  She stated that she was  a  member
    of the UK Electronic Immigration Network  and  the  'international  bar
    association with the reference number 1412994'.  She  stated  that  she
    had  fourteen  years'  experience  'within  various  sections  of   the
    Judiciary in Iran' and that she had degrees at Bachelor's and  Master's
    level from Iranian universities.   She  had  previous  experience,  she
    said, of acting as an expert witness 'in connection with legal  matters
    related to the Iranian legal system.'  She stated that she was familiar
    with legal documentation from Iran  as  a  result  of  her  work  as  a
    solicitor there,  practising  in  various  fields.   She  also  stated,
    without elaboration, that she was 'acting as a Legal Consultant for the
    Iranian asylum seekers in the UK  from  2016  until  present  with  law
    offices'.  Her report is printed on company headed  paper  for  a  firm
    called PIMI Ltd, which describes itself as 'The Law Firm UK',  both  in
    its logo and the printed 'watermark' on the paper.

30. Mrs Saatnia stated that she had been instructed 'to provide  an  expert
    report' on the appellant's Iranian birth certificate.  Her instructions
    were not set out with any greater degree of particularity.  Having  set
    out her qualifications, she stated  that  she  had  seen  the  original
    document and that:

         "This birth certificate contains all required details such  as  the
         serial numbering, national ID number,  issuance  place  and  dates,
         parent's details  and  relevant  state  registry  of  civil  status
         districts area to the birth certificate."

31. She then recounted what was entered on the document, before setting out
    Articles 12 and 13 of the Birth Registration of the Law on Registration
    in Iran.  Under the sub-heading 'Conclusion' on the sixth page  of  the
    report, Mrs Saatnia stated as follows:

         "I believe that I am qualified for making comments on  the  Iranian
         Legal documents and also on  the  legal  situation  of  the  asylum
         seekers if they return to Iran.

         The Home Office, for the above fact  and  reasons,  should  believe
         that my expert report is valid  and  I  am  in  a  position  to  be
         qualified to provide assessment on the documents that have recently
         been issued by the Judiciary Authorities in Iran.

         I confirm that I have done the actual checks  to  verify  that  the
         documents have genuinely been issued by  the  Islamic  republic  of
         Iran Ministry of interior state registrar of  civils  status  under
         the Chapter Three - Birth Registration of the Law  on  Registration
         in point of my view this is genuine and correct."

32. Appended to Mrs Saatnia's report were pages  of  academic  transcripts,
    both  in  Farsi  and  translated  into  English,  as  evidence  of  her
    qualifications.

33. The Presenting Officer before the judge seemingly  submitted  that  Mrs
    Saatnia's report was not  deserving  of  weight  because  she  was  not
    'approved by BAILII': [5].  I do understand the  basis  on  which  that
    submission came to be made.  Bailii does  not  'approve'  experts,  nor
    does it have a directory of expert witnesses such as that  retained  by
    the Electronic Immigration Network; that is not its stated function and
    the respondent's advocates should have been aware of that.   The  judge
    did not waste time on this submission, sensibly preferring to focus  on
    what he considered to be the real issue with the shenasnameh.

34. At [7], the judge explained why he did not consider Mrs Saatnia  to  be
    an 'expert whose views are conclusive'.  He went on to  state  that  he
    had concluded that the document  was  not  valid  because  he  was  not
    satisfied about its provenance and the fact that it contained a  recent
    photograph of the appellant.

35. Whilst the judge's reasoning was compressed, I do not  consider  it  to
    have been legally inadequate.  He had noted what had been said  by  Mrs
    Saatnia but he was not satisfied that the document  was  one  to  which
    weight could properly be attached.  His conclusions in that regard must
    be understood in context.  Mrs  Saatnia's  report  confirmed  that  the
    document contained all of the information which was to be expected  but
    her opinion on its form  went  no  further  than  that.   She  did  not
    confirm, for example, that the paper used in the shenasnameh was of the
    type expected; that the wet ink stamps  had  not  been  printed  by  an
    inkjet printer; or that the embedded security features of the  document
    were in line with those used in 1983.  In this respect, therefore,  her
    report really did  not  take  matters  very  far  indeed.   By  way  of
    comparison, an expert report  which  stated  that  a  British  passport
    contained a person's name, date and place of birth would be  of  little
    assistance  to  a  judge  in  determining  whether  that  document  was
    deserving of weight.   A  report  which  stated  that  the  holographic
    security features were in keeping with the date of issue and  that  the
    laminate on the biodata page was wholly  intact,  on  the  other  hand,
    might be thought to be of obvious significance.

36. Mrs Saatnia's report also seemed to  confirm,  however,  that  she  had
    'done the actual checks' to verify that the document had  been  validly
    issued.  In this respect, her report was wholly lacking.  She  did  not
    state what 'actual checks' had been performed, nor did she confirm  the
    results of those checks.  She simply stated that 'in point of  my  view
    this is genuine and correct'.  With respect to Mrs Saatnia,  this  part
    of her report is wholly unclear.  If she meant to state  that  she  had
    been in touch with  the  Iranian  authorities  and  that  it  had  been
    confirmed to her that this was a genuine document, she failed to  state
    the method of her enquiry or give any clear indication of  the  results
    of that enquiry.  This part of her report was not properly capable,  in
    my judgment, of bearing any weight whatsoever.

37. For these reasons, Mrs Saatnia's report did not take matters  very  far
    at all for the appellant. At the most, it confirmed that  the  document
    contained what she would expect it to contain. I doubt whether this was
    an instance in which a judge of the First-tier Tribunal was required to
    articulate a good reason for rejecting the view expressed by an expert,
    such as the situation considered in Miao v SSHD  [2006]  EWCA  Civ  75;
    [2006] Imm AR 379, for example.  Even  if  it  was  such  a  situation,
    however, I consider that the judge was entitled to take the view he did
    for the reasons that he gave.  The document was surprising on its face,
    and Mrs Saatnia did not address the obvious oddity  that  the  document
    was purportedly issued in the year of the appellant's birth but it bore
    a photograph of him as a man.  The judge was concerned about that,  and
    he was concerned to understand how the document had been obtained.   In
    the absence of a satisfactory answer  to  either  question,  the  judge
    concluded that the document was unreliable.  His reasons were clear and
    logical, therefore, and his overall approach  was  in  accordance  with
    Tanveer Ahmed [2002] UKIAT 00439, [2002] Imm AR 318.  I do not consider
    ground three to disclose a legal error on the part of the judge.

38. Ground four is unmeritorious, contending as  it  does  that  the  judge
    failed to make any findings in relation to the appellant's  claim.   He
    plainly did make relevant findings, including his conclusion  that  the
    appellant had failed to adduce any adequate evidence to persuade him to
    depart from Judge Graham's central conclusion that  the  appellant  was
    not an Iranian national.

39. Ground five contends that the judge erred in law in  his  consideration
    of internal  relocation  but  this  is  to  misunderstand  the  judge's
    conclusions.  He concluded that the appellant is an Iraqi national  who
    can return to his family in the IKR.  That  does  no  involve  internal
    relocation; it involves a return to the appellant's home area, in which
    he was considered by the judge not to be at risk.  The  judge  was  not
    required to consider or apply Januzi [2006] UKHL 15; [2006] 2 AC 426 or
    AH (Sudan) [2007] UKHL 49; [2008] 1 AC 678,  and  would  have  been  in
    error if he had done so.

40. By ground six, it is contended that the judge  failed  to  consider  or
    apply the country guidance in SMO (Iraq) when considering  the  ability
    of the appellant to return to the IKR.  That complaint is  correct  but
    is not capable of establishing in the decision of the judge an error of
    law which justifies its setting aside.  There are two  reasons  that  I
    reach that conclusion.  The first is  that,  on  the  findings  of  the
    judge, the appellant could safely return to  his  family  in  the  IKR.
    Despite the well-known economic hardship in that  area,  the  appellant
    has a pre-existing support network to which he could return, and  would
    not therefore be at risk of encountering very significant obstacles  to
    integration or other hardship which would be contrary to the ECHR.

41. Secondly, insofar as this ground relies on the difficulties  which  the
    appellant might encounter because he  does  not  have  a  Civil  Status
    Identity Document (CSID), it  is  again  important  to  understand  the
    judge's conclusions in their proper context.  Like  Judge  Graham,  the
    judge concluded that the appellant's family could assist him  upon  his
    return to Iraq.  It is to be recalled that the judge was presented  not
    with an appellant who claimed  to  be  an  Iraqi  who  would  encounter
    difficulties on return to  that  country  due  to  the  absence  of  an
    identity document; he was presented with an appellant who claimed to be
    an Iranian, and did not advance a primary or alternative argument about
    difficulties upon return to Iraq.  The appellant advanced no reason, in
    other words, for the  judge  to  depart  from  the  prima  facie  valid
    starting point provided by Judge Graham's decision.  I do not  consider
    it to have been incumbent upon the  judge  to  formulate  and  consider
    alternative arguments for the appellant.

42. In respect of ground seven, I consider  that  the  judge's  conclusions
    about the GP's letter were open to him,  essentially  for  the  reasons
    given in Ms Jones'  written  submissions.   The  letter  was  the  only
    medical evidence before the judge.  It was addressed 'To  whom  it  may
    concern' and was dated 1 March 201.  It was as follows:

         "I can confirm that I have recently reviewed Ako at the GP surgery,
         and he has been suffering with low  mood,  reduced  appetite,  poor
         sleep and lack of interest in doing things.  He  feels  vulnerable,
         and his  immigration  status  is  contributing  to  his  depressive
         symptoms.  He tells me he has no family in the UK, and is having to
         rely upon his friends to provide basic support.   He  has  recently
         been started on anti-depressant medication for his symptoms, and  I
         have advised ongoing review at the GP surgery.  Please can you take
         this into consideration when reviewing his case."

43. A manuscript addition to the letter  stated  'reviewed  at  GP  surgery
    14/1/2020 - ongoing meds / review advised'.  That  updated  letter  was
    sent to the FtT as part of a supplementary bundle on 17 January 2020.

44. It is trite that the more a diagnosis is dependent on assuming that the
    account given by the appellant is to be believed, the less likely it is
    that significant weight will be attached to it: JL (China) [2013]  UKUT
    145 (IAC), applying HH (Ethiopia) [2007] EWCA Civ 306.  The  judge  was
    entitled to conclude that the opinion of the appellant's  GP  (that  he
    was suffering from depression) was likely to be based on an  acceptance
    of the symptoms  described  by  the  appellant  himself.   That  letter
    demonstrated no clinical evaluation of the appellant's account and was,
    in reality, little more than a short letter issued by  his  GP  at  his
    request.  It did not purport to be expert evidence.  It did not  comply
    with the requirements of the Practice Statement.

45. The judge is also criticised for his observation that  the  appellant's
    condition could not be significant because 'greater treatment  had  not
    been considered necessary'.  The judge was not required to be a medical
    expert in order to make such an observation, however, and it  was  open
    to him to conclude that the appellant  would  have  been  referred  for
    treatment in addition to the unspecified anti-depressant medication  in
    the event that he was suffering from a serious mental health problem.

46. Insofar as this  ground  also  criticises  the  judge  for  failing  to
    consider whether the appellant would be suspected of demonic possession
    in Iraq due to his mental health problems, I can see  no  reference  to
    any such claim in the appellant's written or  oral  submissions  before
    the FtT.  There is certainly no background material in the  appellant's
    bundle which would begin to support such an assertion.

47. In the circumstances, the appellant's appeal shall be dismissed.



Notice of Decision

The appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.  The decision  of
the FtT shall stand.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


                                                                M.J.Blundell

                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                              Immigration and Asylum Chamber

                                                               3 August 2020
