
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/10422/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 11 February 2021                           |On 1 March 2021               |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN

                                   Between

                                     AHQ
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTIOn made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation

For the Appellant:     Mr Vokes, Counsel instructed by CB Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

This has been a remote hearing to which both parties have consented. The
form of remote hearing was video by Skype (V). A face to face hearing was
not held because it was not practicable and all issues could be determined
in a remote hearing. I did not experience any difficulties, and neither
party expressed any concern, with the process.

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. In 2008 the appellant entered the UK and claimed  asylum.   His  claim
      was  refused  and  subsequent  appeal  dismissed.  In   the   decision
      dismissing his appeal, dated 14 January 2010, it is  stated  that  the
      appellant had not been truthful and that "no part of  his  account  of
      past events in Iraq may be relied upon."

   2. In 2019 the appellant made further submissions. These were refused  by
      the respondent on 30 September 2019. The  appellant  appealed  to  the
      First-tier Tribunal, where his appeal was heard by Judge of the First-
      tier Tribunal Thapar ("the judge"). The judge  dismissed  his  appeal.
      The appellant is now appealing against that decision.

   3. The appellant is a Kurdish citizen of Iraq from  Kirkuk  born  in  May
      1989. His case, in summary, is that he cannot safely return to  Kirkuk
      because of the status and profile his uncle, whom I shall refer to  as
      SQ. The appellant claims that SQ is a former police  chief  in  Kirkuk
      who, following the Kurdish independence referendum, fled  to  the  IKR
      after being issued with an arrest warrant and attacked. The  appellant
      also claims that he does not have, and cannot  obtain  a  replacement,
      civil status identity document  ("CSID")  and  therefore  he  will  be
      exposed to conditions breaching Article 3 ECHR.

   4. The appellant submitted to the respondent several articles  about  SQ.
      One of the articles (from the newspaper Kurdistan 24) includes a  copy
      of  an  arrest  warrant  for  SQ,  a  letter  issued  by  the  Central
      Investigation Court of Baghdad instructing  the  arrest  of  13  high-
      ranking officials including SQ, and instructions from police of Kirkuk
      (relating to the arrest of the aforementioned 13 officials).

   5. The respondent,  in  the  refusal  letter  dated  30  September  2019,
      accepted that the appellant is a relative  of  SQ  but  not  that  the
      articles about SQ were reliable. The respondent also stated that:

           "In the alternative, even if it was accepted that  the  articles
           were reliable, it does not follow that there is  any  reasonable
           likelihood that those  who  carried  out  the  attack  have  any
           interest in you. You have been outside the country for almost  7
           years. You had no involvement in the military or police when you
           lived in Iraq. There is no credible reason as to why  those  who
           carried out the attack would have any interest in you,  or  even
           be aware that you had returned to the country."

   6. The appellant  supported  his  claim  by  submitting  a  report  by  a
      recognised and well respected expert on Iraq Dr Fatah, dated 20  March
      2020.  The  report   discusses   the   authenticity   of   the   three
      aforementioned documents published by Kurdistan 24.  Dr  Fatah  stated
      that because of the presentation of the documents (an image in a  news
      article) it was difficult to authenticate them. However, he was of the
      view that they were genuine primarily because (a) Kurdistan  24  is  a
      newspaper affiliated with the KDP which would not publish  a  document
      claiming to be from the Iraqi authorities if it was not;  and  (b)  he
      was aware - from his own knowledge - of several arrest warrants  being
      handed  to  senior  Kurdish  officials  following   the   independence
      referendum, including SQ. Dr Fatah also stated in the report that  the
      arrest warrant and documents concerning the apprehension  of  SQ  were
      token gestures and "more of a  derogatory  statement  than  an  actual
      intent to arrest", and a "pretext to re-enter Kirkuk".

   7. Dr Fatah's report did not express a view on the respondent's position,
      as set out above in paragraph 5, that  even  if  SQ  was  attacked  as
      claimed there is no reason why those who attacked him  would  have  an
      interest in the appellant.

Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

   8. The judge took as her starting point the negative credibility findings
      made by the First-tier Tribunal in 2010 as well as the  acceptance  by
      the respondent that the appellant is related to SQ.

   9. The judge found that the documents about SQ were  not  reliable.  With
      respect to Dr Fatah's opinion, the judge stated at paragraph 20:

           "I am mindful of Dr Fatah's comments  in  that  his  ability  to
           authenticate the scanned documents was  limited,  the  documents
           were missing some customary  features  and  crucially  that  the
           documents do not hold an intent to arrest. I do  not  find  that
           the comments  of  Dr  Fatah  indicate  that  the  documents  are
           definitively genuine or authentic and rather he speculates  that
           they hold similar characteristics to  documents  issued  by  the
           Iraqi  government.  Consequently,  and  in  light  of   my   own
           observations I find that the documents are unreliable. [Emphasis
           added].

  10. The judge found at paragraphs 22 that the documents about SQ  did  not
      indicate that the appellant would himself be at risk  from  the  Iraqi
      authorities; and at paragraph 24  that  the  appellant  would  not  be
      targeted on account of his uncle's role in Iraq. Although  not  stated
      explicitly, reading the decision as a whole, I am satisfied that these
      findings are made in the alternative: that is, the  judge  found  that
      even if the documents about SQ are genuine it does not follow that the
      appellant would be at risk, or targeted, in Iraq.

  11. The judge also found, in the light of SMO, KSP &  IM  (Article  15(c);
      identity documents) CG Iraq [2019] UKUT 400, that  the  conditions  on
      return were not such that the appellant is eligible  for  humanitarian
      protection. With respect to obtaining a replacement  CSID,  the  judge
      found that the appellant has family in  Iraq  and  therefore  has  the
      means of obtaining the relevant information required to obtain a  CSID
      in the UK.


Grounds of Appeal

  12. The arguments in the grounds of appeal, considered together  with  the
      submissions made by Mr Vokes at the hearing, can be divided into three
      distinct grounds/submissions.

  13. First, it  is  argued  that,  when  considering  the  three  documents
      concerning SQ that were assessed by Dr  Fatah,  the  judge  overlooked
      important aspects of Dr Fatah's opinion, failed to take  into  account
      that SQ fled to the IKR and applied the wrong standard of proof.

  14. The second submission is that the judge failed  to  give  reasons  for
      finding that the appellant would not be targeted because of SQ's role.

  15. The third argument is that the judge failed to  consider  whether  the
      appellant would be at risk on return to Baghdad because  he  would  be
      perceived to be against the Iraqi government. It is submitted that  he
      would be at risk from Shia militia travelling from Baghdad  to  Kirkuk
      (or the IKR) because of his  connection  to  his  uncle.  The  grounds
      contend that the appellant  would  fall  within  paragraph  5  of  the
      headnote to SMO, as  a  person  perceived  to  be  against  the  Iraqi
      government.

Analysis

  16. I agree with Mr Vokes that the judge fell into error in her assessment
      of the reliability of the three documents concerning SQ.

  17. Firstly, the judge appears to have not taken into  consideration  that
      Dr Fatah was able to  independently  corroborate,  based  on  his  own
      knowledge, that SQ was subject to an arrest warrant and  had  fled  to
      the IKR. This strongly supports the appellant's claims  about  SQ  and
      therefore it was necessary for the judge to address it.

  18. Secondly, one of the reasons the judge appears to have found that  the
      documents were not reliable is that Dr Fatah stated that there was  no
      actual intent to arrest SQ. This appears to reflect a misunderstanding
      of Dr Fatah's evidence. Dr Fatah did not  state  in  his  report  that
      because there was not an intent  to  arrest  the  documents  are  less
      reliable. Rather, this was part of his explanation for the  documents:
      that they were a derogatory statement and pretext to enter Kirkuk.

  19. Thirdly, the wording used in paragraph 20 of the decision  (describing
      the evidence of  Dr  Fatah  as  being  that  the  documents  were  not
      "definitively genuine") indicates that the judge applied  too  high  a
      standard of proof.

  20. For these reasons, I am satisfied that the judge's findings  regarding
      the documents about SQ are undermined by an error of law.  However,  I
      am not satisfied that the error is material. It was not sufficient for
      the appellant to establish that SQ  is  a  former  police  chief  who,
      following the  independence  referendum,  was  subject  to  an  arrest
      warrant and attack, and fled to the IKR. It was also necessary for the
      appellant to establish that he would face a  risk  of  persecution  or
      treatment contrary to article 3 ECHR because of his relationship  with
      SQ.

  21. The grounds argue that the judge did not provide reasons  for  finding
      that the appellant would not be  targeted  because  of  his  uncle.  I
      disagree. The judge's reasoning on this is extremely brief, but it  is
      sufficient. The reason given (in paragraphs 22 and 24 of decision)  is
      that the evidence submitted by the appellant does not indicate that he
      would himself be at risk from the Iraqi authorities.  Having  reviewed
      for myself the evidence that was before the First-tier Tribunal, I  am
      satisfied that this conclusion was plainly open to the judge.

  22. None of the articles about SQ adduced by the appellant  indicate  that
      the authorities in Iraq are  pursuing  the  families  (let  alone  the
      extended families) of the senior officials who were  made  subject  to
      arrest warrants. Dr Fatah, in his report, did not express a view  (one
      way or the other) on  whether,  as  a  general  matter,  the  extended
      families of the senior officials referred to in the  articles  are  at
      risk or specifically address whether the appellant might face  a  risk
      because he is SQ's nephew.

  23. Mr Vokes argued, when I put this to him, that it  was  axiomatic  that
      family members are deemed responsible and that the appellant  will  be
      at risk of detention and questioning because of  his  relationship  to
      SQ. I do not agree. In my view, it is not in any way  self-evident  or
      obvious that the appellant, who has  been  out  of  Iraq  for  over  a
      decade, was not involved in the military or police, and did not have a
      political (or other) profile in Iraq, would be  targeted  or  at  risk
      because of his uncle. The burden (to the lower standard)  was  on  the
      appellant to establish his case. In  the  absence  of  any  expert  or
      objective evidence to support the contention that a nephew might be at
      risk because of his uncle the judge was plainly entitled to  find,  as
      she did at paragraphs 22 and 24, that even if the  evidence  about  SQ
      was accepted and taken at its highest, the appellant would not  be  at
      risk because of him.

  24. Paragraph 5 of the headnote to SMO identifies personal characteristics
      which need to be considered in the "sliding scale"  analysis  required
      under article 15(c) of the Qualification Directive. The grounds  argue
      that  the  appellant  falls  within  these  categories   because   his
      connection to his uncle means that he would be perceived to be against
      the Iraqi government. However, paragraph 5  to  the  headnote  of  SMO
      states that opponents of the government may face a greater  risk,  not
      that their family members do. The  judge  therefore  did  not  err  by
      failing to consider this part of SMO.

Decision

  25. The appeal is dismissed and the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
      stands.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify the appellant or any member of the  appellant's  family.
This direction  applies  both  to  the  appellant  and  to  the  respondent.
Failure to comply with this  direction  could  lead  to  contempt  of  court
proceedings.

|                                   |                                   |
|Signed                             |                                   |
|                                   |                                   |
|D. Sheridan                        |                                   |
|Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan      |                                   |
|                                   |Dated: 12 February 2021            |



















