
                                    [pic]

Upper Tier Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10025/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision and Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 25 February 2019                   |On 28 February 2019                |
|                                              |                           |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PICKUP


                                   Between

                                     S K
                        [NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Ms M Owoyina, instructed by Victory Legal Services
For the respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the appellant's  appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Andonian promulgated  20.12.18,  dismissing  his  appeal
    against the decision of the Secretary of State, dated 1.8.18, to refuse
    his application for international protection made on 11.11.15,  on  the
    basis of risk on return  because  of  political  opinion  and  bisexual
    orientation.

 2. First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Murray  granted  permission  to  appeal  on
    29.1.19 but on the single ground of the appellant's assertion that  the
    judge erred in refusing  to  grant  an  adjournment  requested  because
    neither the appellant nor his legal representative had received a  copy
    of the respondent's bundle in advance of the hearing and  no  copy  was
    provided at the hearing. It is asserted that in the circumstances,  the
    appellant was unable to challenge the respondent's case on a number  of
    material points and thus that the hearing was procedurally unfair.

 3. Judge Murray considered that there was no merit in the other grounds of
    appeal, suggesting that the First-tier Tribunal Judge adequately  dealt
    with the medical evidence and reached conclusions open on the facts  of
    the case, as set  out  at  [54]  of  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

Error of Law

 4. For the reasons summarised below, I  found  a  material  error  in  the
    making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal such  as  to  require
    the decision of Judge Andonian to be set aside.

 5. As Judge Murray noted in granting permission to  appeal,  there  is  no
    reference in the First-tier Tribunal's decision to any application  for
    an adjournment on the basis of failure to provide the appellant  and/or
    his legal representatives a copy of the appellant's bundle.

 6. With his grounds  of  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal,  the  appellant
    produced a letter from his solicitors dated 26.11.18 stating that  they
    are not in possession of the respondent's bundle. However, there was no
    supporting witness statement or evidence from  the  representative  who
    attended the hearing to confirm the alleged procedural irregularity  by
    the tribunal proceeding with the appeal when the appellant did not have
    access to the respondent's bundle. Judge Murray indicated  that  whilst
    permission was granted on the assertion made, it was for the  appellant
    to rectify the  omission  pursuant  to  the  guidance  in  BW  (witness
    statements by advocates) Afghanistan [2014] UKUT 00568 (IAC).

 7. There had been a request  for  an  adjournment  made  by  letter  dated
    28.8.18, prior to the initial appeal hearing date of 14.9.18, asserting
    that the appellant was unfit to attend  the  hearing  because  of  high
    blood pressure and chest pains because  of  his  heart.  In  fact,  the
    hearing was adjourned, following a further  letter  of  3.9.18.  Whilst
    some medical evidence was attached, it did not state that the appellant
    was unfit to attend the hearing.

 8. The appeal was relisted for 30.11.18. However, in a further  letter  of
    19.11.18 the appellant again asserted that he was unfit  to  attend  on
    medical grounds, stating that the results of an ECG indicated that  his
    heart was unstable. Once again, the evidence adduced  did  not  support
    the assertion that he was unfit to attend the hearing.

 9. This second request for an adjournment on medical grounds  was  refused
    by the Tribunal Case Worker, on the basis that the appellant failed  to
    provide any medical evidence to confirm he  was  unfit  to  attend  the
    hearing listed for 30.11.18 or  which  indicated  a  reasonable  period
    within which he would be fit to attend  his  appeal  hearing.  It  also
    noted that he had had since August 2018 to  prepare  his  appeal.  This
    refusal was notified to the appellant by letter sent on 21.11.18.

10. In the event, the appellant did attend the hearing on 30.11.18, and was
    legally represented by Mr Laing of Dar & Co Solicitors. The application
    for an adjournment on medical grounds was renewed orally at the hearing
    by Mr Laing. However, it remained the case that there  was  no  medical
    evidence indicating that the appellant was unfit to attend the hearing.
    Not only did the appellant attend but  he  gave  evidence  in  English,
    dispensing with the Lugandan interpreter.

11. Turning to the ground of appeal relating to an alleged request  for  an
    adjournment on the basis having had the  opportunity  to  consider  the
    respondent's bundle, I have looked through the tribunal's case file and
    the judge's Record  of  Proceedings,  but  the  handwritten  notes  are
    difficult to decipher and I can find no reference to a request  for  an
    adjournment on this basis. I confirm that a letter from Dar & Co  dated
    26.11.18 is in the  case  file,  but  only  as  an  attachment  to  the
    application for permission to appeal. Whilst it is dated  on  its  face
    26.11.18, the fax header indicates it was sent on  7.1.19.  It  is  not
    clear that this letter was received by  the  tribunal  at  any  earlier
    date.

12. For the purpose of the appeal to the Upper Tribunal, the appellant  has
    engaged the services of Victory Legal Services, instructed on  12.2.19.
    As part of the appellant's bundle for the Upper Tribunal hearing, there
    appears a witness statement from Ian Laing dated  15.2.19.  Mr  Laing's
    statement asserts that despite requests to both the  tribunal  and  the
    respondent, neither he nor the appellant had received  a  copy  of  the
    respondent's bundle. At [9] of the statement it is asserted that at the
    outset of the First-tier Tribunal appeal hearing Mr  Laing  raised  the
    issue of no respondent's bundle. He also explained that  there  were  a
    number  of  evidential  issues  relating  to  the  assertions  of   the
    respondent that the appellant had (i) returned to Uganda after entering
    the UK; (ii) been issued with a visa to renter the UK;  and  (iii)  had
    been issued with various passports. As all  of  these  issues  were  in
    dispute, Mr Laing wanted sight of the evidence  relied  on  to  support
    these assertions.

13. Mr Laing's statement confirms that he also made an application  for  an
    adjournment on medical grounds, as indicated in the decision  of  Judge
    Andonian. However, it is asserted that the tribunal briefly  considered
    the adjournment application and refused it without  giving  reasons  at
    the time.

14. It is significant that Mr Laing's statement points out that during  the
    hearing the respondent did not  provide  any  documentary  evidence  to
    support the assertion that the appellant had left and reentered the  UK
    or had been issued with various passports. The respondent simply relied
    on the contents of the refusal letter.

15. From [20] onwards of the  decision  of  the  tribunal,  Judge  Andonian
    addressed the issue as to whether the appellant had or had not left the
    UK after first arriving in 1989. Reference was made to an interview  in
    2009 and enquiries made by  the  respondent  with  the  authorities  in
    Uganda. The evidence relied on is set out at [24] of the  decision  and
    at [25] the judge  was  satisfied  that  the  Secretary  of  State  had
    discharged the burden of proof to the civil standard that the appellant
    had left the UK and returned as the  respondent  asserted.  It  is  not
    clear to me what evidence on these issues was  before  Judge  Andonian.
    The refusal decision refers to an earlier IA appeal decision, which  is
    not in the tribunal's case file.

16. At the hearing before me, Mr Tarlow provided a copy of  the  presenting
    officer's hand-written record of proceedings  at  the  tribunal  below.
    This makes clear that there was an application for adjournment based on
    not having received the respondent's bundle. This resolves the  factual
    issue.

17. Given that the respondent adduced no  evidence  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal to support the contentions in the refusal decision  of  1.8.18
    that the appellant had left the UK, returned on a visa, and had various
    passports issued, it is not  clear  that  the  refusal  to  adjourn  on
    grounds of not having received the respondent's bundle was  necessarily
    an error of law.

18. However, if there was no external evidence adduced by the respondent at
    the appeal hearing on these issues and if it were only  the  assertions
    made in the refusal decision on which Judge Adonian made  his  findings
    between [20] and [28] of the decision, it appears to me that that would
    be an error of law,  given  that  the  appellant  hotly  contested  the
    assertions,  maintaining  he  had  never  left  the  UK  and   remained
    throughout from 1989 to date.

19. In the light of these  issues  canvassed  by  me  with  the  two  legal
    representatives at the outset of the hearing, Mr Tarlow  conceded  that
    he could not continue to defend  the  decision  and  accepted  that  it
    needed to be remade. I have  considered  whether  any  of  the  factual
    findings of Judge Andonian could or should be preserved. However,  they
    are to some extent bound up with the findings  as  to  the  appellant's
    alleged departure from  and  return  to  the  UK,  which  bear  on  his
    credibility. In the circumstances, the decision should be made de novo.



20. When a decision of the First-tier Tribunal has been set aside,  section
    12(2) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 requires either
    that the case is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  with  directions,
    or it must be remade by the Upper Tribunal. The scheme of the Tribunals
    Court and Enforcement Act 2007 does not assign the function of  primary
    fact finding to the  Upper  Tribunal.  The  errors  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge vitiates other findings of fact and the conclusions from
    those facts so that there has not been a  valid  determination  of  the
    issues in the appeal.

21. In all the circumstances, at the invitation and request of both parties
    to relist this appeal for a fresh hearing in the First-tier Tribunal, I
    do so on the basis that this is a case which falls squarely within  the
    Senior President's Practice Statement at paragraph 7.2. The  effect  of
    the error has been to deprive the appellant of a fair hearing and  that
    the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding  which  is  necessary
    for the decision in the appeal to  be  re-made  is  such  that,  having
    regard to the overriding objective in rule 2 to deal with cases  fairly
    and justly, including with the avoidance of delay, I find  that  it  is
    appropriate  to  remit  this  appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to
    determine the appeal afresh.

Decision

22. For the reasons set out above, I find that the making of  the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the making  of  an  error  on  a
    point of law such that the decision should be set aside and remade.

     I set aside the decision.

                    I remit the appeal to be decided afresh  in  the  First-
                    tier Tribunal.

     Signed   DMW Pickup
         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated


Anonymity

I have  considered  whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  any
anonymity direction. No submissions were made on the issue.  The  First-tier
Tribunal did not make an order  pursuant  to  rule  13(1)  of  the  Tribunal
Procedure Rules 2014.
Given the circumstances, I make no anonymity order.


Fee Award         Note: this is not part of the determination.

In the light of my decision, I have considered whether to make a  fee  award
pursuant to section 12(4)(a) of the Tribunals, Courts  and  Enforcement  Act
2007.

I have had regard to the Joint Presidential Guidance  Note:  Fee  Awards  in
Immigration Appeals (December 2011).

I make no fee award.

Reasons: The outcome of the appeal has not been decided.

     Signed   DMW Pickup
         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated

