
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10559/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 15 July and 12 August 2019        |On 21st August 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

                                  HM (DRC)
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr James Collins, Counsel instructed by Sentinel
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Lawrence Tarlow, Senior Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant has been granted permission to appeal from  the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Hussain sitting at Hatton Cross on 15
    April 2019) dismissing his appeal against the refusal of his protection
    claim in which he  maintained  that  he  had  a  well-founded  fear  of
    persecution on return to the  DRC  on  account  of  having  an  adverse
    political profile.



The Reasons for the Grant of Permission to Appeal

 2. On 11 June 2019  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Caroline  Andrew  granted
    permission to appeal for the following reasons: "I  am  satisfied  that
    there is an arguable error of law in that  the  Judge  appears  not  to
    consider all the country information placed before him when considering
    the risk on return for the Appellant,  taking  into  account  that  his
    findings as to the appellant's nationality, that he was a high  profile
    and active member of the UDPS, that he was  arrested  and  detained  on
    three separate occasions, and that as a result of recent  elections  in
    the DRC the appellant has joined APARECO."

Reasons for Findings an Error of Law

 3. The Judge found against the appellant  on  the  issue  of  future  risk
    because of what was, in his view, "a  radical  change  in  the  country
    condition".  As  evidence  of  this,  he  cited  an  article  from  the
    appellant's supplementary bundle dated 11 April  2019,  which  reported
    that President Kabila had stepped  down  as  President,  and  had  been
    replaced by the son of an opposition veteran who had been the  supposed
    winner  of  the  highly  contested  December  elections.   The  article
    described the new President as having finally broken Mr Kabila's strong
    hold on power.

 4. However, the permission application cites a  number  of  passages  from
    other articles in the supplementary bundle which conveyed  the  message
    that Mr Kabila remained in power, although  no  longer  the  President.
    For example, the Reuters' article dated 15 March 2019, entitled  "Congo
    Ex-Leader Kabila's Coalition with  his  Decisive  Majority"  stated  as
    follows:

         'Former Democratic Republic  of  Congo  President  Joseph  Kabila's
         coalition won a clear  majority  in  Senate  elections  on  Friday,
         officials   said,   further   undermining   his   successor   Felix
         Tshisekedi's ability to govern independently.

         Kabila's Common Front for Congo (FCC) coalition won  about  70%  of
         the seats in the Lower House  of  Parliament  and  an  overwhelming
         majority of provincial assembly seats in  elections  also  held  on
         Dec.30.

         The results of the Parliamentary and Provincial  elections  suggest
         Kabila will retain  a  significant  influence  in  Congo,  a  vast,
         mineral rich, central African country of about 80 million people.'

 5. Moreover, the Judge did not take  into  account  the  line  of  Country
    Guidance authorities which support the submission that  active  members
    of UDPS or those perceived as such will be at risk on  return  to  DRC;
    and, hence the Judge failed to direct himself  in  accordance  with  SG
    (Iraq) v SSHD [2012] EWCA Civ 940 where  Stanley  Burnton  LJ  said  as
    follows: "It is for these reasons,  as  well  as  the  desirability  of
    consistency, that the decision makers and tribunal judges are  required
    to take Country Guidance determinations into  account,  and  to  follow
    them unless very strong  grounds  supported  by  cogent  evidence,  are
    adduced justifying their not doing so."

 6. The Judge thus failed to ask himself whether the evidence that he cited
    constituted sufficiently cogent evidence to justify  a  departure  from
    Country  Guidance  authority  to  the  effect  that  someone  with  the
    appellant's profile would be at risk of persecution on  return  to  the
    DRC.

 7. The Judge also does not appear to have been alive to  the  significance
    of the appellant joining APARECO. In BM & Others (Returnees -  criminal
    and non-criminal) DRC [2015] UKUT 00293 (IAC), the following is  stated
    in paragraph 3 of the head note: "A national  of  the  DRC  who  has  a
    significant and visible profile within Apareco (UK) is, in the event of
    returning to his country of origin, at real risk of persecution  for  a
    Convention reason or serious harm or treatment proscribed by Article  3
    ECHR by virtue of falling within one of the risk categories  identified
    by the Upper Tribunal in MM (UDPS members - risk on return)  Democratic
    Republic of Congo CG  [2007]  UKAIT  0023.   Those  belonging  to  this
    category include persons who are, or  are  perceived  to  be,  leaders,
    office bearers or spokespersons.  As a general rule, mere rank and file
    members are unlikely to fall into this category.   However,  each  case
    will be fact-sensitive,  with  particular  attention  directed  to  the
    likely knowledge and perceptions of DRC state agents."

 8. Having been  presented  with  the  evidence  cited  in  the  permission
    application, and after seeing Mr Collins' skeleton argument in which he
    cites the relevant Country  Guidance  authorities,  Mr  Tarlow  readily
    conceded that an error of law was made out,  and  I  so  find  for  the
    reasons given above.  The Judge did  not  adequately  engage  with  the
    totality of the  background  evidence  before  him  pertaining  to  the
    question whether there had, or had not, been a durable  change  in  the
    country situation, and he  failed  to  consider  the  relevant  Country
    Guidance on the issue of future risk.  So his decision is  unsafe,  and
    it must be set aside and remade.

Reasons for Retention of the Appeal in the Upper Tribunal

 9. The representatives were in agreement at the error of law hearing on 15
    July that this was an appropriate case to  be  retained  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  There was no challenge to the findings  of  fact  that  were
    made by the Judge in the appellant's favour.  The only factual question
    which remained to be resolved with regard to the  appellant's  personal
    situation was whether he has a significant and visible  profile  within
    APARECO UK.  The Judge simply found that he was active in APARECO,  but
    did not make any finding as to whether he had a significant and visible
    profile within APARECO.  As to whether  there  has  been  a  change  of
    circumstances in the DRC of such a significant and non-temporary nature
    that the appellant's fear of persecution can no longer be  regarded  as
    well-founded, if this was going to be a live  issue  on  remaking,  the
    resolution of the issue would turn on the background  evidence  in  the
    supplementary bundle that was presented to the First-tier Tribunal, and
    any additional evidence, including country expert  evidence,  that  the
    parties might wish to deploy.  However,  as  I  directed,  it  was  not
    incumbent on the appellant to produce any additional evidence  on  this
    issue, as the relevant current Country Guidance authorities were in his
    favour.

The Resumed Hearing on 12 August 2019

10. In advance of the resumed hearing on 12 August  2019,  the  appellant's
    solicitors served a witness statement  dated  9  August  2019  from  Mr
    Livingston  Mundele,  Deputy  Representative  for  the  APARECO  London
    branch, and a second supplementary bundle  containing  some  additional
    newspaper articles about the political situation in the DRC  that  were
    published between January and June 2019.

11. At the resumed hearing, Mr Collins submitted that the evidence from  Mr
    Mundele showed that the Appellant had a significant and visible profile
    within APARECO UK; and that the background evidence  contained  in  (a)
    the first supplementary bundle that was before the First-tier  Tribunal
    and (b) the second supplementary bundle served for the resumed  hearing
    showed that Mr Kabila was still in power.

Discussion and Findings on Remaking

12. Apart from the finding on risk on return, all the other  findings  made
    by the First-tier Tribunal are preserved.  Accordingly,  it  is  common
    ground that the appellant was a  member  of  the  UDPS  who  encouraged
    people to join the party, and that on account of his UDPS  activism  he
    was arrested and detained on three occasions  between  2011  and  2013.
    Although Judge Hussain made no specific finding on the details  of  the
    last detention, he did not reject the appellant's account that  on  the
    third occasion he was detained for nine  months  before  escaping  from
    detention on 23 November 2013 and fleeing to Angola.

13. Having reviewed the background evidence pertaining to the aftermath  of
    Joseph Kabila stepping down as President, I find that the thrust of the
    article of 11 April 2019 referred to in [3] above does  not  reflect  a
    consensus as to the consequences of Kabila taking  this  step.  On  the
    contrary, it appears to represent a minority and contrarian  view,  and
    it does not take into account the key consideration that, as  noted  by
    Voice of America on 21 January 2019 (Second supplementary  bundle  page
    1) "Tshisekedi won the top seat, but Kabila's party took  the  majority
    of parliament."

14. Moreover, the case that Joseph Kabila remains in power is supported  by
    Reuben Loffman, a Lecturer in African History at Queen Mary  University
    in London, who in an article  of  5  June  2019  (Second  supplementary
    bundle pages 16-17) comments that  the  appointment  by  Tshisekedi  of
    Sylvestre Ilunga Ilukamba as Prime Minister "confirms fears that former
    president Joseph Kabila still wields a lot of power over the  Congolese
    government" because Ilunga is one  of  Kabila's  close  confidants.  Mr
    Loffman also points out that Tshisekedi will not be able to  pass  laws
    without the approval of the Kabila-led Common Front for Congo.

15. Accordingly, there  is  no  justification  for  departing  from  extant
    Country Guidance authority,  including  MM  (UDPS  members  -  risk  on
    return) DRC [2007] UKAIT  00023,  which  is  to  the  effect  that  the
    appellant will be at risk of return on  account  of  his  prior  active
    membership of the UDPS and hence his  known  political  profile  as  an
    opponent of a Kabila-led or Kabila-controlled government  of  the  DRC.
    Mr Tarlow did not seek to persuade me otherwise.

16. Mr Tarlow also did not present any argument as  to  why  the  appellant
    should not be treated as qualifying for asylum on the additional  basis
    that he is now an active and visible member of APARECO. He only  became
    a member on 1 December  2018,  but  the  unchallenged  evidence  of  Mr
    Mundele is that since  then  the  appellant  has  been  mobilising  and
    spreading APARECO ideology on social media  and  within  the  Congolese
    community, attending prominent APARECO events, and that his details  as
    a party member are published on the APARECO web site.

17. Accordingly, the appellant has discharged the burden of proving to  the
    lower standard of proof that he qualifies for recognition as a refugee.
    By the same token, there are substantial grounds for believing that  on
    return to the DRC the appellant would face a real risk of ill-treatment
    at the hands of agents of the State of such severity as  to  cross  the
    threshold of Article 3 ECHR.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  contained  an  error  of  law,  and
accordingly the  decision  is  set  aside  and  the  following  decision  is
substituted: the appellant's appeal  is  allowed  on  the  ground  that  his
removal would breach the Refugee Convention  and  on  the  ground  that  his
removal would be unlawful under Section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998.

Anonymity Direction

The appellant is granted anonymity throughout these proceedings, unless  and
until a Court or Tribunal directs otherwise. No report of these  proceedings
shall directly or indirectly identify him or any member of his family.  This
direction applies both to the  appellant  and  the  respondent.  Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 14 August 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD
No fee was paid or is payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date 14 August 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson
