
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10295/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 17th June 2019                    |On 10th July 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVIDGE


                                   Between

                                  Mr F A F
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Paranjorthy (Counsel) instructed by ABN
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms S Jones Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Order Regarding Anonymity  -  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008


 1. Anonymity having previously been ordered in the First-tier Tribunal and
    there being no application to remove the order, I see no reason  to  do
    so and the order remains in place.  Unless  and  until  a  Tribunal  or
    court directs otherwise, the Appellant is granted anonymity.  No report
    of these proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify him  or  any
    member of their family.  This direction applies both to  the  Appellant
    and to the Respondent.  Failure to comply  with  this  direction  could
    lead to contempt of court proceedings.

 2. The  Appellant  appeals  the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    promulgated on 4th April 2019 whereby he dismissed the  appeal  against
    the decision to refuse to grant asylum or ancillary protection.

 3. Permission to appeal was granted at the First-tier  Tribunal  by  Judge
    Gumsley on 8th May 2019 including on the basis  that  it  was  arguable
    that the First-tier Tribunal Judge had rejected the credibility of  the
    appellant without adequate assessment of the evidence in the context of
    an earlier accepted detention, including in  particular  correspondence
    from a member of the Sri Lankan Bar and his  TGTE  membership.  At  the
    hearing before me Ms Jones conceded that the grounds at 1  and  2  were
    made out, although, as did the judge granting permission,  she  thought
    there was less merit in the issue relating to mental health.  In  those
    circumstances, with the agreement of the  representatives  I  indicated
    that by consent I found  an  error  of  law  established  and  set  the
    decision aside. The parties were in agreement that  the  case  needs  a
    complete rehearing, with a fresh look at credibility  and  new  factual
    findings. In those circumstances the representatives were agreed that I
    provide, as per Rule 40 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
    Rules, a summary de novo remittal decision without reasoning.

Decision

 4. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal reveals an error  of  law  such
    that it cannot stand. I set it aside and remit I the appeal de novo  to
    the First-tier Tribunal.


Signed                              Date 27 June 2019

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davidge










