
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10134/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 15th June 2021                    |On 11th August 2021                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON


                                   Between

                                 Miss J Z M
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Mughal, instructed by Amb Adovcates
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The appellant appeals against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
Davey, who dismissed the appellant's appeal on protection and human rights
grounds when she appealed against the refusal of the Secretary of State on
9th October 2019 to grant the appellant asylum.  The appellant is a
national of the Democratic Republic of Congo ("DRC") born on 10th October
1982 and came to the UK in 2016.  The judge found the appellant was a
reliable and credible witness.  Indeed, the appellant claimed that she had
been raped and abused and her son killed by the security forces of Kabila
but that there was no risk that this would be repeated and thus she was not
at risk.

The grounds of appeal advanced that the judge did not refer to the specific
evidence to support his findings, failed to consider the appellant is a
vulnerable lone woman returning to the DRC and failed to address Article 3.
 The judge accepted that the appellant was ill-treated but failed to give
reasoning for the finding that ill-treatment would not be repeated.  The
findings were contradictory and at 21 were not in line with the judge's own
previous findings at 17.  The judge did not take account of the appellant's
previous persecution when making his findings and failed to take into
account the current background/objective evidence that Kabila was involved
with the present government.  The grounds also stated the judge failed to
take into account the current government situation in the DRC and findings
needed to be made and there were no reasoned findings in relation to the
appellant's mental health and Article 3.

At the hearing before me Mr Melvin attempted to withdraw the concession
that the Secretary of State had made by way of letter on 13th August 2020
when stating that:

"The respondent does not oppose the appellant's application for permission
to appeal in line with the grant of permission and the aspect of the
appellant returning as a lone woman.  The Tribunal are invited to determine
the appeal with a fresh oral continuance hearing at the First-tier
Tribunal."

Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Saffer, who
confirmed that it was arguable that the judge had given inadequate reasons
to explain why the appellant would not be at risk on return to the DRC as a
lone woman, having found that she had been raped by government forces and
had a political profile, given the ongoing difficulties in the DRC.

At the hearing Mr Melvin attempted to withdraw the concession on the basis
that there was no relevant evidence before the First-tier Tribunal.  It is
clear that the index of the appellant's bundle referred to the CPIN on
gender-based violence and further I note that the Secretary of State's
decision, which did consider the credibility of the appellant damaged,
referred specifically to the Country Policy and Information Note: Gender
Based Violence September 2018.  I refused to allow this concession to be
withdrawn as it was clear that the country background information note
before the First-tier Tribunal Judge and no exceptional circumstances were
raised before me such that the concession should be withdrawn.

I find that the decision discloses an error of law.  The judge accepted the
appellant was vulnerable and that she has experienced previous ill-
treatment.  At 17 he recorded: "The appellant has shown that the rape ill-
treatment she received was at the hands of the state, as it then was, was
delivered with impunity and there was nothing to show on the evidence ...
of a greater likelihood of protection of vulnerable women."  He then,
however, found that she was not at any real risk of repetition of such ill-
treatment without reasoning or explaining that finding and without
referring to the background material in the face of having found previously
by way of contradiction that Joseph Kabila had "amassed extensive political
clout", paragraph 10, evidently subsequent to the ascendancy of President
Tshisekedi.  Thus, the reasoning was not deficient.  The reasoning of the
judge disclosed some contradiction between on the one hand, paragraphs 16
(finding that it was not surprising that she feared return to DRC) and 17
"there was nothing to show on the evidence that I was taken to of a greater
likelihood of protection of vulnerable women, as I have found this
appellant to be" and, on the other hand, paragraph 21 where the judge found
that she had not shown a real risk of persecution.  The judge did not
consider the CPIN on gender-based violence despite its reference in the
index of the appellant's bundle and reference in the Secretary of State's
own decision letter.

Paragraphs 16 and 17 are preserved.  Owing to the nature and extent of the
findings which need to be made, including those on mental health, the
matter will be remitted for redetermination to the First-tier Tribunal.



Notice of Decision

The Judge erred materially for the reasons identified. I set aside the
decision (save that Paragraphs 16 and 17 are preserved) pursuant to Section
12(2)(a) of the Tribunals Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 (TCE 2007).
Bearing in mind the nature and extent of the findings to be made the matter
should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal under section 12(2) (b) (i)
of the TCE 2007 and further to 7.2 (b) of the Presidential Practice
Statement.

Directions

The parties are to file and serve any further evidence together with
skeleton arguments (no more than 10 pages of A4) at least 28 days prior to
the substantive hearing in the First-tier Tribunal.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed   Helen Rimington                         Date 2nd August 2021

Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington
