
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10953/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 20th December 2018                |On 11th February 2019                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LEVER


                                   Between

                          mr Md Asfak Hossain tarek
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Wilcox of Counsel, Universal Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant born on 1st January 1987 is a citizen of Bangladesh.  The
    Appellant was represented by Mr Wilcox of Counsel. The  Respondent  was
    represented by Mr Wilding a Senior Presenting Officer.



Substantive Issues Under Appeal

 2. The Appellant had entered the United Kingdom and  made  an  application
    for asylum that was refused by the Respondent on 31st August 2018.  The
    Appellant appealed that decision and his appeal  was  heard  at  Taylor
    House on 12th October 2018 before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Talbot.
    The judge  dismissed  the  appeal  on  all  grounds.   Application  for
    permission to appeal was made on 6th November 2018 and granted on  12th
    November 2018.  It was said that it  was  arguable  that  there  was  a
    perversity  between  the  evidence  at  paragraph  16  of  the  judge's
    decisions and the findings that he made at paragraph 30.  It  was  said
    that that may have affected the issue of credibility in respect of  the
    history of claimed political activity in Bangladesh before entry to the
    United Kingdom.  Directions were issued for the matter to be  heard  by
    the Upper Tribunal on the question of an error of law  and  the  matter
    comes before me in accordance with those directions.

Submissions on Behalf of the Appellant

 3. Mr Wilcox firstly noted that the  interpreter  had  been  requested  to
    translate a particular document in which  it  was  said  there  was  an
    oddity surrounding the Appellant's name and that the judge should  have
    exercised anxious scrutiny by going through all  documents  to  see  if
    other problems had arisen that may  have  disclosed  an  error  in  the
    original  translation.   Secondly  it  was  said  that  there   was   a
    discrepancy between the evidence noted by the judge at paragraph 16  in
    respect of Mr Hussain's evidence that she  had  met  the  Appellant  in
    Bangladesh when he was clearly in a position of some responsibility and
    thereafter the judge's finding at paragraph 30.  Finally, it  was  said
    that there should have been more anxious  scrutiny  on  the  sur  place
    activities.  It was noted that there was no country guidance  case  for
    Bangladesh on  this  matter  and  no  guidance  that  simply  low-level
    activity did not present a  risk  on  return  to  Bangladesh.   It  was
    submitted that potentially this case was suitable to  be  listed  as  a
    country guidance case on this particular point.

Submissions on Behalf of the Respondent

 4. In respect of the newspaper article it  was  said  that  the  Appellant
    could have objected to the procedure of using the  interpreter  and  it
    was conceded there was a discrepancy.  It was  further  said  that  the
    judge had come  to  conclusions  on  the  photographs  which  had  been
    provided as part of the evidence and had given reasons  in  respect  of
    those photographs.  In respect of the core matter  namely  the  alleged
    discrepancy between paragraphs 16 and 30 it was noted that  Mr  Hussain
    the witness had  met  the  Appellant  only  once  in  Bangladesh.   The
    Appellant's case was that he was politically active in  Bangladesh  and
    Mr Hussain's evidence did not go beyond meeting the  Appellant  on  one
    occasion.  It was said that that alleged discrepancy did  not  say  the
    day for the Appellant in terms of his alleged political involvement  in
    Bangladesh.  In respect of the final matter it was submitted  that  the
    suggestion was that because there was no country guidance case on  this
    particular issue the sur place activities that seemed  to  indicate  an
    error of law on behalf  of  the  judge.   It  was  submitted  that  the
    evidence before the judge did not establish a risk to the Appellant and
    it was for the Appellant to produce evidence to show he was at risk  if
    that was his case.

 5. In resubmissions it was further emphasised that it was dangerous to say
    that the Appellant was not involved in politics given the  presence  of
    Mr Hussain's evidence.

 6. At the conclusion of the hearing I reserved my decision to consider the
    submissions and evidence in this case.  I  now  provide  that  decision
    with my reasons.

Decision and Reasons

 7. The judge had set out at paragraphs 5 to 16 a summary of  the  evidence
    provided by the Appellant and his three witnesses.  He had further  set
    out the main features  of  the  Home  Office  refusal  letter  and  the
    submissions raised by both representatives.

 8. The Appellant  had  within  his  bundle  produced  part  of  a  Bengali
    newspaper article referring to a number of BNP leaders and their roles.
     However, it was  only  part  of  the  article.   The  judge  noted  at
    paragraph 23 that the Presenting  Officer  found  at  the  hearing  the
    complete article on the internet.  That was shown to the Appellant  and
    the court interpreter was asked to translate the list of names  of  the
    BNP leaders.  That produced a discrepancy, which as  the  judge  noted,
    related to the Appellant and was the sole discrepancy in a long list of
    names.  The judge found that that discrepancy in the  Bengali  original
    and English translation produced by the Appellant  within  his  bundle,
    when compared to the full article was not merely error  or  coincidence
    and found that to be an adverse feature in the Appellant's case.

 9. There is no suggestion within the decision that there was any objection
    raised at the hearing by the Appellant's Counsel to the  production  of
    the full article by the Presenting Officer or the  translation  of  the
    list at the hearing.  The Appellant himself had introduced the  article
    but only partially within his own bundle.  The discrepancy was  put  to
    the Appellant so he was provided with  an  opportunity  to  comment  or
    explain upon the matter.  If it was felt appropriate  to  examine  more
    closely translations of other documents as suggested in submissions  to
    me that course of action could have been proposed at the hearing.   The
    production of the evidence on the day by the Presenting  Officer  using
    the internet and the translation thereafter by  the  court  interpreter
    was perhaps a little unusual but did not produce any objections and  it
    is hard to see that it was a material error on the part of the judge.

10. However, the judge did not rely upon that point alone in terms  of  his
    adverse credibility findings.  At paragraphs 24 to  32  he  gave  clear
    reasons why he found the Appellant's evidence in a number  of  ways  to
    lack credibility.  He had specifically referred to the evidence of  the
    three witnesses.  At paragraph 30 he began  by  stating  he  found  the
    value of their evidence limited in terms  of  the  Appellant's  claimed
    activities in Bangladesh.  In respect of Mr Hussain he accurately noted
    at paragraph 30 the evidence that Mr Hussain had only met the Appellant
    once in Bangladesh and he did not have direct knowledge of the  alleged
    incidents involving the Appellant.  He further noted  in  paragraph  30
    that of the three witnesses he found Mr Faruk the most credible.  It is
    the case that in his assessment of that which Mr Hussain could  say  at
    paragraph 30 he did not reference the political position Mr Hussain had
    ascribed to the Appellant as noted by the judge at  paragraph  16.   It
    may be the judge erred  in  not  commenting  upon  that  aspect  of  Mr
    Hussain's evidence and whether he regarded  Mr  Hussain's  evidence  on
    that point to be credible, reliable or  not  (particularly  bearing  in
    mind his assessment of credibility of the three  witnesses).   However,
    it is clear the judge had looked at all of the evidence both  oral  and
    documentary and had provided a number of not insignificant reasons  why
    he did not accept the Appellant's account.  Accordingly, if  the  issue
    regarding Mr Hussain was an error it was not material.

11. The judge had assessed evidence relating to sur place  activities.   He
    accepted at paragraph 32 that the Appellant had been involved in the UK
    with the Bangladeshi Student Union (BSU), but had sought  to  embellish
    that evidence and found he did  not  have  a  high  profile.   He  gave
    reasons for reaching that finding clearly set out in the decision.   He
    had examined country material and reached a finding principally set out
    at paragraph 36 that given his findings of  fact  and  credibility  and
    after an examination of all the evidence there was no real risk to  the
    Appellant on return to Bangladesh based on  his  sur  place  activities
    such as they were.  He was entitled to reach that  finding.   The  fact
    that there may be no country guidance case  on  this  issue  is  of  no
    consequence.  It was neither a perverse or unreasonable finding to make
    based on all the evidence available to the judge.

Notice of Decision

12. There was no material error of law made by the judge in this  case.   I
    uphold the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

    No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lever


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.




Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lever

