
         [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                             Appeal Number:
PA/10469/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |    Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 2 November 2017                        |    On 16 November 2017           |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LATTER

                                   Between

                                     MAK
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Z McCallum, counsel.
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


An order has been made under rule 14(1) of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008  prohibiting  the  disclosure  or  publication  of  any
matter likely to lead to the appellant being identified. Failure  to  comply
with this order could lead to a contempt of court




 1. This is an appeal by the appellant against a decision of the First-tier
    Tribunal dismissing his appeal against the respondent's decision  dated
    15  September  2016  refusing   his   application   for   international
    protection.

2.    The appellant is a citizen  of  Bangladesh  born  17  June  1986.   He
    arrived in the UK on 18 November 2009 with a valid visa to study  as  a
    Tier 4 student.  His leave to remain in this capacity was  extended  to
    30 August 2015 but on 13 August 2014 he was served with notice  of  his
    liability to administrative removal on the basis that he  had  obtained
    leave by deception.  On 17 February 2015, the appellant was served with
    a further notice alleging  that  he  had  submitted  false  educational
    certificates.  He sought to challenge these  notices  by  applying  for
    judicial review but on 16 February 2016 he was  refused  permission  to
    bring proceedings.  On 1 March 2016, he claimed asylum.

3.    He based his claim on a fear of persecution arising from  his  support
    for the BNP in Bangladesh.   He  claimed  that  false  cases  had  been
    brought against him by members of the Awami  League  and  he  supported
    this claim by producing a number of documents relating  to  proceedings
    in  Bangladesh  including  FIRs,  warrants  of  arrest,   warrants   of
    conviction, court orders and judgments.  The respondent,  however,  was
    not satisfied that these documents were genuine or reliable or that the
    appellant had given a credible account about why  he  was  in  fear  of
    returning to Bangladesh.

4.    At the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal an application was  made
    by the presenting officer for an adjournment  on  the  basis  that  the
    court  documents  produced  by  the  appellant  had   been   sent   for
    verification.  The judge refused  the  application  because  there  had
    already been one adjournment and the originals of the documents  relied
    on were in the possession of the appellant's  solicitor  and  therefore
    available to be produced in evidence.  Having heard  the  evidence  and
    considered the submissions, the judge did not find the appellant to  be
    credible and he was not satisfied that the court  documents  relied  on
    were genuine.  He commented that there was voluminous country  evidence
    on  the  use  of  fraudulent  documents  for  immigration  purposes  in
    Bangladesh.  The appeal was dismissed accordingly.

5.    Permission to appeal was refused by the First-tier Tribunal on 1  June
    2017 but on 28 June 2017 the presenting officer wrote to  the  Tribunal
    to confirm that the respondent had received notification  that  an  FIR
    relied on by the appellant and submitted for  formal  verification  had
    been verified as genuine at police level in  Bangladesh  and  would  be
    verified at court level during August 2017.  The  respondent  hoped  to
    receive a document verification report in late  August/early  September
    2017.

6.    Permission to appeal was granted by the Upper Tribunal  on  the  basis
    that it  was  arguable  that  the  judge's  credibility  findings  were
    inadequate and that he had erred in concluding that the FIR was  not  a
    reliable document.

7.     In her submissions Ms McCallum argued that there  was  a  mistake  of
    act amounting to an error of law and that there had been  a  procedural
    irregularity which had caused unfairness.  Mr Walker did  not  seek  to
    resist the appeal.  He accepted that in the light  of  the  information
    obtained by the respondent in the verification process, the decision by
    the judge not to grant an adjournment had resulted in unfairness.

8.    For the reasons relied on by Ms McCallum  and  in  the  light  of  the
    jurisprudence in R (Iran) & Others v Secretary of State [2005] EWCA Civ
    982 and MM (Unfairness; E&R) Sudan [2014] UKUT 105, I am satisfied that
    the  failure  to  grant  an  adjournment  amounted  to   a   procedural
    irregularity which caused unfairness and accordingly, the  judge  erred
    in  law  such  that  the  decision   should   be   set   aside.    Both
    representatives submitted, and I agree, that this is a proper case  for
    the appeal to be  remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  full
    rehearing.

Decision

9.    The First-tier Tribunal erred in law and the decision  is  set  aside.
    The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  for  reconsideration
    by way of a full rehearing before a different judge.

10.   In the light of  the  issues  raised  in  this  asylum  appeal,  I  am
    satisfied that this is a proper case for an order to be made under rule
    14(1) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 and I  make
    an order prohibiting the disclosure or publication of any matter likely
    to lead to the appellant being identified.



Signed:           H J E latter               Dated:       13 November 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Latter




