
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10221/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at City Centre Tower Birmingham  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 18 September 2017                   |On 6 October 2017                    |
|                                       |                                     |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal JUDGE RENTON

                                   Between

                                     p d
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms E Rutherford, Counsel instructed by TRP
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


Introduction

 1. The Appellant is a male citizen of Iran born on [  ]  1986.   He  first
    arrived in the UK on 18 March 2016 when he applied  for  asylum.   That
    application was refused for  the  reasons  given  in  the  Respondent's
    Decision dated 14 September 2016.   The  Appellant  appealed,  and  his
    appeal was heard  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Sangha  (the  Judge)
    sitting at Birmingham on 13 January 2017.  He decided  to  dismiss  the
    appeal on asylum, humanitarian protection, and human rights grounds for
    the reasons given in his Decision dated 30 January 2017.  The Appellant
    sought leave  to  appeal  that  decision  and  on  26  July  2017  such
    permission was granted.

Error of Law

 2. I must first decide if the decision of the Judge contained an error  on
    a point of law so that it should be set aside.

 3. The Appellant claimed to be at risk on return to Iran  as  a  Christian
    convert from Islam.  The Judge dismissed the appeal because he did  not
    believe the  Appellant's  evidence.   He  described  that  evidence  as
    lacking  in  clarity  in  certain  respects,   and   inconsistent   and
    implausible.  The Judge cited various examples of discrepancies in  the
    evidence which he also found to be not consistent with  the  background
    information.   The  Judge  considered  the  Appellant's  knowledge   of
    Christianity to be very basic, and in reaching his conclusion took into
    account the evidence of a witness, Marie Lutter.  The Judge  took  into
    account the decisions in SZ and JM (Christians - FS confirmed) Iran  CG
    [2008] UKAIT 00082 and SSH and HR (illegal exit: failed asylum seekers)
    Iran CG [2016] UKUT 00308 (IAC).

 4. At the hearing, Ms Rutherford referred to the  grounds  of  application
    and submitted that the Judge had made material errors of law in respect
    of his finding of credibility.  The Judge had failed to engage with the
    evidence of the Appellant.  The Judge had repeatedly  referred  to  the
    contents of the Refusal Letter but had not dealt with  the  Appellant's
    responses thereto.  In addition the Judge had made irrational  findings
    on the evidence, for example giving weight to the  Appellant's  failure
    to  consider  other  religions  before  converting   to   Christianity.
    Further, the  Judge  had  failed  to  give  adequate  reasons  for  his
    findings, particularly in rejecting the evidence of Marie Lutter.

 5. In response, Mr Mills began by acknowledging that the  decision  in  SZ
    and JM had been overtaken by subsequent decisions and that it  was  now
    the Home Office policy to treat Christian converts as at risk in  Iran.
    Therefore if the Judge had erred in law in rejecting the evidence, that
    was an error which was material.  He went on to refer to  the  Rule  24
    response and argued that there was no such error of law.  The Judge had
    directed himself appropriately and had clearly taken into  account  all
    the evidence as he  stated  at  paragraph  33  of  the  Decision.   The
    Appellant's apparent ignorance of the  Christian  faith  was  only  one
    factor taken into account by the Judge.  The Judge stated that he  took
    into account the  evidence  of  Marie  Lutter  and  gave  adequate  and
    rational reasons for his finding as to  credibility  considering  those
    reasons as a whole.

 6. I do find a material error of law in the decision of the Judge which  I
    therefore  set  aside.   The  Judge  considered  the  evidence  of  the
    Appellant in some considerable detail at paragraphs 24 to 32  inclusive
    of the Decision.  He  analysed  that  evidence  in  the  light  of  the
    background information and found it to be inconsistent and implausible.
     He identified the discrepancies and  implausibilities  upon  which  he
    founded that decision, and therefore in my view his reasons  cannot  be
    considered as inadequate or irrational.  However, I find  an  error  of
    law in the way the Judge dealt with the evidence of Marie Lutter.  That
    was highly relevant  and  pertinent  evidence  as  it  relates  to  the
    Appellant's baptism as a Christian and his attendance at a church  with
    which Marie Lutter was involved.  It is true that the Judge  stated  in
    the Decision that he had taken into account of all of the  evidence  in
    the round including that  of  Marie  Lutter,  but  he  dealt  with  her
    corroborative statements in a cursory manner in just  a  few  words  at
    paragraph 33 of the Decision.  If the Judge found that  Marie  Lutter's
    evidence did not corroborate that  of  the  Appellant  he  should  have
    explained in detail why.  For this reason I find a  material  error  of
    law in the decision of the Judge.  The decision in the appeal will need
    to be remade  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  under  the  provisions  of
    paragraph 7.2(b) of the Practice Statements as  findings  of  fact  are
    still required.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside that decision.

The decision in the appeal will be remade by the First-tier Tribunal.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made an order for anonymity  which  I  continue  for
the same reasons as those given by the First-tier Tribunal.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date   6th October 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Renton
