
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10193/2019 (v)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford IAC                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On the 2 July 2021                   |On the 2 July 2021                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

                                     SHJ
                         (ANONYMITY direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     AND

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     The appellant in person.
For the Respondent:    Mr M. Diwncyz , Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction:

      1. The appellant appeals with permission against the decision  of  the
         First-tier  Tribunal  (hereinafter  referred  to  as  the   "FtTJ")
         promulgated on the 7 February 2020 in which the appellant's  appeal
         against the decision to refuse  her  protection  and  human  rights
         claim was dismissed.

      2. I make a  direction  regarding  anonymity  under  Rule  14  of  the
         Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal  Rules)  Rules  2008  as  the
         proceedings relate to the  circumstances  of  a  protection  claim.
         Unless  and  until  a  Tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise  the
         appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
         shall directly or indirectly identify her or  her  family  members.
         This direction applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.
          Failure to comply with this direction could lead  to  contempt  of
         court proceedings.

      3. The appellant  claims  to  be  a  citizen  of  Iraq.  She  made  an
         application to  enter  the  United  Kingdom  as  the  spouse  of  a
         naturalised British citizen, originally from Iraq in an application
         made in 2010. It was stated that on 18 July 2010  she  had  married
         her husband in Syria and her  intention  was  to  travel  with  her
         husband to the UK. The application for a spousal visa was made  the
         day after the wedding. In a decision dated  13  February  2011  the
         application for entry clearance as a spouse was refused.  According
         to the interview which took place with the  appellant,  she  stated
         that he returned to the UK and she returned  to  Iraq.  Since  that
         time the appellant states that she has seen him 2 or 3  times  when
         he has returned to Kurdistan or in the alternative  3  or  4  times
         (see asylum amendments).

      4. The appellant arrived illegally in the UK on 24  January  2019  and
         claimed asylum. The date that she left Iraq is not entirely  clear,
         but it is recorded that her fingerprints were taken in Italy on  16
         October 2018.

      5. The basis of her protection claim is set out in the decision letter
         dated 14 October 2019 and in the  FtTJ's  decision.  The  appellant
         claims that she had lived in Duhok in the Kirkuk region of Iraq and
         spent time living in Deraluk. She  is  an  ethnic  Kurd  and  Sunni
         Muslim. She lived with her mother and sister.

      6. In order about 2009 her husband made a marriage proposal which  was
         accepted, and they married in Syria in  2010  following  which  she
         made an application to join him in the UK.  After  the  application
         was refused, the appellant stayed living in Iraq with  her  husband
         visiting her. The basis of her claim as set out to  the  respondent
         in the 2 interviews that took  place  and  the  amendments  to  the
         interviews submitted by her  former  legal  representatives  was  a
         victim or potential victim of an "honour  crime"  based  on  events
         concerning her family relatives and the local community in Iraq.

      7.  In  a  decision  letter  dated  14  October  2019  the  respondent
         considered the factual basis of her claim. At paragraphs  24  -  36
         the respondent considered her  claimed  nationality  but  concluded
         that she had not been able to demonstrate to a reasonable degree of
         likelihood that she was an Iraqi national for the reasons set  out.
         However it was accepted that she was of Kurdish  ethnicity.  In  so
         far as a claim to be in an  ongoing  marriage  to  her  husband,  a
         naturalised British citizen, at paragraphs 41  -  50,  it  was  not
         accepted that the claimed marriage was genuine and  subsisting.  As
         to the problems that she claimed occurred in Iraq at paragraphs  51
         - 62, the respondent set out the inconsistencies in her account and
         that it was not accepted that she had demonstrated she would be  at
         risk in Iraq on the basis claimed. The remainder  of  the  decision
         letter considered return to  Iraq  in  the  light  of  the  country
         guidance decisions and the country materials. Article  8  was  also
         considered that as the decision earlier set out, as she was not  in
         a  genuine  subsisting  relationship,  she  could  not   meet   the
         requirements under Appendix FM and  for  the  reasons  set  out  in
         paragraphs 134 - 141  she  could  not  meet  the  requirements  for
         private life under paragraph 276ADE  .  The  decision  letter  also
         considered her medical circumstances in line with the material that
         she had provided which related  to  her  mental  health  and  other
         medical concerns.

      8. The appellant appealed that decision, and the  appeal  came  before
         the FtT on 24 January 2020.

      9. It is recorded that at the hearing the appellant  did  not  appear.
         The judge recorded that the appeal had previously been listed on 25
         November 2019 when the appellant had attended but was adjourned  as
         a result of interpreter difficulties. It  is  further  recorded  at
         paragraph 1 that enquiries were undertaken with Tribunal staff  and
         that she had been informed of the date of the new hearing and  that
         a letter had been sent at her last address.  In  the  circumstances
         the judge proceeded to hear the appeal in her absence  as  she  had
         failed to provide an explanation for her non-attendance.

     10. The FtTJ  dismissed  her  appeal  on  all  grounds  in  a  decision
         promulgated on 7 February 2020.

     11. The appellant  applied  for  permission  to  appeal  that  decision
         asserting that her removal would be in breach of article 8  of  the
         ECHR and that the judge had failed to consider the circumstances in
         Iraq and the sensitivity of  "honour  killings".  The  FtT  refused
         permission on 24 June 2020. An application was made for  permission
         to the Upper Tribunal which was granted  by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
         Mandalia. In the grant of permission  UTJ  Mandalia  sets  out  the
         appellant's contention that  she  had  "mentioned  in  my  previous
         statement that I have not received any letter for  the  hearing  to
         attend after the cancellation of 1st  hearing  due  to  issue  with
         interpreter. They have not sent me any new date for  the  hearing."
         The judge granted permission  stating  that  if  the  appellant  is
         correct," it is at least arguable that the decision to  proceed  in
         the absence of the appellant  amounts  to  an  error  of  law.  The
         question of the  Upper  Tribunal  is  not  whether  the  FtT  acted
         reasonably. Rather the test to be  applied  is  that  of  fairness;
         Nwaige (adjournment: fairness) [2014] UKUT 00 418."

     12. I observe that with the grant of permission a  direction  was  made
         for the parties to file  further  submissions.  In  particular  the
         respondent was ordered to file within 21 days of  24  July  2020  a
         document setting out their position.

     13. Following the  grant  of  permission  there  has  been  no  further
         correspondence from either party and there had been  no  compliance
         with the directions by the respondent.

     14. The matter was therefore listed for a hearing for  the  parties  to
         attend. The appellant attended  along  with  her  husband  and  the
         respondent  was  represented  by  Mr  Diwnycz,  senior   presenting
         officer. He was aware of the direction made  by  the  tribunal  but
         stated that it had  not  been  acted  upon  in  error.  As  to  the
         circumstances of the last hearing, he referred to the PO note which
         confirmed that set out at paragraph 1.

     15. The appellant confirmed her position that she had not attended  the
         hearing as she had not received the hearing  notice  but  confirmed
         that she had remained  living  at  the  same  address.  I  had  the
         opportunity  to  consider  the  file  and  the   history   of   the
         proceedings. The appellant was previously represented by solicitors
         who were able to provide assistance to the appellant  by  providing
         the amendments to the screening and substantive interviews.  It  is
         unclear when they came off record, but the file  demonstrates  that
         they were not on record in November 2019 when the case was set down
         for a pre-hearing review. The appellant provided  some  information
         in documentary form that she had been undertaking medical treatment
         which she referred to  as  depression  (see  reply  to  IAC  notice
         October 2019 at paragraph 4 "new matters").

     16. The appeal was listed for 25 November 2019. The appellant  attended
         the hearing, but it is  recorded  that  the  appeal  was  adjourned
         because of interpretation problems and there was no Kurdish Badhini
         interpreter who could be available.

     17. There is no hearing notice on the file providing the  date  of  the
         next hearing or any record of it being sent to the appellant or  to
         what address. That accords with the note of the PO. The judge noted
         that enquiries of Tribunal staff made it clear that  the  appellant
         had been informed then of the date of the new hearing. There is  no
         note on the file to confirm this and given  the  difficulties  with
         the interpreter and particular the reference made to interpretation
         difficulties with numbers, it is not clear how  the  appellant  was
         informed of the next hearing date.  It is  right  to  observe  also
         that the enquiries with the staff at the hearing on 24 January 2020
         stated that a letter had also been sent out  to  her  at  the  last
         known address but there is no notice of hearing on the file.

     18. I have therefore considered the issue in the  light  of  the  above
         circumstances. It is plain in my judgement that the  appellant  had
         sought to proceed with her appeal as demonstrated by her attendance
         at the hearing in November 2019. The hearing was adjourned  through
         no fault of the appellant. I can find no hearing notice on the file
         and given the difficulties at  the  adjourned  hearing  as  I  have
         stated it is unclear to me how the appellant had been  informed  on
         that day of the date of the  new  hearing.  As  Mr  Diwnycz  fairly
         stated, it is difficult to see how  the  appellant  could  prove  a
         negative and that she had sought to  proceed  with  her  appeal  as
         noted by her attendance at court previously and she had all to gain
         by attending.

     19. As UTJ Mandalia set out in his grant of permission,  the  issue  is
         one of fairness and given the factual circumstances outlined above,
         and in the light of the anxious scrutiny required for a  protection
         claim, I cannot be satisfied that the appellant did in fact receive
         the  hearing  notice.  The  failure  to  attend   is   a   complete
         contradiction to her earlier conduct in attending court and wishing
         to  proceed  with  her  appeal.  Her  claim   also   includes   her
         relationship with her husband with whom she appeared at court  with
         at this hearing which was a relevant consideration to  the  factual
         and legal assessment of the appeal.

     20. As to the future conduct  of  this  appeal  I  have  given  careful
         consideration to the Joint Practice  Statement  of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal and Upper Tribunal concerning the disposal of  appeals  in
         this Tribunal.

             "[7.2] The Upper Tribunal is likely on each such occasion to
             proceed to re-make the decision, instead of remitting the case
             to the First-tier Tribunal, unless the Upper Tribunal is
             satisfied that:-

             (a) the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before
             the First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other opportunity
             for that party's case to be put to and considered by the First-
             tier Tribunal; or

             (b) the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding which is
             necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be re-
             made is such that, having regard to the overriding objective
             in rule 2, it is appropriate to remit the case to the First-
             tier Tribunal."

     21. In my judgement as this is a procedural error, I am satisfied  that
         the decision falls within subparagraph (a)  above.  It  also  falls
         within subparagraph (b)  as  the  judicial  fact  finding  will  be
         required on all issues, both protection and human rights  claim.  I
         therefore find that is consistent with the overriding objective  to
         remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing  with
         none of the findings to remain.

     22. As stated at the hearing the appeal will be  listed  at  a  hearing
         centre that is near to the appellant's home. The appellant has been
         provided with the telephone number of the tribunal service so  that
         there is a point of contact. The appellant has also  been  provided
         with the address in writing of the presenting officers unit so that
         further documents that she seeks to rely upon can  be  provided  in
         advance. The  tribunal  will  provide  further  assistance  to  the
         appellant at any prehearing review held so that  documents  can  be
         sent to the tribunal for her  claim.  The  appellant  may  wish  to
         obtain legal representation before the next hearing.  I  have  also
         asked that the tribunal should be  notified  by  the  appellant  by
         email or by letter to confirm she has received the decision and any
         hearing notice that will be sent.

     23. For the reasons given above, I am satisfied that  the  decision  of
         the FtTJ did make an error on a point of law and  the  decision  of
         the FtT shall be set aside and remitted to the FtT  for  a  hearing
         afresh.



Notice of Decision.

     24. The decision of the FtT is set aside and remitted to the First-tier
         Tribunal for a fresh hearing.


Signed Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds

     Dated 2 July 2021


    I make a direction regarding anonymity under Rule 14  of  the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal Rules) Rules 2008 as the  proceedings  relate
    to the circumstances of a protection claim. Unless and until a Tribunal
    or court directs otherwise the  appellant  is  granted  anonymity.   No
    report of these proceedings shall directly or indirectly  identify  her
    and her family members. This direction applies both  to  the  appellant
    and to the respondent.  Failure to comply  with  this  direction  could
    lead to contempt of court proceedings.






                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS


1.   A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision  must  make
a written application to the Upper Tribunal. Any such  application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent.


2.   Where the person who appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days if  the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).


3.   Where the person making the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5  working  days
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


4.   Where the person who appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  outside
the United Kingdom at the  time  that  the  application  for  permission  to
appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days (10 working  days  if  the
notice of decision is sent electronically).


5.   A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or a Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday, or a bank holiday.


6.   The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on the  covering
letter or covering email.

