
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10898/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice Centre      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 7 February 2019                            |On 28 February 2019           |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between

                                     G H
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Timpson, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a national of Bangladesh born on 10 August  1981.   He
    arrived in the United Kingdom on 1 April 2008 and subsequently made  an
    asylum application on the basis that he feared persecution as a  member
    and supporter of the BNP from the Awami League Party which is the party
    in power.  His application for asylum was rejected on 4 September  2018
    and he appealed against that decision.  His appeal came before Judge  R
    S Drake of the First-tier  Tribunal  for  hearing  in  Bradford  on  11
    October 2018.  In a decision and reasons promulgated on 25 October 2018
    the judge dismissed the appeal.

 2. The Appellant sought permission to appeal in time to the Upper Tribunal
    on the basis of the following grounds.  Firstly,  that  the  judge  had
    erred materially in law in failing to take into  account  the  evidence
    before the Tribunal.  It  was  submitted  the  Appellant  had  provided
    adequate documentation and evidence confirming that he was a member  of
    the BNP in Bangladesh, including a letter from the BNP branch  but  the
    judge had failed to attach any weight to  this  evidence,  nor  to  the
    Appellant's evidence which was corroborated that he had  been  attacked
    as a consequence of his involvement with the BNP.

 3. Secondly, it was asserted that the judge had materially  erred  in  his
    assessment of the Appellant's credibility in  that  he  had  failed  to
    conduct that  assessment  in  light  of  the  background  evidence,  in
    particular the  Home  Office  CPIN  Report:  Opposition  to  government
    January 2018 at 8.2.1 which makes clear  the  high  level  of  violence
    between the Awami League and the BNP and the judge had failed to assess
    the impact of this on the safety of the  return  of  the  Appellant  to
    Bangladesh.

 4. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Page in the following terms on 3 December 2018:

         "I am satisfied that an arguable error of law has  been  identified
         in the judge's decision at paragraphs 24 and 25  that  could  cause
         the Upper Tribunal to interfere.  The two  grounds  of  appeal  are
         arguable in saying that the  judge  erred  in  law  by  not  giving
         appropriate weight  to  the  evidence  before  him.   There  is  no
         reasoning in these paragraphs to show what parts  of  the  evidence
         the judge had in mind when saying that 'most  if  not  all  of  the
         Appellant's testimony and evidence is unsatisfactory' leaving  open
         the possibility that some unspecified part or parts of the evidence
         may have been satisfactory.  It is also  arguable  that  the  judge
         failed to give weight to the documents the  Appellant  provided  in
         the absence of verification.  I  am  satisfied  that  there  is  an
         arguable error of law in the judge's decision due to the paucity of
         reasoning and findings  and  give  permission  to  appeal  on  both
         grounds".

     Hearing

 5. At the hearing before the Upper Tribunal, Mr Timpson for the  Appellant
    sought to rely on the grounds of appeal as drafted and also  the  terms
    of the grant of  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal.   He
    submitted the key paragraphs by the judge are those set out at [24] and
    [25] and that there were real problems with these paragraphs.  At  [25]
    the judge  appeared  to  have  difficulties  with  the  fact  that  the
    documents attesting to the Appellant's membership of the  BNP  had  not
    been notarised.  However, it is frequently the case that documents  are
    not notarised and that this is not a clear finding. The  judge  further
    failed to take account of the evidence set out in the CPIN which begins
    at page 49 of the Appellant's bundle, see [2.3.3] at AB55,  [6.1.1]  at
    page 67, [6.1.2] and [6.1.6] at page 69.

 6. Mr Timpson also drew the Upper Tribunal's attention to  the  fact  that
    there is a document verification  report  in  respect  of  the  alleged
    genuine FIR at D36 to D37 of the Respondent's bundle. He submitted that
    if, as the evidence suggests, the police are corrupt  and  are  aligned
    with the Awami League then this reduces the weight that can be attached
    to the absence of any formal record of an  FIR.   Moreover,  the  judge
    failed to make any finding in respect of  the  DVR  in  any  event  and
    generally it appeared that there were sentences  and  findings  missing
    from the judge's determination which when considered  overall  rendered
    it unsafe and unsustainable.

 7. Mr McVeety on  behalf  of  the  Respondent  conceded  in  light  of  Mr
    Timpson's submissions, the terms of the grant of permission  to  appeal
    and the grounds of  appeal  that  there  was  an  absence  of  material
    findings by the judge and an absence of reasons as to why the judge did
    not find the Appellant to be credible.

     Findings and Reasons

 8. I find in light of Mr  McVeety's  helpful  concession  that  there  are
    material errors of law in the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Drake.  I set out the impugned paragraphs as follows:

         "24. I find that most if not all of the Appellant's  testimony  and
             evidence  is  unsatisfactory  and  incapable  of  meeting  the
             required standard as mentioned above in  paragraphs  7  to  11
             inclusive. I do not accept that the Appellant has  established
             he is a BNP member at the time of the alleged assaults or that
             he was then a supporter but I find  in  any  event  that  this
             alone if it had been established does  not  put  him  at  risk
             according to the 2015 guidance and nor has  he  shown  in  his
             documentary or other evidence that he has any new  or  changed
             political profile such as to put him at risk on return or that
             relocation is not possible or there is an absence of means  to
             resort to seeking protection from relevant authorities.

         25.  Documents produced by the Appellant to support  his  assertion
             as membership of BNP are dubious in probative quality as their
             provenance is not  supported  by  anything  like  attestation,
             certification, notarisation or any other form of verification.
              Even if they do establish BNP membership which I do not  find
             then for the same reasons as set out earlier in paragraph 25 I
             find that this alone does not establish a basis  for  fear  or
             real risk".

 9. Notably the judge at [26] went on to find it was reasonably likely that
    the Appellant had been assaulted but the evidence does  not  show  that
    the perpetrators were political opponents or that the  reason  for  the
    assault was his political affiliation.

10. It is in my view apparent from the findings at [24] and [25] above that
    there is a paucity of reasoning underpinning those findings, such  that
    it is possible to know why the judge  reached  those  conclusions.   In
    particular, although there is reference in [17] of his  decision  to  a
    Home Office COI document on Bangladesh dated February 2015 and  updated
    in January 2018, the judge has not apparently factored in the  contents
    of  that  report  to  his  overall  assessment   of   the   Appellant's
    credibility.

Notice of Decision

I find material errors of law in the decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
Drake.  The appeal is remitted for hearing de  novo  before  the  First-tier
Tribunal.

An anonymity direction is made.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed   Rebecca Chapman                         Date 25 February 2019


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman

