
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10219/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 7 April 2021                      |On 6 May 2021                        |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM


                                   Between

                                     G A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Sharma, Counsel instructed by J D Spicer Zeb
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms S Cunha, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008
Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan.  His  date  of  birth  is  1
    January 1988.

 2. In a decision of 17 September 2020, following an error of  law  hearing
    on 10 September 2020, I set aside the decision of Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Moffatt dismissing the  Appellant's  appeal  against  the
    decision of the Secretary of Stata on 15 October  2019  to  refuse  his
    application on protection grounds.  The salient parts of the  error  of
    law decision read as follows:-

         "20. The law has evolved with the decision of AS [2020].  The judge
             applied AS [2018]. There was no  reference  to  the  Court  of
             Appeal decision.  The Court of Appeal said that AS  should  be
             reconsidered in the light of the security  situation  and  the
             risk from  security  incidents.   The  judge  found  that  the
             Appellant would not be at risk from the Taliban in  Kabul.  He
             said at [61] that he must consider  whether  he  could  safely
             internally relocate in the  light  of  15(c)  of  the  Council
             Directive (2004/83/EC) (Qualification Directive)  and  decided
             that he would be.  These are sustainable findings in the light
             of AS [2020]. Mr Sharma did not seek to persuade me otherwise.



         21.  The Appellant's evidence was that it would not  be  reasonable
             for him  to  internally  relocate  and  the  judge  identified
             material parts of the judgment on AS [2018] to  determine  the
             issue; however, at no time does  he  decide  whether  internal
             relocation is reasonable  as  opposed  to  safe.   This  is  a
             material error of law.  I set aside the decision of the  judge
             to dismiss the appeal on protection grounds.  In  the  absence
             of a cross challenge to the Article 8 decision,  there  is  no
             reason for me to go behind the decision of the judge  that  to
             remove the Appellant would breach his rights under Article  8.
             The judge made a number  of  findings  about  the  Appellant's
             individual circumstances on return which are  not  challenged,
             and no good reason was drawn to my attention to justify  going
             behand these.

         22.  The was concern about court time.   In  the  circumstances,  I
             adjourned the case.  The parties agreed that the matter should
             proceed by way of submissions at a future remote hearing."

 3. The hearing resumed before me to hear submissions from the  parties  in
    respect of the only  issue  to  be  determined  namely  whether  it  is
    reasonable for the Appellant to relocate to Kabul properly applying  AS
    (Safety of Kabul) Afghanistan CG [2020] UKUT 130.

 4. The First-tier Tribunal  made  sustainable  and  unchallenged  findings
    concluding that the Appellant is at risk on return to his home area  in
    Logar Province.  The judge accepted the Appellant's account that he has
    a well-founded fear of persecution from  the  Taliban  because  of  his
    imputed political opinion.  It was accepted that in 2005 the  Appellant
    and his father were abducted and ill-treated by the Taliban.  Some  six
    or seven years after that  incident,  the  Appellant  gave  information
    about an individual with  links  to  the  Taliban  to  a  local  police
    commander in exchange for money.  As a result, the Taliban  killed  the
    Appellant's father and detained the Appellant.  The Appellant was  able
    to escape as a result of  a  skirmish  between  the  Taliban  who  were
    holding him captive and the Afghan National Army  and  Special  Forces.
    The judge accepted that the Taliban came to  the  Appellant's  mother's
    home to look for him and told her that they were going  to  behead  the
    Appellant.  His mother is now deceased. However, the judge  found  that
    the Appellant could safely relocate to Kabul. He dismissed  the  appeal
    on protection grounds.

 5. The judge made the following findings:-

         "63. The appellant would be returning to Kabul as single man  (sic)
             with no family network for support.   He  has  been  diagnosed
             with moderate to severe depression and significant PTSD  (para
             83 of Dr Turvill's report).  Dr Turvill  states  at  paragraph
             90:

                  In my opinion, whether or not it is objectively justified,
                  [GA's] fear of return  is  genuine  from  a  psychological
                  perspective.   He  would  live  in  a  constant  state  of
                  uncertainty, and of fear of  being  subjected  to  further
                  violence

         64.  Whilst [GA] states he is illiterate.  He was able to  own  and
             manage a successful barber shop before  he  left  Afghanistan.
             [GA] stated in his oral evidence, that there were no  economic
             barriers to his return to Afghanistan, just his fear.

         65.  Mr Foxley states that the appellant would struggle to  receive
             adequate, reliable and affordable  treatment  in  Afghanistan.
             He refers to a 2019 article highlighting the extremely limited
             healthcare  and  mental  healthcare  resources  available   in
             Afghanistan.  Mr Foxley states that

                  A  fragile  mental  health  condition,  no  education,  an
                  absence of a family network and a long period of time away
                  are particular circumstances which could make it difficult
                  for him to  negotiate  his  way  through  a  very  adverse
                  security environment such as Afghanistan.

         66.  Having considered all the evidence in  the  round  and  taking
             account of the Country Guidance by which I am  bound,  I  find
             that the Appellant  would  not  be  at  risk  of  serious  and
             individual threat by reason of indiscriminate violence were he
             to return to Kabul.  Therefore, I find  that  the  Appellant's
             claim for humanitarian protection fails."

 6. The judge, however, allowed  the  appeal  on  Article  8  grounds.   At
    paragraph 71 he said as follows:-

         "I have identified the factors in paragraphs 72 and 73 (sic)  above
         the difficulties the appellant would  face  on  return.   The  most
         significant of these, I find, is the limited availability of mental
         health treatment.  Dr Turvill has  stated  the  appellant  requires
         psychotherapy  to  treat  his  PTSD.   He   has   self-harmed   and
         subjectively feels he is at  risk  on  return.   I  find  that  the
         appellant would face very significant obstacles to his  integration
         to Afghanistan on return.  Looking  at  all  the  evidence  in  the
         round, I am satisfied that on the facts of this case requiring  the
         appellant  to   return   to   Afghanistan   would   amount   to   a
         disproportionate interference in his  Article  8  rights.   In  the
         circumstances I allow the Article 8 appeal."

 7. There was no proper cross challenge by the Secretary of  State  to  the
    decision of the FtT to allow the appeal on Article 8 grounds. Ms  Cunha
    sought to challenge it for the first time at the error of law  hearing.
    The Secretary of State  had  not  been  granted  permission  to  appeal
    against the decision, no application having been made.  I was not asked
    by Ms Cunha to consider waiving any requirement of the  2008  Procedure
    Rules (pursuant to Rule 7(2)(a) of the 2008 Rules)  to  comply  with  a
    requirement  of  the  Rules  (see  Smith  (appealable  decisions;   PTA
    requirements; anonymity) [2019] UKUT  00216).   That  decision  stands.
    Relocation must be considered in the light of a finding that there  are
    very significant obstacles  to  integration  facing  the  Appellant  on
    return to Afghanistan.

Submissions

 8. Ms Cunha referred me to paragraphs 189 to 193 of AS where the  Tribunal
    explained why the evidence of UNHCR should be approached with  caution.
    She did not seek to challenge Dr Turvill's evidence. She submitted that
    although the Appellant genuinely fears return to Kabul so  long  as  he
    continues with medical treatment his mental  state  and  anxiety  would
    improve.

 9. She referred me to paragraph 229 of AS to support a submission that the
    Appellant may be able to create  connections  in  time  and  develop  a
    network and in any event if he were unable to  form  such  connections,
    he would be able to find inexpensive accommodation in  a  "chai  khana"
    and he would be able to work as a day labourer in the  informal  labour
    market in Kabul.  He would have the  assistance  of  the  UK  financial
    package and the assistance of charities on the  ground.   The  evidence
    that he is at risk is very low.  There  is  no  evidence  he  would  be
    targeted or that he would stand out.  He is resourceful having left his
    country and travelled all the way to the UK.

10. Mr  Sharma's  primary  submission  was  that  that  relocation  of  the
    Appellant is unreasonable. In addition, he submitted that the Appellant
    falls into a particular social group.   He  relied  on  DH  (particular
    social group: mental health) Afghanistan [2020] UKUT 223.

Conclusions

11. While DH was not promulgated  until  after  the  hearing  before  Judge
    Moffatt, the issue could have been but was not raised at the  error  of
    law hearing on 10 September 2020.  In  any  event,  the  submission  is
    misconceived.

12. Judge Hanson in DH said that whether a  person  with  a  mental  health
    issue falls within a PSG is a complex question of law  and  fact.   The
    degree of disability in each individual's case will vary enormously and
    that only in a small number of cases will it mean there is  a  lack  of
    mental capacity or behavioural traits that may expose that person to  a
    real risk of harm as a result of their illness.  He stated  that  there
    must be sufficient cogent evidence to enable a clear finding to be made
    that such a person is suffering from serious mental illness.  He stated
    that there are a number of mental health issues  which  can  themselves
    vary in degree but which  enable  a  person  to  function  without  any
    obvious external indicators or risk factors.  He stated  that  "serious
    mental illness" includes diagnoses which  typically  involve  psychosis
    (losing touch with reality or experiencing delusions) or high levels of
    care which require hospital treatment.  He identified schizophrenia and
    bipolar disorder (or manic depression) as the most common  however,  he
    emphasised that it  is  fact  sensitive  question  in  each  case.  The
    Appellant in DH  suffered  serious  mental  health  issues  and  lacked
    litigation capacity.  The medical evidence was that he presented  in  a
    "significantly  and  chaotic  and  disturbed  manner".    He   suffered
    hallucinations and had been detained under the Mental Health Act  1983.
    His mental state was found by a psychiatrist to be "grossly abnormal."

13. This Appellant has severe depression and significant PTSD.   He  has  a
    subjective fear  of  further  violence.   Dr  Turvill  found  that  the
    Appellant had injuries which were highly consistent and typical of  his
    account of torture,  evidence  that  was  accepted  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  However, there is no evidence drawn to my attention that the
    Appellant has the type of serious mental illness which would expose him
    to acts of persecution.

AS (Safety of Kabul) Afghanistan CG [2020]

14. The country guidance case of  AS  postdates  the  promulgation  of  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal.  In respect of  reasonableness  of
    internal relocation to Kabul the headnote reads as follows:-

         "(iii)   Having regard to the security and  humanitarian  situation
             in Kabul as well as the difficulties faced by  the  population
             living there (primarily the urban poor but also IDPs and other
             returnees, which are not dissimilar to  the  conditions  faced
             throughout many other parts of Afghanistan) it  will  not,  in
             general, be unreasonable or unduly harsh for  a  single  adult
             male in good health to relocate to Kabul even if he  does  not
             have any specific connections or support network in Kabul  and
             even if he does not have a Tazkera.

         (iv)  However,  the  particular  circumstances  of  an   individual
             applicant must  be  taken  into  account  in  the  context  of
             conditions in the place of relocation,  including  a  person's
             age, nature and quality of  support  network/connections  with
             Kabul/Afghanistan, their physical and mental health, and their
             language, education and  vocational  skills  when  determining
             whether a person falls within the  general  position  set  out
             above. Given the limited options for employment, capability to
             undertake manual work may be relevant.

         (v)  A person with a support network  or  specific  connections  in
             Kabul is likely to be  in  a  more  advantageous  position  on
             return, which may counter a  particular  vulnerability  of  an
             individual on return. A person without a network may  be  able
             to develop one following return. A person's  familiarity  with
             the cultural and societal norms of Afghanistan (which  may  be
             affected by the age at which  he  left  the  country  and  his
             length of absence) will be relevant to whether, and if so  how
             quickly and successfully, he will be able to build a network."

15. The two principal domestic authorities concerning  internal  relocation
    are the decisions of the House of Lords in Januzi v Secretary of  State
    for the Home Department [2006] UKHL 5, [2006] 2 AC 426, and AH  (Sudan)
    v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2006] UKHL 49,  [2008]  1
    AC 678.  Considering all the relevant circumstances pertaining  to  the
    Appellant and his country of origin, it  would  not  be  reasonable  to
    expect him to relocate and or it would be unduly harsh to expect him to
    do so.

16. The Appellant will be returning to Kabul without support or a  network.
    This, in itself, is not sufficient to establish that  relocation  would
    not be reasonable.  However, what is significant in this  case  is  the
    First-tier Tribunal's acceptance of  Dr  Turvill's  evidence  that  the
    Appellant  has  post-traumatic  stress  disorder  and  significantly  a
    genuine subjective fear  of  return  such  that  he  would  live  in  a
    "constant state of uncertainty"  and  a  fear  of  being  subjected  to
    further violence".  I have considered what the Tribunal said in  AS  in
    relation to safety and security at paragraphs 213 to 216; namely,  that
    although there is no real risk that Kabul will fall under  the  control
    of anti-government elements or become a site of  active  conflict,  the
    evidence is that its inhabitants are  affected  by  armed  conflict  in
    particular because of violent attacks by Taliban and ISIS.

17. While the likelihood of the Appellant being killed or injured is small,
    the violence connected to armed conflict is widespread and  persistent.
    Moreover, healthcare provision is poor.  There is a lack of  facilities
    available to provide treatment.

18. The Appellant has a genuine subjective fear of return. It would not  be
    reasonable to expect him to live in a constant state of fear.  There is
    an unchallenged finding that there would be insurmountable obstacles to
    integration. This is not determinative of the issue,  but  it  supports
    that relocation is unreasonable.    I conclude that  it  would  not  be
    reasonable to expect the Appellant to return to Kabul.

19. The appeal is allowed on protection grounds.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Joanna McWilliam  Date 29 April 2021

Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam

