








Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/10957/2018



                             THE IMMIGRATION ACT



|Heard at Civil Justice Centre      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|Manchester                         |                                   |
|On 18th March 2019                 |On 21st March 2019                 |
|                                           |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCCLURE



                                   Between

                                 Dishad [A]

                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Sadiq of Adam Solicitor

For the Respondent:    Mr Tan   Senior Home Officer Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Mark Davies promulgated on the 23rd October 2018 whereby
    the judge dismissed the appellant's appeal against the decision of  the
    respondent  to  refuse  the  appellant's  claims   based   on   asylum,
    humanitarian protection and Articles 2 and 3 of the ECHR.

 2. I have considered whether or not it is appropriate to make an anonymity
    direction. Having considered all the circumstances I do not consider it
    necessary to do so.

 3. Leave to appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  was  granted  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge on 16th November 2018. Thus the case appeared before  me
    to determine whether or not there was a material error of  law  in  the
    decision.

 4. At the outset of the  hearing  Mr  Tan  on  behalf  of  the  respondent
    conceded that the judge failed  to  properly  consider  the  background
    evidence  and  put  the  evidence  given  into  the  framework  of  the
    background evidence. Mr Tan accepted that that  failure  by  the  judge
    brought into question the findings and conclusions such that it was  an
    error of law rendering the decision unsafe. In the circumstances Mr Tan
    did not oppose the appeal  and  accepted  that  the  appeal  should  be
    remitted to be heard afresh.

 5.  Mr Sadiq on behalf of the appellant agreed to the course  proposed  by
    Mr Tan.

 6. In light of the submissions made there is a material error of  law  and
    the appeal is allowed. The case is  remitted  back  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for hearing afresh.

    Notice of Decision

 7. I allow the appeal to the extent that it is remitted back to the First-
    tier Tribunal for a  further  hearing  on  all  grounds.  None  of  the
    findings of fact are preserved.






Signed

Deputy           Upper           Tribunal           Judge            McClure
Date 19 March 2019.



