
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10558/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 8 May 2018                                 |On 14 May 2018                |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FROOM


                                   Between

                                    B A H
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Saeed, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    M, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                    DECISION AND REASONS ON ERROR OF LAW

 1. The appellant appeals with the permission of the  First-tier  Tribunal,
    against a decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Obhi  in  which
    she dismissed the appellant's protection appeal. The  appellant  is  an
    Iraqi national and he claimed to be at risk of persecution  on  account
    of his religion and imputed political opinion.

 2. The judge's main findings were as follows. The  appellant  is  a  Sunni
    Muslim. Although he has Iraqi citizenship, he has  not  lived  in  Iraq
    since 2005. His parents divorced and his mother took him to  live  with
    her and her new husband in Jordan. The appellant  came  to  the  UK  to
    study between 2013 and 2015. In 2015 he lived and worked in  Spain.  He
    returned to the UK in July 2017, again to study. The appellant  claimed
    that he could not return to Jordan because  his  stepfather  no  longer
    supports him. However, the judge did not accept that was the case.

 3. In relation to the asylum claim, the  judge  accepted  the  appellant's
    father must have been a person of some standing because  the  appellant
    has inherited property in Iraq and receives a pension  of  around  $600
    per month. The appellant visited his father in Iraq before he  died  in
    2008. There is a housekeeper in the property in Iraq.  The  appellant's
    uncle continues to live in Kirkuk. She rejected the  appellant's  claim
    that they had to leave Iraq in 2005 due to  threats  because  this  was
    inconsistent with the appellant returning to meet his uncle  after  his
    father's death. The appellant had been  inconsistent  with  respect  to
    where he had been during the visit to Iraq. The judge did not  entirely
    discount the appellant's claim that his  father  was  killed  during  a
    battle with the so-called Mahdi Army. However, that would not mean  the
    appellant was at risk. The judge rejected the claim that the  appellant
    was at risk from the authorities because he continued  to  receive  his
    pension and complaints made by  his  mother  regarding  damage  to  the
    property had been investigated. The appellant's account of  threats  he
    received had been vague. If there had been real interest  in  him,  his
    property would have been seized. The judge  did  not  accept  that  the
    police report submitted by the appellant was genuine. She concluded the
    appellant had fabricated his claim.

 4. The judge  then  considered  the  risk  on  return.  She  accepted  the
    appellant had not lived in Iraq for some  time,  although  he  had  not
    given a credible explanation as to why he could not return  to  Jordan.
    She assessed the case against  the  country  guidance  decision  in  BA
    (Returns to Baghdad) Iraq CG [2017] UKUT 18 (IAC). Although there  were
    differences, she noted the appellant shared some of the characteristics
    of the appellant in that case. She accepted some young Sunni men  could
    be at risk of harm and she noted the appellant was someone with a level
    of wealth and property. She found there was some risk to him  returning
    to Baghdad. However, she found he could relocate safely to  Kirkuk.  He
    either has a CSID or would be able to obtain one. She was satisfied the
    appellant already had established family in Kirkuk with whom  he  could
    live.

 5. The appellant sought permission to appeal on a number of  grounds.  The
    judge was  said  to  have  ignored  the  explanation  provided  by  the
    appellant's mother as to why he could not return to Jordan.  The  judge
    had made a mistake stating that the appellant had not returned to  Iraq
    since 2005. He last returned  2008.  The  judge  had  made  credibility
    findings without having regard to the objective evidence. The judge had
    overlooked the fact the police report did state what the  threat  faced
    by the appellant was. The possibility of relocation to Kirkuk  had  not
    been raised by the respondent. The judge had not considered the  safety
    of travelling from Baghdad to Kirkuk.

 6. Permission to appeal was granted by the First  Tier  Tribunal.  It  was
    noted that some of the grounds had  little  merit  but  permission  was
    granted on the points about the ability of the appellant to  return  to
    Jordan and the police report.

 7. The respondent has not filed a rule 24 response.

 8. I heard submissions from the representatives on the  issue  of  whether
    the judge's decision contained a material error of law.  I  shall  only
    set these out as is necessary to explain my decision.

 9. Mr Saeed relied on all five grounds but the first three  can  be  dealt
    with quite swiftly. That is because they contain no merit.  Ground  one
    complains that the judge made a finding that the appellant retains  the
    right to live in Jordan without having due regard to the evidence which
    the appellant had submitted. However, that  evidence  consisted  of  no
    more than a line in a letter written by his mother to the  effect  that
    the  appellant's  stepfather  no  longer  supported  him.   The   judge
    considered  this  evidence  and  rejected  it,  considering  it  "self-
    serving". It  is  clear  what  the  judge  meant  by  that  phrase.  An
    unexplained assertion in the letter produced by the appellant's  mother
    regarding a matter of foreign law, unsupported by any further evidence,
    is hardly likely to bear much weight. I see no  error  in  the  judge's
    rejection of this evidence.

10. Ground two highlights what is described as a  "glaring  error"  by  the
    judge in referring to the appellant not having returned to  Iraq  since
    2005. That reference is seen at paragraph 22 of  the  decision.  It  is
    clear that this is a simple error because the judge had  already  noted
    that the appellant had returned in 2008  and,  she  specifically  dealt
    with this in paragraph 34. Whilst it is true the judge appears to  have
    set some store by the fact that there had been  a  period  of  over  12
    years since the appellant had been Iraq when assessing  the  likelihood
    of continuing adverse interest, in paragraph  27,  this  is  plainly  a
    typographical error and,  in  any  event,  I  do  not  agree  that  the
    difference of three years could have had any  material  impact  on  her
    decision.

11. Ground three seeks  to  argue  that  the  judge  erred  by  making  her
    credibility findings  without  having  any  regard  to  the  "objective
    evidence". I do not accept that is the case. The  decision  has  to  be
    read as a whole and the judge has referred to background evidence  and,
    more significantly, to country guidance. Moreover, the key  credibility
    finding made by the judge concerned the fact that, if the appellant had
    been at risk in Iraq, his mother would not have sent  him  back  there.
    Clearly, that is not a finding that depended for  its  cogency  on  any
    amount of background evidence. It is a matter of common sense.

12. In  my  judgment,  grounds  four  and  five,  taken  together,  provide
    sufficient reason to consider that the judge's decision is vitiated  by
    material error of law such that it must be set aside.

13. In relation to the judge's treatment of the police report,  highlighted
    in ground four, paragraph 28 of the decision contains  a  finding  that
    the police report  did  not  state  exactly  what  the  threat  to  the
    appellant was. A cursory glance at the said document shows that it  did
    state the nature of the threat to the appellant.  Mr  Bramble  conceded
    this was the case. However, he argued the error was not material.  That
    is because the judge also relied on the vagueness of the wording in the
    report in concluding that it could not be genuine.

14. There may be some  force  in  the  judge's  reasoning  on  this  point.
    However, of greater concern is her manner of expression in  the  second
    sentence of that paragraph. She states, "[t]he appellant has fabricated
    the claim that he  has  received  threats  and  the  documents  he  has
    provided are likely to have been created to support  that  claim."  The
    only way that this sentence can be understood is that the judge, having
    decided that the appellant had fabricated a claim,  reasoned  that  the
    documents he submitted in support of his claim must be false  as  well.
    That is plainly an erroneous  approach  and  is  against  the  guidance
    provided in the well-known authority of Ahmed (Documents unreliable and
    forged) Pakistan [2002] UKIAT 00439 Starred (Tanveer Ahmed). The  judge
    should have looked at all the evidence in the round before reaching her
    conclusions on credibility. It may be that the judge only  intended  to
    be understood as theorising and carelessly omitted the word  "if"  from
    the beginning of this sentence. However, as written, it is not possible
    to conclude with certainty that this was her intended meaning.  I  find
    the judge's approach to the documents erroneous.

15. The judge's conclusions on  internal  flight  are  also  insufficiently
    clear. This was shown by the fact that  the  representatives  had  each
    understood the judge's conclusion differently. Mr Saeed had  understood
    the judge to have found that the appellant could not relocate safely to
    Baghdad, which is why she went on to consider the possibility of return
    to Kirkuk. Mr Bramble had understood the judge to have found  that  the
    risk was sufficiently low in Baghdad  for  the  appellant  to  relocate
    there  and  the  judge's  consideration  of  Kirkuk   was   simply   an
    alternative. A reading of paragraphs 34 and 35 of the decision can bear
    both the meanings attributed by the representatives.

16. In paragraph 34, the judge made comparisons between  the  appellant  in
    her case and the appellant in BA. This led her to conclude that, "there
    is some risk to him returning to Baghdad for the reasons which were set
    out in BA. However, he could relocate to Kirkuk, the city in  which  he
    was born." Then at paragraph 35, summarising her conclusions, the judge
    stated that, "in light of his ethnicity and religion  there  is  a  low
    level of risk to him if he returns to Baghdad, but I am satisfied  that
    the (sic) can return to Kirkuk." Whilst it seems to me the more  likely
    meaning was that  Baghdad  was  too  dangerous  for  the  appellant  to
    relocate to, unfortunately it is not sufficiently clear that  this  was
    the judge's intended meaning.

17. A further problem with the decision is that, as ground five  complains,
    it appears the appellant had  insufficient  opportunity  to  argue  his
    objections to relocation to Kirkuk. I am not satisfied  there  was  any
    procedural unfairness. An examination of the record of the  proceedings
    suggests  the  judge  did  raise  the  alternative  of  Kirkuk  in  her
    questioning of the appellant at the end of his evidence. I do not agree
    with Mr Saeed that the fact this option was not raised in  the  reasons
    for refusal letter meant that the judge was not entitled to raise it of
    her own motion. Indeed, it appears to me to have been the right  course
    if she had concerns about the safety of relocation to Baghdad. However,
    what she has left out of her considerations is the important  issue  of
    the safety of travelling from Baghdad to  Kirkuk.  The  judge  has  not
    addressed whether there may be  a  means  of  travelling  by  air  from
    Baghdad or whether, as a young Sunni  of  some  wealth,  the  appellant
    would be able to make the journey safely by road.

18. For these reasons, the decision of Judge Obhi must  be  set  aside  and
    remade. The appellant's appeal is allowed.

19. I considered the appropriate course for the remaking of  the  decision.
    Neither party was ready to proceed  to  do  so  at  the  same  hearing,
    despite directions informing them that they should be  so  prepared.  A
    more telling problem was that further oral evidence would  have  to  be
    called and there was no Arabic interpreter available. Nor did it appear
    to me to be possible to "repair" the judge's decision by  making  clear
    findings on the issues where  she  went  wrong.  That  is  because  the
    question of the reliability of the police report goes to the  heart  of
    the overall credibility finding. Even  the  issue  of  the  appellant's
    returnability to Jordan must be considered as part and parcel  of  this
    overall  assessment.  Therefore,  the  appropriate  course  of   action
    appeared to me to be to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal  with
    none of Judge Obhi's findings preserved.

20. The appeal will have to be heard again by a different  judge  who  will
    have to consider the whole of the claim afresh. He or she will have  to
    make findings on the credibility of the appellant's account,  including
    his claim that he would not be admitted to Jordan, the risk  on  return
    to Iraq and the possibility of internal relocation.



Notice of Decision

The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal made a material error of  law  and  her
decision dismissing the appeal is set aside. The appeal is remitted  to  the
First-tier Tribunal to be reheard.


Signed                                  Date 9 May 2018



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Froom
