
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10083/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 14th September 2018                        |On 25th September 2018        |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN

                                   Between

                               mr Marsel Hysaj
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     No Representative
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal to the Upper Tribunal by the Appellant in relation to
    a Decision and Reasons of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated  on  27th
    July 2017.  It is a Decision and Reasons  of  Judge  Abebrese  and  the
    appeal that he was determining was that of an Albanian man born in 1995
    who had entered the United Kingdom and some two months later, after  he
    had been arrested, claimed asylum.  He did so on the basis that he  was
    at risk because of a blood feud, he having got a girl pregnant and  her
    brothers would kill him on return.  He also claimed that since  he  has
    been in the UK his uncle, with whom he was particularly close, had been
    killed and he had speculated that that was by the same people.

 2. I am  proceeding  in  the  absence  of  either  the  Appellant  or  the
    Appellant's representatives.  The time is now 11.55 and  the  case  was
    listed at 10.  When nobody arrived the clerk contacted the  solicitors,
    Duncan Lewis & Co, to be told that they were without  any  instructions
    from the Appellant, and when they tried  to  telephone  he  refused  to
    answer.  The Notice of Hearing was sent both to the  Appellant  at  his
    home address and to the representatives and thus there is no reason  to
    prevent me from proceeding to hear it in their absence.

 3. The Judge  started  his  findings  and  analysis  of  the  evidence  at
    paragraph 20 of his Decision  and  he  ultimately  concluded  that  the
    Appellant's claims were not credible; that he was not at risk  and  the
    appeal was dismissed.

 4. Permission to appeal was granted by a Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal
    who found it arguable that the Judge had failed  to  give  any  or  any
    adequate reasons for his findings on credibility and  plausibility  and
    particularly pointed out the contents of paragraph 28 of the  Decision.



 5. At paragraph 28 as referred to in the grant of  permission,  the  Judge
    says this:

         "I also found that the appellant was not plausible in  relation  to
         how he found out that his assailants were in the same country as he
         was and how he got to know that this was the case.  I did not  find
         the appellant to be credible in relation  to  his  claim  that  his
         uncle was killed as  a  consequence  of  his  conduct  and  he  has
         invented this in order to bolster his  claim.   The  appellant  did
         post information on Facebook regarding his uncles but  he  made  no
         mention of how he might have died."

 6. If one looks at  that  paragraph  in  isolation  it  does  not  contain
    reasons.  However, when reading the findings and  analysis  section  of
    the Decision and Reasons as a whole it is quite clear  that  the  Judge
    does give his reasons.  The reasons are contained from paragraph 20 and
    what he says in paragraph 28 is essentially a summary of  the  findings
    that he has made above.  He refers, for example, to the  death  of  his
    uncle but clearly it is only the Appellant's speculation that this  was
    related to the claimed risk from  his  ex-girlfriend's  brothers.   The
    Appellant was only guessing they were responsible. It is not  the  case
    that the Decision is inadequately reasoned as full  reasons  are  given
    for finding the claim entirely lacking in credibility.  The Judge  also
    noted that the Appellant claimed asylum only  after  he  was  arrested.
    There is no error of law, material or otherwise, in the judgment of the
    First-tier Tribunal.  Accordingly, the appeal to the Upper Tribunal  is
    dismissed.


No anonymity direction is made.

Signed [pic]                            Date 20th September 2018


Upper Tribunal Judge Martin


