
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10887/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 4 August 2020                     |On 11 August 2020                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 GP (China)
                           [ANONYMITY ORDER MADE]

                                                                  Respondent

                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS


Anonymity order
Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) The Tribunal has ORDERED that no one shall publish  or  reveal
the name or address of [initials] who is the subject  of  these  proceedings
or publish or reveal any information which would be likely to  lead  to  the
identification of him or of any member of  his  family  in  connection  with
these proceedings.

Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise  to  contempt  of
court proceedings.

                           Decision and directions

 1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against the decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal allowing  the  claimant's  appeal  against  her
    decision to refuse him international protection or leave to  remain  in
    the United Kingdom on human rights grounds.

 2. The claimant is a citizen of the People's Republic  of  China  and  his
    appeal was allowed under the Refugee Convention, Articles 2,  3  and  8
    ECHR, and also under the Immigration Rules HC 395 (as amended).

Background

 3. The claimant entered the United Kingdom clandestinely in 2007, aged 29.
     His account was that when in China, his family owned a small farm  and
    in 2003/2004, borrowed RMB 400,000 and acquired additional land to make
    two fish ponds, which the Chinese government sought  to  buy  for  road
    building.  When the claimant's parents refused to sell, he says that in
    October 2004, the Chinese authorities poisoned the fish.  The claimant,
    with the help of a friend, approached a loan shark to repay  the  money
    borrowed to buy the land.

 4. When the local mayor and head man came to the house to try to force his
    parents to sign a contract to sell their  land,  his  parents  refused.
    Security staff  slapped  the  claimant's  father,  and  in  anger,  the
    claimant stabbed the mayor in the thigh.  He then  fled  to  Guangzhou,
    where he worked in a factory  until  he  was  abducted  in  a  car  and
    trafficked to the United Kingdom.   The claimant feared harm  from  the
    government or from the loan shark, should he be returned to China.

Refusal letter

 5. The claimant  benefits  from  a  Conclusive  Grounds  decision  by  the
    respondent on 1 November 2018, which accepted that he is  a  victim  of
    modern slavery,  having  been  trafficked  from  China  to  the  United
    Kingdom.  I can find no copy of the Reasonable Grounds decision dated 7
    April 2017 in the documents which were before the First-tier Judge  and
    the Secretary of State's GCID, which would have  the  reasoning  behind
    the Conclusive Grounds decision, was not disclosed.

 6. In her refusal letter of  28  October  2019,  the  Secretary  of  State
    accepted at [53] that  the  claimant  had  provided  a  consistent  and
    coherent account of his  trafficking  experience,  which  as  Competent
    Authority she had accepted, and therefore accepted  that  the  claimant
    was indeed a  victim  of  trafficking.   She  also  accepted  that  the
    claimant was a citizen of the People's Republic of China.

 7. The Secretary of State rejected the claimant's account  of  his  family
    problems, and his own problems, in China in 2004 and  thereafter.   She
    did so by reason of a  number  of  disagreements  with  the  claimant's
    account which are set out at [36]-[51] of the  refusal  letter.   There
    are no findings as to the  claimant's  credibility,  but  a  number  of
    internal inconsistencies were relied upon.

 8. The Secretary of State accepted that the claimant  had  demonstrated  a
    genuine subjective fear of the authorities and the  loan  shark  if  he
    were returned to China, but considered it not to  be  objectively  well
    founded by reason of sufficiency of protection, and  also  because  his
    account of problems with the authorities and the loan  shark  in  China
    had been rejected.  The Secretary of State considered that the claimant
    would have an internal relocation option in Beijing, away from any risk
    in Fujian.

 9. In relation to Article 8 ECHR, the Secretary of State  noted  that  the
    claimant had not resided in the United Kingdom and had not  shown  very
    significant  obstacles  to  reintegration  to  bring   himself   within
    paragraph 276ADE(1)(iii) of the Immigration Rules HC 395 (as  amended).
     Nor were there any exceptional circumstances for which leave to remain
    on human rights grounds or discretionary  leave  to  remain  should  be
    granted.  There was no mention in this part  of  the  decision  of  the
    claimant's mental health issues or his having been a trafficked person.

10. The Secretary of  State  refused  leave  to  remain  and  the  claimant
    appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.

First-tier Tribunal decision

11. The claimant was unfit to give oral evidence and the  First-tier  Judge
    decided the appeal on the basis of the  written  evidence  before  him.
    He found that the central core of the claimant's account was  credible:
    he was a trafficked person who had  been  brought  from  China  through
    Russia to the United Kingdom and was a victim of modern  slavery.   The
    judge found  it  likely  that  the  background  circumstances  were  as
    asserted by the claimant: that he had  been  trafficked  in  connection
    with the family's unpaid  debt.   The  judge  accepted  the  claimant's
    account of having attacked the village  head  with  a  knife  when  his
    father was slapped.

12. The First-tier Judge went on to make a brief but  robust  reference  to
    the expert evidence of Dr Anthony Ahwe,  Consultant  Psychiatrist  MBBS
    MRCPsych DPM and to the fragility of the claimant's mental  health,  as
    therein set out.  Dr Ahwe found the claimant to be suffering from Major
    Depressive  Disorder:  his  report  does  not  reference  the  Istanbul
    Protocol, but the judge was entitled to give it weight.   He  also  had
    regard to the Secretary of State's CPIN on China, in particular section
    on  corruption  and  local  politics,  which  was  supportive  of   the
    claimant's account.

13. The First-tier Tribunal allowed the claimant's appeal and the Secretary
    of State appealed to the Upper Tribunal.

Secretary of State's appeal

14. The Secretary of State challenged the  First-tier  Judge's  failure  to
    apply the 2009 country guidance in ZC and others and  the  adequacy  of
    the First-tier  Tribunal's  findings  of  credibility  and  fact,  with
    particular  reference  to  those  made  under  Article  8  ECHR.    The
    Secretary of State relied on the decision  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  in
    Budhathoki (reasons for decisions) [2014] UKUT  000341  (IAC),  arguing
    that the First-tier Judge failed to explain in clear  and  brief  terms
    why the claimant's case was preferred  to  that  of  the  Secretary  of
    State.

15. Permission to appeal was granted to the Secretary of State on the basis
    that the First-tier Judge's reasoning was arguably inadequate; that  he
    had arguably failed properly to apply the relevant country guidance  or
    to provide a clear explanation of why he had  departed  therefrom;  and
    that his assessment of the Article  8  ECHR  claim  was  insufficiently
    reasoned.

Upper Tribunal proceedings

16. Following triage directions during the COVID-19  pandemic  period,  the
    parties were invited  to  provide  further  written  submissions.   The
    Secretary of State chose not to  do  so,  relying  exclusively  on  her
    grounds of appeal, but reserving (which the  directions  did  not)  the
    right to make further submissions if the claimant responded.

17. The claimant's submissions assert that at [39]-[42] of the decision the
    First-tier Judge  did provide an adequate explanation of the reason why
    he disapplied the country guidance in ZC (Risk - illegal  exit  -  loan
    sharks) China CG [2009] UKAIT 28 and in HL (Risk - return - snakeheads)
    China CG  [2002]  UKAIT  03683.  The  claimant  relies  on  Terzaghi  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2019] EWCA Civ 2017  as  to
    the extent to which  the  Upper  Tribunal  should  interfere  with  the
    reasoning of a First-tier Judge, and on UT (sl) v  Secretary  of  State
    for the Home Department [2019] EWCA Civ 1095 and AH (Sudan) v Secretary
    of State for the Home Department [2007] UKHL 49 to show that the  Upper
    Tribunal should not interfere merely because it might  have  reached  a
    different conclusion on the evidence before the First-tier Judge.

18. In relation to Article 8 ECHR, the appellant relied  on  TZ  (Pakistan)
    and PG (India) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2018] EWCA
    Civ 1109 at [34] in the judgment of the Senior President  of  Tribunals
    (Lord Justice Ryder,  with  whom  Lord  Justices  Longmore  and  Moylan
    agreed) and contended that if the requirements of the Rules  were  met,
    the statutory presumptions in Part VA of the  Nationality,  Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002 (as amended) did not apply.  Having regard  to  the
    observations of the Senior  President  at  [27],  that  is  arguably  a
    misreading of the ratio decidendi in TZ and PG.

19. Even if the statutory presumptions were applicable, the claimant argued
    that the First-tier Tribunal conducted the necessary  broad  evaluative
    judgment and that its decision should be upheld.

20. The Secretary of State did not take the opportunity  to  reply  to  the
    claimant's submission.

21. Neither the claimant nor the Secretary of State has  submitted  that  a
    further oral hearing is required.  I  therefore  proceed  to  determine
    this appeal  on  the  documents  before  me,  in  accordance  with  the
    directions of Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia.



Analysis

22. The Secretary of State 's challenge is to the adequacy  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal's reasoning, failure  to  apply  2002  and  2009  country
    guidance, and to the adequacy of the First-tier Tribunal's  credibility
    findings and approach to Article 8.

23. The claimant was referred into the  NRM  by  the  Salvation  Army.  The
    Secretary of State disclosed her positive Conclusive  Grounds  decision
    to the First-tier Tribunal, but that is of little assistance since  the
    decision says no more than that 'there are conclusive grounds to accept
    your client is a victim of modern  slavery'.   The  Reasonable  Grounds
    decision is not disclosed, nor the GCID which would indicate what parts
    of the claimant's account was  treated  as  reliable  in  reaching  the
    positive Conclusive Grounds decision.

24. I remind myself that the appellant was present and  gave  evidence  and
    that the First-tier Judge is the fact-finding  judge.   I  may  not  go
    behind the First-tier Judge's findings of fact and credibility, save in
    the limited circumstances set out by Lord Justice Brooke in R (Iran)  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2005] EWCA Civ 982 at [90].
     The First-tier Tribunal's reasoning must be  Wednesbury  unreasonable,
    perverse, or incomprehensible to the reviewing judge.

25. Neither the First-tier Judge nor the Secretary of  State  when  arguing
    this appeal before the First-tier  Tribunal  had  the  benefit  of  the
    Supreme Court's decision in MS (Pakistan) v Secretary of State for  the
    Home Department [2020] UKSC 9, as to  the  treatment  of  a  Conclusive
    Grounds or Reasonable  Grounds  decision  in  international  protection
    appeals.  Giving the judgment of the court, Lady Hale  JSC  (with  whom
    Lord Kerr JSC, Lady Black JSC, Lord Lloyd-Jones JSC and Lord Briggs JSC
    agreed) said that in the case of a negative NRM decision,  it  was  for
    the fact-finding Tribunal to determine for itself  whether  a  claimant
    was a victim of trafficking, and that the fact-finding Tribunal was  in
    a better position to do so than the Secretary  of  State  as  Competent
    Authority.

26.  In this case, however, the Secretary of State, in her role  as  Single
    Competent  Authority,  has  made  positive   Reasonable   Grounds   and
    Conclusive Grounds decisions, applying the  higher  civil  standard  of
    balance of probabilities.  She  has  accepted  that  this  claimant  is
    indeed a victim of trafficking.  The Secretary of  State's  grounds  of
    appeal did not deal with, or disclose, the Reasonable Grounds  decision
    or the GCID record underlying the Conclusive Grounds decision.

27. Applying the lower standard in international protection claims, that of
    real risk or reasonable  degree  of  likelihood,  those  findings  must
    therefore be preserved.  Absent the Secretary of State's  reasoning  in
    her Conclusive Grounds decision, it is very difficult to understand how
    she rejected the account of the claimant's troubles in  China  and  how
    she considered that he had fallen into the hands of traffickers, if not
    because of the family debts and his attack on a  local  dignitary.   It
    was unarguably open to the First-tier Judge to find that  part  of  the
    account credible and to reach the conclusions he did as to  credibility
    and fact.

28. I am not satisfied, on the limited  evidence  and  argument  which  the
    Secretary of State has chosen to put before the  Upper  Tribunal,  that
    the First-tier Judge erred in his findings of fact and  credibility  at
    an R (Iran) level or  that  I  am  entitled  to  interfere  with  those
    findings.  If the First-tier Judge's findings of fact  and  credibility
    are accepted, the claimant's appeal was bound  to  succeed  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

29. I therefore uphold the decision of the First-tier Judge and dismiss the
    Secretary of State's appeal.



DECISION

30. For the foregoing reasons, my decision is as follows:

    The making of the previous decision involved the making of no error  on
    a point of law

    I do not set aside the decision but order that it shall stand.


Signed   Judith AJC Gleeson     Date:    4 August 2020
     Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson
