
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:  pa/10804/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 15 March 2019                           |On 9 April 2019                 |
|                                           |                                |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY


                                   Between

                                      S
                             (Anonymity DIRECTED)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr H Pratt (Solicitor)
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    This the claimant's appeal to the Upper  Tribunal,  brought  with  the
permission of a judge of the First-tier Tribunal, from  a  decision  of  the
First-tier Tribunal (the tribunal) to dismiss his appeal against a  decision
of the Secretary  of  State  of  23  August  2018,  refusing  to  grant  him
international protection. The tribunal made its decision on 13 October  2018
following a hearing of 11 October 2018 and then sent it on 30 October 2018.

2.     Shorn of all but the essential details the  background  circumstances
are as follows:

The claimant is a male national of Iran and was born on 8 June 1990.  He  is
of Kurdish ethnicity. He  claims  that  he  became  involved  with  a  small
oppositionist group which called itself the Rohiz Dissident Group.  He  says
that shortly after joining the group he and his friend a man  I  shall  call
H, had been caught putting up Kurdish  flags  in  public  places.  This,  he
says, led to H being shot. The claimant, though, was  able  to  escape.  His
(that is the claimant's) father was subsequently  arrested  by  the  Iranian
authorities but released  shortly  afterwards.  The  claimant,  fearful  the
authorities would apprehend and harm him, exited Iran and  embarked  upon  a
journey which, ultimately led him to the United Kingdom (UK). He  says  that
he  entered  the  UK  illegally  on  22  January  2018.   He   then   sought
international protection. The Secretary of State refused the  claim  because
he did not believe the claimant had given a truthful or accurate account  of
events. It was accepted that he  is  Iranian  and  it  seems  to  have  been
accepted (though I am not sure this is anywhere expressly stated  on  behalf
of the Secretary of State) that he is Kurdish. It  was  that  refusal  which
ultimately led to the appeal before the tribunal.

3.    The tribunal, like the Secretary of State, disbelieved the  claimant's
account. It set out the account of  events  he  had  offered  in  a  passage
running from paragraph 27 to 36 of its written reasons of 13  October  2018.
Then, from paragraph 37 to 44, it explained why it did not believe it.   One
of its  credibility  concerns  related  to  the  claimant's  assertion  that
shortly  after  the  shooting  incident  his  had  been  arrested  but   had
nevertheless then  been  released  very  shortly  afterwards.  The  tribunal
thought that what had been said in a section of an  expert  report  prepared
by Dr Kakhki (an acknowledged expert) meant that that part  of  the  account
was not true. The tribunal explained  its  reasoning  as  to  that  discrete
aspect of the case in this way:

         "39.     I have carefully read the section  in  the  expert  report
         entitled "Family Arrests Policy" and conclude that it  renders  the
         Appellant's account not credible that his father was  arrested  and
         that he was released shortly afterwards on  the  same  day  as  the
         incriminating material was found  hidden  in  the  Appellant's  own
         bedroom. This account is at odds with paragraphs 53 to 57. There is
         no evidence before  me  that  the  Iranian  Courts  have  made  any
         specific Order against the Appellant's  family  or  any  individual
         member of his family. In my judgement, the Appellant's account that
         anti-regime flags and other incriminating material are said to have
         been found in the Appellant's family home  is  wholly  inconsistent
         with the Appellant's claim that the authorities released his father
         as  early  as  they  did  without   discovering   the   Appellant's
         whereabouts.

         40.      If, as claimed by the Appellant,  [H]  had  given  up  the
         names and details of the members of the Rohiz Group  prior  to  his
         death those  details  would  have  included  his  own  father.  The
         Ettela'at, would have, been aware  that  the  Appellant's  friend's
         father was involved in the dissident group and they  would,  in  my
         judgement, have been highly likely to conclude that the Appellant's
         father was also involved.  On his own account the two families have
         been  friends  for  a  very  long  time.  In  my   judgement,   the
         sophisticated and informal network of the Iranian  security  forces
         would have  quickly  discovered  the  connection  between  the  two
         families resulting in them not readily accepting any  account  from
         the Appellant's father that he was not involved  in  the  dissident
         groups activities and would not have released him as claimed".

4.    The tribunal then looked at what the claimant had  said  he  had  done
after H's apprehension by the authorities. It thought he had  said  that  he
had gone to a maternal uncle's house. However, it thought that if that  were
true the Appellant would have been discovered  by  the  authorities  because
the Iranian authorities would have raided that maternal  uncle's  home.  The
tribunal said this:

         "41.     Additionally, given the extremely sophisticated nature  of
         the Ettela'at's information gathering systems  I  do  not  find  it
         credible that the Appellant's maternal uncle's home would not  have
         been raided and searched if they knew of the  Appellant's  identity
         and involvement with the dissident group due to [H] giving them the
         Appellant's details prior to dying shortly after being shot".

5.    To complete its credibility assessment  the  tribunal  then  expressed
disbelief at the claimant's contention that he  and  H  had  on  5  separate
occasions replaced Iranian flags with dissident flags. That is  because  the
tribunal thought if they had been doing so in a relatively small  area  that
would have led to the authorities simply watching  sites  where  flags  were
located in order to find the culprits. So, runs the argument,  the  claimant
and H would not have behaved in that way at all.  It  would  have  been  too
risky to do so.

6.    It was the tribunal's disbelief of the  account  which  caused  it  to
dismiss the appeal. The dismissal of the appeal  was  not  the  end  of  the
matter, however, because permission to appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  was
sought and obtained.  The  grounds  included  contentions  that  the  expert
report did not preclude the possibility of early release of  the  claimant's
father and that the claimant had not said that he had  gone  to  a  maternal
uncles' house.

7.    Permission to appeal was granted. So, the matter  was  listed  for  an
oral hearing before the Upper Tribunal (before  me)  so  that  consideration
could be given as to whether the tribunal had erred in law and, if  it  had,
what should flow from that. Representation at that  hearing  was  as  stated
above and I am grateful to each representative.  As  it  turned  out,  as  a
result of a conciliatory stand taken by Mr McVeety, the  hearing  was  quite
short. He did not actually concede that the  tribunal's  decision  contained
errors of law but he did accept that the claimant had  never  asserted  that
he had fled to a maternal uncle's home and he also  accepted  that  what  Dr
Kakhki had to say in his report  regarding  the  arrest  of  the  claimant's
father was neutral rather than damaging  to  the  claimant's  account,  with
respect to the early release of the father. Mr McVeety added he observed  he
was "able to see merit in the grounds".

8.    As may be seen from the above summary, the tribunal have  taken  three
adverse credibility points against the claimant. One of  those,  of  course,
was based on what it thought was his claim that he had fled  to  a  maternal
uncle's house. The tribunal's reasoning was that  the  authorities  in  Iran
are so sophisticated with respect to their detection  procedures  that  they
would have discovered the location of the maternal uncle's  home  and  would
have raided it on the basis that there was a possibility  the  claimant  had
been taking shelter with a  family  member.  The  assertion  of  the  behalf
claimant, by way of reminder, is that he had never said he had gone  to  his
maternal uncle's home at all.

9.    I have looked closely at the evidence about this which was before  the
tribunal. At  paragraph  14  of  the  claimant's  witness  statement  of  25
September 2018, he says that after the incident which led  to  the  shooting
of H, he had realised that it would not be safe for him to  go  home  "so  I
decided to go my friend [name of friend] house". He went on to explain  that
that person was a close friend  of  his  and  that  he  lived  in  a  nearby
village. In looking at the  tribunal's  handwritten  record  of  proceedings
(commendably legible) it is recorded that he told the tribunal that  he  did
go to that particular friend's house. It  is  recorded  that  he  added  "my
friend's house was twenty-five minutes motorbike ride away  from  where  [H]
was shot". I can find  nothing  in  the  paperwork  in  front  of  me  which
suggests that the claimant did say he had gone to a maternal uncle's  house.


10.   I have concluded, in light of the above, that the  tribunal  did  make
what having regard to pressure of work  was  an  understandable  mistake  of
fact. The question is whether that has  translated  into  an  error  in  law
given that the mistake  may  have  contributed  to  the  tribunal's  adverse
credibility conclusions. I can certainly see the logic in  saying  that  the
Iranian authorities would  have  or  might  have  sought  to  apprehend  the
claimant by raiding the homes of family  members  or  at  least  any  family
members who happened to live close by. If they knew his identity and  wanted
him badly enough that would be an obvious thing to do. I have  asked  myself
whether the same can said be about close friends. However, it  seems  to  me
whilst assiduous enquiries made by the authorities might well  lead  to  the
rapid identification of  locally  based  family  members,  the  same  cannot
necessarily  be  said  about  locally  based  friends.   I  think,  speaking
generally, that the authorities would probably find family links as  opposed
to friendship links, more speedily and readily  ascertainable.  So,  I  have
concluded that the tribunal's credibility point (which  would  have  been  a
cogent one if the claimant had to gone to his maternal uncle's place)  loses
force once it is realised that his account was to the  effect  that  he  had
gone to a friend's house. That  does  remove  one  plank  from  the  adverse
credibility case built by the tribunal.

11.   There is then the issue concerning the  speedy  arrest  and  then  the
speedy release of the father. The tribunal thought that  that  part  of  the
account was inconsistent with what was indicated by Dr Kakhki in  a  passage
from paragraph 53 to paragraph 57 of his expert report. On my  reading  what
is said therein is that the authorities do frequently arrest family  members
of those suspected of political oppositionist  activity.  It  is  said  that
there is in Iran a legal basis for  the  making  of  such  arrests  and  for
subsequent questioning. Dr Kakhki expresses the view that  it  is  plausible
that the Iranian authorities would have arrested the claimant's father.  But
I do not detect anything in that section of the report which suggests it  is
implausible that he would be released with a degree of rapidity  thereafter.
As such, it seems to me on a fair reading of that passage, what is  said  by
Dr Kakhki is, with respect to the  prospect  of  an  early  release  of  the
father, simply neutral.  Mr McVeety agrees with that and, in truth I do  not
think the passages in the report can viably be  read  any  other  way.  That
does create a difficulty because it is apparent from what the  tribunal  had
to say at paragraph 39 of its written reasons (set out above)  that  it  did
rely upon what its interpretation of what was said  in  Dr  Kakhki's  report
when deciding that the account of the  early  release  was  implausible.  It
does seem to me though, that in the circumstances of  this  particular  case
and given what was likely to be substantial  concern  on  the  part  of  the
authorities regarding the putting up of  anti-regime  flags,  a  case  could
well have been made for the implausibility of early release irrespective  of
the content of the expert report. But since the tribunal  clearly  did  rely
upon the expert report for at least part of  its  reasoning  regarding  that
particular credibility concern I am not able to say, if it had not done  so,
that it would inevitably have arrived at the same view.

12.   I would conclude, therefore, that  with  respect  to  its  credibility
assessment the tribunal has erred through making a relevant mistake of  fact
and through misconstruing the contents of the expert report and  that  those
errors have significantly influenced its adverse credibility findings. I  do
think,  notwithstanding  a  protest  in  the  written  grounds,   that   the
tribunal's reasoning as to the flag issue has force. But I am not  satisfied
that that, on its own, is capable  of  sustaining  the  adverse  credibility
findings. In these circumstances I have  concluded,  and  I  have  not  been
seriously urged to take a different view, that the tribunal did err  in  law
in a way which was material in that the errors I have  identified  could  (I
do not say would) have led to a different conclusion.

13.   In the above circumstance I have decided  that  the  most  appropriate
course of action is remittal. That is because, since I have  concluded  that
the credibility assessment is not sustainable, I am  not  able  to  preserve
any of the tribunals findings  and  conclusions.  Matters  must,  therefore,
commence entirely afresh. There will need to be fresh fact finding and  that
task is best undertaken by the  First-tier  Tribunal  as  the  expert  fact-
finding body. There will, therefore, be a complete rehearing of  the  appeal
by a differently constituted tribunal.

14.   I have set out, below, some  brief  directions  as  I  am  statutorily
required to do.

Directions for the Rehearing

A.    There will be a complete rehearing of the appeal before a  differently
constituted tribunal to that which decided the appeal on 13 October 2018.

B.    The rehearing shall take place at the Bradford Hearing Centre.

C.    The claimant shall have the  benefit  of  a  Kurdish  Sorani  speaking
interpreter at the rehearing.

D.    These directions maybe amended or supplemented  at  any  time  by  any
salaried judge of the First-tier Tribunal.

Decision

The tribunal's decision involves the making an  error  of  law  and  be  set
aside. Further, the case is remitted  for  a  complete  rehearing  before  a
differently reconstituted tribunal.

Anonymity

I grant the claimant anonymity. Accordingly, no report of these  proceedings
shall identify him or any member of his family. This applies to  each  party
to these proceedings. Failure to  comply  may  lead  to  contempt  of  court
proceedings.


Signed:     Dated: 4 April 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway

