
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10952/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Conducted by Remote Hearing          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 24 July 2020                      |On 7 September 2020                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                                     A m
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms J Pratt, Legal Representative, Tann Law
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer
                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules
    2008 I make an order prohibiting the disclosure or publication of any
    matter likely to lead members of the public to identify the Appellant.
    Breach of this order can be punished as a contempt of court. I make
    this order because the Appellant is an asylum seeker and so is entitled
    to privacy.

 2. This appeal was conducted by remote hearing. I am grateful to both
    representatives for their willingness to experiment with this new
    technology which appears to have worked entirely satisfactorily.

 3. This is an appeal by a citizen of Ethiopia against a decision of the
    First-tier Tribunal dismissing his appeal against a decision of the
    Secretary of State refusing him asylum or any other kind of
    international protection.  Permission to appeal was granted by First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Keane.  He gave quite detailed reasons for giving
    permission but really two points emerge.  First, and foremost, the
    Judge has disagreed with the expert evidence of a Dr Bersisa Berri but
    although the judge has clearly disagreed there is no analysis of Dr
    Berri's evidence or no proper explanation for coming to a different
    conclusion.  No-one suggests that the judge has to follow the expert
    but when a different view is taken it must be plain why that view has
    been taken.  It is not plain to me and Ms Everett, with characteristic
    realism, accepted it was not plain from the face of the Decision and it
    was going to be difficult for her to defend the decision.

 4. There was, I think, agreement that the decision was unsatisfactory and
    had to be set aside.

 5. I consider then what findings if any should be preserved.  Clearly
    findings should be preserved if they can be, perhaps particularly
    findings that are favourable to the appellant but the difficulty here
    is that it is not plain what the judge accepted.  There are some things
    that the judge plainly did not accept but we find in paragraph 49 an
    indication that an explanation is plausible.  It is well understood
    that an explanation that is plausible is not necessarily truthful and a
    finding that something is "plausible" is not a finding that these
    things happened. However the used of the expression leaves open the
    possibility that the judge is thought to have accepted something when
    that is not the case.

 6. I find that it would be wrong for this appellant to be tied by any of
    the decisions that have been made.  The reasoning is inadequate and the
    findings are inadequate.

 7. I think with the consent of the parties but certainly because it is in
    my judgment, the right thing to do, I set aside the decision of the
    First-tier Tribunal.  Given there had been no proper findings made and
    that is not the appellant's fault in any way it seems to me desirable
    that the appeal is reheard in the First-tier Tribunal in front of a
    different judge.

Notice of Decision

 8. The First-tier Tribunal erred in law. The decision is set aside. The
    appeal will be determined again in the First-tier Tribunal before a
    different judge.



                              Jonathan Perkins
|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 28 August 2020                 |

