

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                             Appeal Number:
PA/10409/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                           | Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 9 March 2018                            |On 13 March 2018                |
|                                           |                                |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                           ABDULLAH HOSSEIN-GHOLI
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D McGlashan, of McGlashan MacKay, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Matthews, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The  respondent  refused  the  appellant's  asylum  claim  for  reasons
    explained in her letter dated 10 September 2016.

 2. First-tier Tribunal Judge Mrs D H  Clapham  dismissed  the  appellant's
    appeal for reasons explained in her decision promulgated on 23  October
    2017.

 3. The appellant's grounds of appeal, stated in his  application  dated  7
    November 2017, are as follows (lightly edited):

      The judge erred in law in concluding that  the  appellant's  Christian
      conversion was not genuine (paragraph 78) because: -

      2.1 She has not accorded proper weight to what two witnesses who  gave
      oral evidence (Mara Roeofse and Iain Macaulay) and  one  who  did  not
      (Niall Fulton) said ... each of these persons occupied  a  responsible
      role in the leadership of the church at which the appellant claims  to
      have been converted.  Each  person  was/is  an  experienced  Christian
      leader. Such evidence fell to be assessed as opinion evidence  on  the
      genuineness of the appellant's conversion. It was based not simply  on
      what the appellant told each of them but on his  behaviour,  demeanour
      and  action  over  a  certain  time  and  in  different  contexts.  In
      describing this evidence as "of limited value" (paragraph 84) ...  the
      judge has not accorded sufficient - indeed it would seem ANY - weight:

      Ms Roelofse considers the behaviour since around September 2016 of the
      appellant in attending classes/gatherings, the  nature  of  which  was
      clearly much more than "fairly transient" (paragraph  85).  Rather  it
      demonstrated a crucial aspect of his alleged conversion,  viz  how  he
      appears to be have been able to not  only  effectively  interact  with
      others but how he also acknowledged the importance  of  study  of  the
      Christian faith;

      Mr Macaulay's evidence may have tended to the general, but it  was  no
      less sincere and (as an experienced Christian  leader)  authoritative.
      Crucially  he  supplies  the  necessary  "link"  with  the   spiritual
      experience the appellant claims to have had ... Mr Macaulay  describes
      this as "a significant time"  for  the  appellant  who  "testified  to
      experiencing the Holy Spirit and recognising for the first  time  that
      Jesus was alive" ... If the judge thinks that such  evidence  from  an
      experienced Christian leader is of no more than  "limited  value"  she
      has misunderstood the significance of expert  evidence  generally  and
      specifically in Christian conversion cases.

      The evidence of Niall Fulton  (who  baptised  the  appellant)  ...  is
      ignored by the judge. This was an error since this evidence considered
      in the round with evidence from the  other  two  witnesses  about  the
      appellant's behaviour speaks to his alleged conversion. As  Mr  Fulton
      says [in his letter] in being baptised the appellant was expressing "a
      personal commitment to Christ".  Taken along with other  instances  of
      conversion ... this was evidence  -  considered  in  the  round  -  of
      conversion to Christianity. The judge erred in ignoring it.

      2.2 The 3 reasons she has given for not accepting the  genuineness  of
      the conversion are irrational:

      Paragraphs 79,  80:  it  is  said  here  that  there  was  a  material
      inconsistency about his evidence concerning previous practice of Islam
      because he discusses  (his  statement)  being  strict;  but  screening
      interview he said he did not practice. There is no inconsistency  ....
      his statement has been misquoted: he did not say "I practice"  but  "I
      practiced" (past tense). He is referring to a  past  situation  not  a
      present one.

      Paragraphs 81 - 83: Ms Roelofse identifies a relevant  time/date  when
      he started to attend classes, while so far as his Bible  knowledge  is
      concerned he is still learning and cannot rationally be  "accused"  of
      not  knowing  "basic  principles"  of  Christianity  when  experienced
      witnesses make no issue about this (and in  any  event  there  was  no
      evidence... what such principles are...).

      Paragraph 86: the judge notes that although Mr Macaulay was unaware of
      the leaflets, he "welcomed the production". Only if  Mr  Macaulay  had
      expressed an opinion, for example, that the issue of such leaflets was
      unwise, misguided premature should this go against the  appellant.  Mr
      Macaulay said none of these things. The  specific  absence  of  anyone
      whom the appellant has himself evangelised is not be taken as evidence
      of a conversion that is not genuine.


 4. The main points I noted from  the  submissions  by  Mr  McGlashan  were
    these:

      i) The judge directed herself correctly on how to approach credibility
         at [75], but did not go on to apply those principles.

     ii) By reference to his witness statement, the  appellant  was  talking
         about his observance of Islam at different periods of his life, and
         did not contradict himself as found at [79] and [80].

    iii) There was no lack of  clarity  about  when  the  appellant  started
         attending church, as found at [81].

     iv) Contrary to [82], the judge should have found that the  appellant's
         evidence at interview about his conversion was  supported  by  what
         Reverend Macaulay said in a letter, as  they  were  describing  the
         same event.

      v) Contrary to  [83],  the  appellant  had  shown  good  knowledge  of
         Christianity at interview in  a  way  which  could  not  have  been
         rehearsed.

     vi) Properly understood, the evidence was  that  the  appellant  was  a
         regular not a transient attender at church groups, [85].

    vii) The evidence of the church  witnesses  covered  a  long  period  of
         conversion in considerable detail.  The  judge  did  not  take  the
         accumulation of evidence in the appellant's favour into account.

   viii) It was accepted that there is no authority  for  any  special  rule
         about the significance of  "expert  evidence  ...  specifically  in
         Christian conversion cases".  However, in this case the decision of
         the judge simply mirrored that of the resident, and took no account
         of anything which went in favour of the appellant.

     ix) It was accepted that the evidence did not show that there could  be
         only one outcome within reason, but this was a case which should be
         heard again by another judge.

 5. Having heard also from the respondent, I reserved my decision.

 6. Most of the grounds are self-evidently  factual  disagreement,  and  no
    more.

 7. The submissions for the appellant  (some  details  of  which  were  not
    foreshadowed in the grounds) made the most of the  case  the  appellant
    put to the FtT, but I am unable to find in them anything but insistence
    on the facts.

 8. None of the criticisms showed that the judge took any view  which  fell
    outside her reasonable range.

 9. There is no need to go through each issue of fact.  By way of  examples
    only, the appellant did contradict  himself  about  the  level  of  his
    Islamic  observance;  and  when  the  judge  said  at  [82]  that   the
    appellant's description of his conversion  was  not  the  same  as  the
    episode described by Reverend Macaulay, that was well within the  scope
    of sensible judgment.

10. The grounds do not justify the assertion that the judge failed to apply
    her self-direction on credibility.

11. The grounds and submissions do not show that the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal should be set aside for any error  on  a  point  of  law.
    That decision shall stand.

12. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.

            [pic]

            12 March 2018
            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman




