
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  PA/10165/2018 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard by Skype for Business                   |Decision & Reasons           |
|                                              |Promulgated                  |
|on 20 January 2021                            |on 15 February 2021          |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                    R M L
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr D Olabamiji, of DMO Olabamiji, Solicitors,
Glasgow
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of El Salvador, who claims she  is  entitled
    to refugee status because of a well-founded fear of gang members in  El
    Salvador, where her daughter was raped.   The  respondent  refused  her
    claim.   FtT  Judge  Handley  dismissed  her  appeal  by   a   decision
    promulgated on 5 December 2018.

 2. A panel of the UT comprising the President,  Vice  President  and  Lord
    Matthews granted permission to appeal to the UT by a decision dated  11
    May and issued on 11 June 2020.

 3. This decision should be read as if the grounds of appeal and the  grant
    of permission were incorporated herein.

 4. The case was listed to be heard before  me,  by  remote  means,  on  25
    November 2020.  Mr  M  Diwnycz,  Senior  Presenting  Officer,  attended
    remotely for the respondent.  There was no appearance by or  on  behalf
    of the appellant. Notice of hearing had been sent to her at the address
    which she last made known to the UT. She had sent no  communication  to
    the UT, or  to  the  respondent.   She  had  no  legal  representatives
    currently on record.

 5. I ascertained from Mr Diwnycz that the Home Office has  a  more  recent
    address  on  record  for  the  appellant.   It   is   of   course   her
    responsibility to advise the UT of any change, but  I  decided  not  to
    proceed in her absence. The hearing was adjourned.  On 18 December 2020
    notice was issued to her new address of the hearing to take place on 20
    January 2021.

 6. Mr Olabamiji appeared on behalf of the appellant on 20 January.  He was
    instructed by her in  March  2020  but  was  not  on  record  with  the
    tribunal.  He had not seen the grant of permission.  Mrs Aboni provided
    him with a copy by e-mail, and a copy of the respondent's brief written
    submission.  The hearing was "stood down" to give Mr Olabamiji time  to
    consider those.

 7. The appellant did not attend and had not been expected to do so.

 8. The technology enabled an effective remote hearing.  I  am  obliged  to
    both representatives for their succinct submissions.

 9. Mr Olabamiji adopted the  grounds,  which  were  prepared  by  previous
    representatives, and submitted further:

      i) The decision made no adequate assessment of the best  interests  of
         the child.

     ii) The decision  at  [45]  was  at  best  a  "tick  box"  exercise  on
         proportionality,  not  the  required  application  of  the  "Razgar
         tests".

    iii) The psychological report filed with the FtT showed that  the  child
         was suffering from PTSD, for which she was receiving  treatment  in
         the UK.

     iv) The failure of the FtT to deal with the child's condition, and  her
         best interests, was material, especially as the respondent conceded
         that she had been raped.

      v) It was only the identity of the perpetrators  which  was  disputed.
         That did not affect the issue.

     vi) The FtT misapplied the law on internal relocation.  Given the small
         size of El Salvador, and the expert report, it was unreasonable  to
         expect the appellant to relocate.

    vii) In  light  of  the  terms  of  the  grant  of  permission  and  the
         respondent's written submissions, the  case  turned  on  the  "best
         interests" point.

10. Mrs Aboni submitted:

      i) The argument on the best interests  of  the  child,  based  on  her
         mental health, was not put to the FtT.  There was no  basis  for  a
         new ground to be taken at this late stage.

     ii) There was no error in the article 8 assessment, which was correctly
         made on the assumption of the return of the family unit.

    iii) The respondent's position on internal relocation had been backed up
         by background evidence, which the  FtT  was  entitled  to  take  as
         reliable.  The appellant's position was based on an expert  report,
         on the assumption that the perpetrators  were  an  organised  gang,
         which the appellant failed to establish.  There was no  finding  of
         ongoing interest and no basis on which to exclude relocation.

11. Mr Olabamiji replied:

      i) The grounds  at  4  (vi)  covered  the  assessment  of  article  8,
         including the best interests  of  the  child.   This  was  not  the
         introduction of a novel case.

     ii) The failure to deal with that point required the case to  be  heard
         afresh by another judge in the FtT.

12. I reserved my decision.

13. The grounds at 4 (vi) allege an inadequate assessment of article 8  and
    in particular whether it is proportionate  to  remove  the  appellant's
    daughter "when it is accepted, she was sexually assaulted by the  gangs
    and in light of her medical issues".

14. That is a vague complaint of error on a point of law, and perhaps  only
    disagreement; but it is just enough  to  cover  the  submission  by  Mr
    Olabamiji.

15. The grounds, at 4 (vi)  and  elsewhere,  are  incorrect  on  the  facts
    established.  The respondent did not accept, and the appellant did  not
    show, that gangs were involved.

16. The appellant filed a psychological report about her daughter  but  did
    not state any case that her best interests required her  to  remain  in
    the UK to benefit from medical treatment.  There has been no  reference
    to evidence to that effect.

17. The appellant's husband and 5 children appear to be dependants  on  her
    claim.  She has never suggested that the case  might  involve  anything
    other their return as a family,  or  not  at  all.   The  daughter  who
    suffered the assault reached the age of 18 in July 2020 and would be an
    adult at the date of any remaking of the FtT's decision.   Family  life
    for article 8 purposes may continue after age 18, and the  matter  does
    not weigh significantly in the present decision,  but  it  is  a  point
    which would need to be considered in any remaking.  I am not  aware  of
    any authority for the "best interests of the  child"  aspect  extending
    into legal adulthood.

18. On internal relocation, the  submission  for  the  respondent  is  well
    founded.  The expert report for the appellant was based  on  assertions
    which she did not establish.  She has referred to no other material  by
    which internal relocation would be excluded.  The materials relied upon
    by the respondent were to the contrary.

19. The grounds of  appeal,  other  than  4  (vi),  have  effectively,  and
    correctly, been abandoned.  They were based on a  misstatement  of  the
    respondent's concession.  On the  adverse  credibility  findings,  they
    showed no error in the FtT's identification of  numerous  discrepancies
    and were no more than disagreement.

20. Mr Olabamiji did his best to derive something from the grounds but  has
    not shown any error on a point of law in the FtT's decision, such as to
    require it to be set aside.  That decision shall stand.

21. Unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  appellant
    has been granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall
    directly or indirectly identify her or any member of her family.   This
    direction applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.  Failure
    to  comply  with  this  direction  could  lead  to  contempt  of  court
    proceedings.

        Hugh Macleman

      21 January 2021
      UT Judge Macleman


                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS
1. A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must  make  a
written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any  such  application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:
2. Where the person who appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).
3. Where the person  making  the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).
4. Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is  outside  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if the notice  of
decision is sent electronically).
5. A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or  a  Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.
6.  The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on  the  covering
letter or covering email.
