
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10872/2019 (R)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham CJC with parties         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|attending by Skype                           |                              |
|On 6th October 2020                          |On 14th January 2021          |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA

                                   Between

                                     JAS
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss V Laughton, Counsel instructed by Inayat
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs. H Aboni , Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DECISION AND REASONS (R)


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008


An anonymity direction was made by the First-tier Tribunal ("the FtT").  As
this appeal concerns a claim for international protection, it is
appropriate for me continue that anonymity direction. Unless and until a
Tribunal or court directs otherwise, JAS is granted anonymity.  No report
of these proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify him or any
member of his family.  This direction applies both to the appellant and to
the respondent.  Failure to comply with this direction could lead to
contempt of court proceedings.


    1. The hearing before me on 6th October 2020 took the form of a remote
       hearing using skype for business. Neither party objected.  I sat at
       the Birmingham Civil Justice Centre. I was addressed by the
       representatives in the same way as I would have been if the parties
       had attended the hearing together.  I was satisfied: that the open
       justice principle has been secured; that no party has been
       prejudiced; and that, insofar as there has been any restriction on a
       right or interest, it is justified as necessary and proportionate.  I
       was satisfied that it was in the interests of justice and in
       accordance with the overriding objective to proceed with a remote
       hearing because of the present need to take precautions against the
       spread of Covid-19, and to avoid delay.  I was satisfied that a
       remote hearing would ensure the matter is dealt with fairly and
       justly in a way that is proportionate to the importance of the case,
       the complexity of the issues that arise, and the anticipated costs
       and resources of the parties.  At the end of the hearing I was
       satisfied that both parties had been able to participate fully in the
       proceedings.


The Background


    2. The appellant appeals the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Mill
       ("Judge Mill") promulgated  on  13th  December  2019  dismissing  the
       appellant's appeal against  a  decision  dated  30th  September  2019
       refusing his claim for asylum and humanitarian protection.


    3. The appellant is a national of Afghanistan. He claims to have arrived
       in the United Kingdom on 6th July 2017.  He  claimed  asylum  on  1st
       August 2017.  The claim was refused by the respondent for reasons set
       out in a decision dated 30th January 2018.   The  appellant's  appeal
       against that decision was  dismissed  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
       Young for reasons set out in a decision promulgated on  2nd  November
       2018.


    4. There are two strands to the claim made by the appellant.  The  first
       concerned the appellant's work in Afghanistan as  a  journalist  that
       the appellant claimed had  led  to  an  incident  in  2008  when  the
       appellant  was  attacked  and  beaten.  The  second   concerned   the
       appellant's subsequent  work  for  the  Afghan  government  that  the
       appellant claimed had led to threats, and an incident in  July  2017,
       whilst the appellant was visiting  his  aunt  in  the  UK,  when  the
       appellant claims a group of men  armed  with  guns  had  visited  the
       family  home  in  Afghanistan  searching  for  the   appellant.   The
       appellant's cousin who was staying there at the time, was  beaten  up
       and  the  appellant's  mother  was  asked   about   the   appellant's
       whereabouts.  Following a further  visit  to  the  family  home,  the
       appellant's mother left Afghanistan and went to her sister's house in
       Pakistan.  The appellant's wife went to her father's  house.   First-
       tier Tribunal Judge Young dismissed the appeal for reasons set out at
       paragraphs [74] to [89] of his decision.   At paragraph [77]  of  his
       decision Judge Young sets out his concerns regarding the  claim  made
       by the appellant stemming from his activities as  a  journalist.   At
       paragraphs [78] and [79], he said:


         "78. So there are good reasons why the account of the attack  would
         not be believed.


         79.  Even if there was an attack on the appellant as  a  result  of
         his journalistic writings that occurred in 2008 and (sic) there has
         been no threat or incident since then as a result of such articles.
          He gave up journalism in 2009 to  take  up  a  position  with  the
         government. There is no indication that  there  is  any  continuing
         pursuit of the appellant as a result of articles  written.  He  has
         not expressed any desire to  return  to  journalism.  There  is  no
         reason to think that the appellant would be persecuted  on  account
         of these articles given no action has taken (sic) against him since
         2008 as a consequence."


    5. Judge Young addressed the appellant's claim that he is  under  threat
       as a result of his work for the Afghan government at paragraphs  [80]
       to [86] of his decision.  At paragraph [87], Judge Young concluded:


         "In all the circumstances therefore I  do  not  consider  that  the
         appellant has made out his case to the lower standard that there is
         a reasonable likelihood of persecution on return. I do not consider
         he has established to the lower standard that he  is  under  threat
         because of any articles written in 2008. I do not accept that he is
         under threat in relation to the duties he conducted in China. Given
         that there is no risk on return  I  do  not  allow  the  claim  for
         asylum."


    6. The appellant made further  submissions  on  8th  August  2019.   The
       respondent decided to refuse the claim for  asylum  and  humanitarian
       protection, and it is the respondent's decision dated 30th  September
       2019 that was the subject of the appeal before Judge Mill.


    7. The appellant attended the  hearing  of  his  appeal.  He  gave  oral
       evidence with the  assistance  of  an  interpreter.  As  set  out  in
       paragraph [9] of his decision, Judge Mill confirms  that  he  treated
       the appellant  as  a  vulnerable  witness.   Judge  Mill  records  at
       paragraph [14] of his decision that the previous  findings  of  Judge
       Young are a starting point. At paragraph [16] of his  decision  Judge
       Mill summarises the claims made by the appellant at  the  hearing  of
       the appeal before him. The appellant broadly relied upon the  matters
       previously considered by Judge Young  but  claimed  that  there  were
       additional documents to support  his  claims,  which  undermined  the
       findings previously made.


    8. At paragraphs [18] to [20] of his decision Judge Mill  considers  the
       medical evidence that was before the Tribunal.  He noted  that  there
       is no report from a consultant psychiatrist regarding  the  state  of
       the appellant's mental health but noted the evidence in the  form  of
       letters from the appellant's GP.  At paragraph [21], Judge Mill said:


         "I find that the appellant has a standard diagnosis  of  depression
         anxiety. He is managed and reviewed by his general practitioner  in
         the absence of any specialist mental health services and receives a
         standard prescription for an antidepressant."


    9.  As to the claim for international protection, at paragraph  [22]  of
       his decision, Judge Mill said:


         "I did not find the appellant to be a credible  and  reliable  oral
         witness. He avoided answering questions of the simplest nature such
         as when he received certain additional documents upon which he  now
         relies. I also found him to be vague in his answers. I am satisfied
         that  the  appellant's  established  and  evidenced  mental  health
         difficulties have no impact at all upon the manner in which he gave
         evidence and how he has provided his written evidence."


   10. The additional documents relied upon by the appellant  are  addressed
       at paragraphs [23] to [33] of  the  decision.   It  was  accepted  on
       behalf of the appellant that no original documents were available and
       that only electronic copies of documents sent  to  the  appellant  by
       'WhatsApp' exist.


   11. Judge Mill refers to the expert evidence relied upon by the appellant
       at paragraphs [34] to [35] of his  decision.   He  noted  that  Judge
       Young had previously considered a report from Dr Anotonio  Giustozzi.




   12. Judge Mill summarises his conclusions as to the  claim  made  by  the
       appellant at paragraph [36] of his decision:


         "36. I do not find the appellant to be a credible oral  witness.  I
         do not find any of the additional documents which he  has  produced
         capable of being relied upon. I find that they are false documents.
         The appellant's willingness to provide false documents in continued
         support of  his  failed  asylum  claim  in  the  context  of  fresh
         submissions undermines his credibility. The fact that the appellant
         was a commercial counsellor for Afghanistan and it  is  known  from
         background country materials that such individuals may be  targeted
         for the purposes of participation in  corruption,  those  facts  of
         themselves do not discharge the lower standard of proof.  There  is
         no basis to depart from Judge Young's earlier findings. The  second
         limb of the appeal is dismissed."


   13. Having considered the background material and in particular the  EASO
       Country Guidance of June 2019, Judge Mill concluded at paragraph [40]
       of his decision that the appellant would not be at risk  upon  return
       to Afghanistan and would not be at risk  of  indiscriminate  violence
       under Article 15(c) of the Qualification Directive.


The appeal before me


   14. The appellant advances six grounds of appeal.  Permission  to  appeal
       was granted on all grounds by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Shimmin  on
       21st January 2020.  In response to directions made by Upper  Tribunal
       Judge O'Callaghan on 23rd April 2020, the respondent filed and served
       written submissions dated 29th May 2020.   The  appellant  filed  and
       served a consolidated response dated 1st June 2020.


   15. Although there is little merit to the second, fifth and sixth grounds
       of appeal, I am satisfied that the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal
       Judge Mill is vitiated by a material error of law for two reasons  in
       particular, such that the decision must be  set  aside.   The  errors
       both concern the assessment of credibility.


   16. The appellant claims there was extensive medical evidence before  the
       First-tier Tribunal that established  that  the  appellant  had  been
       diagnosed as suffering from  severe  PTSD,  anxiety,  depression  and
       panic attacks with suicidal intentions.  The  appellant  claims  that
       although Judge Mill  said  at  paragraph  [9]  that  he  treated  the
       appellant as a vulnerable witness, when considering his evidence, the
       judge made  several  material  errors  of  fact.  The  appellant  had
       provided a letter from Amyas  Doulton,  a  High  Intensity  Therapist
       employed by the Central and North West London NHS  Foundation  Trust,
       dated 12th June  2018,  confirming  the  appellant  had  attended  an
       assessment on Monday 11th June 2018 and "..This revealed that he  has
       severe post-traumatic stress disorder and depression.".  The  summary
       and recommendations state:


         "..[The appellant] has severe PTSD and depression stemming from his
         experiences in Afghanistan. He has  been  offered  weekly  sessions
         with our service..."


   17. The appellant claims that in reaching his decision, Judge Mill failed
       to have regard to that evidence and erroneously concluded,  at  [21],
       that the appellant does not  receive  any  specialist  mental  health
       services.  It is said  that  there  was  evidence  of  the  appellant
       attending weekly sessions with his therapist at pages 143 to  153  of
       the appellant's bundle.   The  appellant  claims  that  the  evidence
       regarding his vulnerability was relevant to  the  assessment  of  his
       credibility, the Article 15(c) risk and the risk of suicide.


   18. At paragraph [18] of  his  decision,  Judge  Mill  records  that  the
       appellant has produced evidence of his medical conditions and  relies
       upon the state of his mental health. He confirms that on the basis of
       the documents taken together at face value, he was satisfied that  it
       is in the interests of fairness that the appellant should be  treated
       as a vulnerable witness.


   19. I accept there is  no  express  reference  to  the  letter  from  the
       appellant's therapist, Amyas Doulton, dated 12th June  2018  and  the
       diagnosis set out in that letter that the appellant has severe  PTSD.
       At paragraph [19] of his decision, Judge Mill refers to  two  reports
       (they are in  fact  letters)  provided  by  the  appellant's  GP,  Dr
       Paramjit Wasu, that refer  to  the  appellant  receiving  counselling
       therapy.  Judge Mill states:


         "... No detail  is  provided  in  relation  to  such  therapy.  The
         appellant has not  produced  any  evidence  from  such  therapeutic
         sources. The appellant's representative submits that the  appellant
         suffers from PTSD but this is not a diagnosis referred  to  in  the
         appellant's general practitioner letters..."


   20. At paragraph [19], Judge Mill refers to the updated letter  from  the
       appellant's GP that  confirms  that  the  appellant's  mental  health
       issues relate to a diagnosis of depression and anxiety. He noted  the
       GP also stated that the appellant has been  referred  to  the  mental
       health team on 14th August 2019, although  no  information  had  been
       produced in relation to that referral.


   21. Although it  was  correct  to  say  that  there  was  no  information
       regarding a recent referral to the mental health team on 14th  August
       2019, the appellant had adduced evidence  regarding  the  counselling
       therapy he previously received  and  contrary  to  what  is  said  at
       paragraph [19], there was  in  fact  evidence  from  the  therapeutic
       sources at pages 141 to 155 of the appellant's  bundle,  albeit  that
       evidence was somewhat dated and did not confirm  that  the  appellant
       was receiving  ongoing  treatment,  and  in  particular,  therapeutic
       services at the time his appeal was heard in December 2019.


   22. At paragraph [21], Judge Mill found that the appellant has a standard
       diagnosis of depression anxiety that is managed and reviewed  by  his
       general practitioner in the absence of any specialist  mental  health
       services, and that the appellant receives a standard prescription for
       an antidepressant.  There is no reference to the diagnosis of 'severe
       PTSD' that  is  referred  to  in  the  letter  from  the  appellant's
       therapist, Amyas Doulton, dated 12th June 2018.  Judge Mill correctly
       noted at paragraph [18] of his  decision  that  there  is  no  report
       before the Tribunal from a consultant psychiatrist and in the absence
       of such a report although it might well have been open to Judge  Mill
       to reject the diagnosis set out in the letter from Amyas Doulton,  in
       my judgement it appears that Judge Mill failed to have any regard  to
       the evidence that was before the Tribunal.  As Miss Laughton submits,
       Judge Mill proceeds upon the premise that there was no detail  before
       the Tribunal in relation to the counselling therapy and the appellant
       had not produced any evidence from such therapeutic sources,  whereas
       that evidence was before the Tribunal, but  is  not  referred  to  by
       Judge Mill.  I am satisfied that Judge  Mill  erroneously  considered
       that the evidence had  not  been  provided,  and  the  lack  of  that
       evidence played a material part in his reasoning.


   23. It may well in my judgement have been open to Judge Mill to reject or
       attach little weight to the evidence and the diagnosis in the  letter
       from the therapist that the appellant suffers from severe  PTSD,  but
       the difficulty with the decision is that it  proceeds  on  the  basis
       that the evidence does not exist, or was not provided,  when  clearly
       it was before the Tribunal.


   24. I accept the findings and conclusions reached by Judge Mill regarding
       the appellant's mental health and his vulnerability were relevant  to
       the assessment of his credibility, the Article  15(c)  risk  and  the
       risk of suicide, and the decision must therefore be set aside.


   25. The second area that causes me to conclude that the decision of Judge
       Mills must be set aside concerns the  judge's  consideration  of  the
       additional documents.  On its own, I would have  rejected  the  claim
       made by the appellant that the judge  erroneously  states  throughout
       that the documents are self-serving.  All evidence is to some  extent
       self-serving and the use of that phrase, although  unfortunate,  does
       not undermine the other reasons given by  Judge  Mill  regarding  the
       concerns that he had about the documents.  However, at paragraph [24]
       of his decision, Judge Mill states:


         "The appellant's position is that all of  the  documents  which  he
         relies upon now were sent to him from a friend he names as Muthari.
          The identity of the individual who  sent  the  documents  was  not
         clear prior to the oral hearing. The appellant  does  not  disclose
         this in any of his witness statement. No explanation is  given  for
         this. He provided the explanation that the individual named Muthari
         provided the  documents  following  me  giving  permission  to  his
         representative to ask additional questions by way of clarification.
         The appellant's earlier failure to make clear  the  source  of  the
         information  impacts  upon  the  weight  to  be  attached  to   his
         subsequent explanations. Subsequent oral explanations  in  relation
         to the existence of Muthari were vague.   There  is  no  supporting
         statement from this individual."


   26. I accept the submission made by Miss Laughton that again,  the  Judge
       proceeds upon the premise that the appellant made no reference to his
       friend Muthari, prior to the hearing whereas  the  appellant  had  in
       fact referred to his friend and  named  his  friend  in  his  witness
       statement dated 6th December 2019.  I was referred to the appellant's
       witness  statement  in  which  he  confirms  that  he  has   attached
       screenshots  from  his  friend  Mr  Mutahari,  confirming  that   the
       documents had been sent to the appellant him  from  Afghanistan  with
       his assistance.


   27. It appears therefore that Judge Mill erred in his understanding  that
       the identity of the individual who sent the documents was  not  clear
       prior to the oral hearing and that the appellant  had  not  disclosed
       that in any of his witness statements.  Judge Mill concluded that the
       appellant's failure to make  clear  the  source  of  the  information
       earlier impacted upon the weight to be  attached  to  his  subsequent
       explanations.  The appellant had in fact referred to  his  friend  in
       his witness statement.  Although it might have  been  open  to  Judge
       Mill to conclude that he could attach little  or  no  weight  to  the
       documents for the other reasons that he gave, I cannot be  sure  that
       Judge Mill would have  reached  the  same  conclusion  regarding  the
       credibility of the appellant and the weight that he could  attach  to
       the documents, if he had had regard to what was said by the appellant
       in his witness statement.


   28. For the reasons I have set out above,  I  accept  the  appellant  has
       established that the  decision of FtT Judge Mill  is  infected  by  a
       material error of law and the appropriate course is for the  decision
       of First-tier Tribunal Judge Mill to be set aside.  As  to  disposal,
       in my judgment the  appropriate  course  is  for  the  matter  to  be
       remitted to the FtT for hearing de novo with no  findings  preserved.
       I have decided that it is appropriate to remit this  appeal  back  to
       the First-tier Tribunal,  having  considered  paragraph  7.2  of  the
       Senior President's Practice Statement of 25th September 2012.  In  my
       view, in determining  the  appeal,  the  nature  and  extent  of  any
       judicial fact-finding necessary will be extensive.


   29. The parties will be advised of the date of the First-tier Tribunal
       hearing in due course.





Notice of Decision


   30. The appeal is allowed, and the decision of FtT Judge Mill promulgated
       on 13th December 2019 is set aside.


   31. The appeal is remitted to the FtT for a fresh hearing of the appeal
       with no findings preserved.


   32. I make an anonymity direction.


Signed   V. Mandalia                    Date:         16th December 2020
             Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia




