

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
PA/10497/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |    Decision and Reasons          |
|                                         |Promulgated                       |
|On 3rd April 2018                        |    On 4th April 2018             |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY

                                   Between
                                     A M
                            (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     None
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    Introduction



    1. The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh born in 1981. He arrived in
       the UK in 2009 as a Tier 4 student migrant. He had leave  to  remain
       in this capacity until  2012.  He  then  overstayed  his  leave.  He
       claimed asylum in 2017 when he was detained as  an  overstayer.  His
       claim was refused on  3rd  October  2017.  His  appeal  against  the
       decision was dismissed on all grounds by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
       Telford in a determination promulgated on the 17th January 2018.

    2. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal
       Keane on a Robinson obvious basis that  it  was  arguable  that  the
       First-tier  judge  had  erred  in  law  in  the  assessment  of  the
       credibility of the appellant  and  by  reference  to  the  screening
       interview, although the grounds put forward by  the  appellant  were
       not arguable.

    3. The matter came  before  me  to  determine  whether  the  First-tier
       Tribunal had erred in law.

    4. On the day of the hearing a request was received from the  appellant
       to adjourn the hearing due to health reasons. He stated that he  had
       been vulnerable since  his  release  from  detention  and  had  some
       psychological issues. He had tried to book  the  barrister  who  had
       represented him in the past, but this person was not available as he
       was booked to do a bail hearing. He said it would be unjust  not  to
       adjourn. A large number of medical notes from  Heathrow  Immigration
       Removal Centre with blood test results were attached and some repeat
       prescriptions. Ms Everett opposed the adjournment of the hearing.

    5. I decided that it was not necessary in the interests of fairness  to
       adjourn the  hearing.  The  appellant  had  put  forward  no  cogent
       evidence he was unwell at the current time. He had  not  claimed  he
       was unable to obtain any legal  representation  for  today:  if  his
       previous  barrister  was  booked  he  should  have  sought   another
       appropriately qualified counsel. He had  had  a  month  and  a  half
       notice of the hearing. In any case his own grounds had not been seen
       as raising any arguable error of  law  and  so  it  was  for  me  to
       determine whether the arguable Robinson obvious issues raised in the
       grant of permission to appeal were in fact errors of law.  This  was
       not a matter the appellant was at all likely to be able to assist me
       with.

Submissions - Error of Law

    6. The origin grounds of appeal put forward by the  appellant,  who  as
       noted above currently acts in  person  although  at  the  First-tier
       Tribunal hearing he was represented by a  solicitor,  are  that  the
       First-tier Tribunal failed to appreciate that he is a  BNP  activist
       and that as is demonstrated in the Home Office CIG he is at risk  of
       serious harm. There was also a failure to  appreciate  that  he  had
       been wrongly convicted of  killing  an  MP  and  thus  he  would  be
       persecuted for this if he returned to Bangladesh. It is argued  that
       impermissible weight had been placed on the "outside story" and that
       there was a  failure  to  give  adequate  reasons  and  many  issues
       remained unresolved.

    7. Ms Everett argued  that  in  fact  the  reliance  on  the  screening
       interview had been done in a permissible way at paragraphs 22 to  27
       of the decision. She submitted that ultimately the  key  issues  and
       documents supporting the appellant's  claim  were  examined  by  the
       First-tier Tribunal Judge and that the conclusion  that  the  appeal
       should be dismissed was sufficiently reasoned and  rational  in  all
       the circumstances.

Conclusions - Error of Law

    8. The way in which the decision is written does  raise  concerns.  The
       First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  starts  his  findings  section  of  the
       decision with the statement: "I find his whole account  incredible."
       The tone of the decision is immoderate from the  start  using  terms
       such  as  "risible",  "nonsense",  "not  a  scintilla  of   credible
       support", "self-serving", "blatant untruth",  woefully  inadequate",
       and "his answer was the untruth". The decision is not written  in  a
       calm judicial tone which would assist in explaining clearly  to  the
       losing party why he has  lost.  In  addition  the  decision  is,  at
       points, hard to follow as there is no clear explanation of what  the
       pieces of evidence are purported to contend or  support  before  the
       Judge starts to deride them: for instance with respect to  the  Rule
       35 Report, at paragraph 33 of the decision, there is no  description
       of what is in the report before the Judge commences with his  attack
       on its worth.

    9. However, I have concluded that ultimately  the  decision  does  deal
       with the  evidence  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  come  to
       conclusions which are reasoned and rationally open to the Judge  for
       the reasons I set out below, and thus does not materially  error  in
       law.

   10. The First-tier Tribunal Judge does remind himself  at  paragraphs  6
       and 20 of  the  decision  of  the  lower  civil  standard  of  proof
       applicable in asylum appeals and also of the need  to  consider  the
       evidence collectively. Credit is also given  to  the  appellant  for
       having a degree  of  political  understanding  consistent  with  the
       background country evidence, although this is not found  to  suffice
       to make out his case due to the other problems  with  the  evidence,
       see paragraph 44 of the decision.

   11. The conclusions with respect to the screening interview are prefaced
       with the fact that these notes  are  usually  rightly  treated  with
       caution, see paragraph 22  of  the  decision.  It  is  only  in  the
       particular circumstances of this case where the failure to mention a
       wrongful conviction for the murder of an  Awami  League  MP  at  the
       screening interview is seen as relevant, and these are  set  out  in
       detail at paragraphs 22 to 27. These are, in summary, the failure to
       mention the wrongful murder conviction either as a key issue in  his
       claim  or  in  response  to  a  specific  screening  question  about
       accusations of having committed an  offence;  the  failure  for  his
       solicitors to have addressed this after the screening interview  and
       prior to the full interview; the confirmation at the full  interview
       that his screening answers were true and accurate; and only  raising
       the issue of  a  contended  intimidating   interview  style  at  the
       screening interview in  a  late  complaint  after  the  second  full
       interview. I find that this was a  rational  consideration  of  this
       issue and that weight in these limited circumstances could fairly be
       given to the failure to mention the wrongful  murder  conviction  at
       the screening interview.

   12. The First-tier Tribunal rightly  considers  the  delay  in  claiming
       asylum to be against the credibility of the appellant. Consideration
       is given to the letters he had submitted in support of his claim.  I
       find it was open to the First-tier Tribunal to give little weight to
       the letter from the appellant's mother. The letters from the BNP are
       analysed at paragraphs 30 and 32 of the decision in the  context  of
       the appellant's oral evidence, which was an approach rationally open
       to the Judge, and valid negative conclusions  were  reached  due  to
       inconsistencies between what was said in the letters and the rest of
       the evidence. It was also reasonable for the First-tier Tribunal  to
       have consideration to the absence of other documents relating to the
       charge and conviction of murder at paragraph  31  of  the  decision.
       Whilst I have criticised the lack of  description  of  the  Rule  35
       report the analysis of why it does not add to the  appellant's  case
       was rationally open to the Judge, see paragraph 33 of the  decision.
        It was also open to the First-tier Tribunal to  conclude  that  the
       appellant's behaviour after his conviction and  his  departure  from
       Bangladesh did not fit with his description of being  in  hiding  at
       that time, see paragraph 36 of the decision.

   13. I am therefore satisfied on the totally of the evidence  before  the
       First-tier Tribunal that the finding  that  the  appellant  had  not
       shown his protection claim to be credible, and thus to show  on  the
       lower civil standard of proof that he was at real  risk  of  serious
       harm  if  returned  to  Bangladesh  was  sufficiently  reasoned  and
       rationally open to the First-tier Tribunal.


          Decision:

   1. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not  involve
      the making of a material error on a point of law.

   2. I uphold the decision of the First-tier Tribunal dismissing the appeal
      on protection and human rights grounds.


Anonymity


    Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal
    or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any
    form of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  the
    original appellant. This direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  all
    parties. Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise  to
    contempt of court proceedings. I do so in order to avoid  a  likelihood
    of serious harm arising to the  appellant  from  the  contents  of  his
    protection claim.




Signed:     Fiona Lindsley                         Date:  3rd April 2018
Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley
