
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10484/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8 January 2019                    |On 31 January 2019                   |
|                                           |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN


                                   Between

                                     RSA
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. H. Kannangara, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr. C. Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  a  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Paul, promulgated  on  11  October  2018,  in  which  he
    dismissed the Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's  decision  to
    refuse a grant of asylum.

 2. As this is an asylum appeal, I make an anonymity direction.

 3. Permission to appeal was granted as follows:

         "The grounds essentially argue  lack  of  adequate  evidence  based
         reasons for  concluding  that  the  Appellant's  evidence  was  not
         credible and that he would not be at risk on return to  Sri  Lanka.
         The judge's conclusions are extremely brief and at paragraphs 30 to
         32  they  support  the  grounds.   Those  paragraphs  are  arguably
         difficult to understand and lacking in reasoning; they  contain  no
         analysis of either the Appellant's  evidence  or  argument  on  the
         points  in  question,  or  consistency  with  relevant   background
         material."


 4. At the hearing, following an acceptance by Mr. Avery on behalf  of  the
    Respondent that the decision involved the making of a material error of
    law, I set the decision aside and remitted the appeal to the First-tier
    Tribunal to be remade.

Error of Law

 5. Given that Mr. Avery conceded at the hearing that the decision involved
    the making of a material error of law, as I indicated at  the  hearing,
    the reasons for my decision will be brief.

 6. The Judge's findings are set out from paragraphs [28] to [34]  and  are
    only one page in length.  Given that this is an asylum appeal,  I  find
    that this in and of itself indicates  that  insufficient  consideration
    has been given to the Appellant's case.  As set out in the grant, it is
    not entirely clear at [30] to [32] what the Judge's objections were  to
    the Appellant's account.   There is  no  proper  consideration  of  the
    evidence before him.  For example, at [32] he states that he  does  not
    accept that the report is a genuine document, but no reasons are  given
    for this finding.  He then states that, "even if it is",  he  does  not
    accept that it was "generated in relation to  any  specific  incident".
    No explanation is given as to what this means.  The Judge finds at [34]
    that the account is lacking in substance "for all these reasons", but I
    find  that  inadequate  reasons  have  been  given  in  the   preceding
    paragraphs.

 7. Further, there is no consideration of the background evidence  at  all,
    either with reference to the Appellant's account, or with reference  to
    his risk on return.

 8. I find that the Judge has failed  to  give  due  consideration  to  the
    Appellant's account, and  has  failed  to  give  adequate  reasons  for
    rejecting it.  He has further failed to give adequate reasons  for  why
    the Appellant would not be at risk on return to Sri Lanka.

 9. I find that the decision involves the making of  a  material  error  of
    law.  I have taken account of the Practice Statement dated 10  February
    2010, paragraph 7.2.  This contemplates that an appeal may be  remitted
    to the First-tier Tribunal where the effect of the error  has  been  to
    deprive a party before the First-tier Tribunal of  a  fair  hearing  or
    other opportunity for the party's case to be put to and  considered  by
    the First-tier Tribunal.  Given the nature  and  extent  of  the  fact-
    finding necessary to enable this appeal to be remade, having regard  to
    the overriding objective, I find that it is appropriate to  remit  this
    case to the First-tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

10. The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  involves  the  making  of  a
    material error of law and I set the decision aside.

11. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be remade.

12. The appeal is not to be listed before Judge Paul.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date 21 January 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain

