
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10308/2017
                                                               PA/10311/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 28 March 2019                     |On 1 April 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                 ISL and BSL
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Brown, instructed Legal Justice, solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants were born in 1974 and 1949  respectively  and  are  male
    citizens of Afghanistan. Both appellants are Sikhs. By decisions  dated
    29 September  2017,  the  appellants'  applications  for  international
    protection were refused by the Secretary of State. They appealed to the
    First-tier Tribunal which, in a decision  promulgated  on  27  November
    2017,  dismissed  the  appeals.  The  appellant   now   appeals,   with
    permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. I find that the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  should  be  set
    aside. I notified this decision to the representatives at the  hearing.
    My reasons are as follows. First, I find that the judge's  analysis  is
    vitiated by his failure to take account of the fact that the respondent
    had accepted that the second  appellant's  wife  is  receiving  ongoing
    treatment for cancer. The judge's own note of evidence  (which  I  read
    out to the representatives) makes clear that the presenting officer, Mr
    Spence, told the Tribunal that he accepted that the second  appellant's
    wife was receiving chemotherapy. Notwithstanding that  acknowledgement,
    the judge at [58-59] found that there was insufficient evidence to show
    that  the  second  appellant's  wife  was  receiving  treatment.  Judge
    comments that evidence from  medical  practitioners  should  have  been
    obtained.  I  acknowledge  that  at  [59]  the  judge  finds  that  the
    appellants had  failed  to  show  that  there  would  be  no  available
    treatment for cancer in Afghanistan; it is arguable that the judge  has
    found, in the alternative, that even if  the  wife  is  suffering  from
    cancer this would make no difference to  the  outcome  of  the  appeal.
    However,  I  find  that  the  wife's  illness  should   have   been   a
    consideration in the judge's analysis  of  the  appeal  in  respect  of
    Article 15(c). That it was not constitutes an error of law.

 3. Secondly, I agree with Mr Brown, who appeared for the appellants at the
    initial hearing, that the judge has not  made  any  assessment  of  the
    difficulties which the  second  appellant's  wife  would  encounter  as
    regards the requirement  to  wear  Islamic  dress  in  Afghanistan,  in
    particular the veil. Thirdly, I also agree with Mr Brown that the judge
    has not adequately considered whether the business which the appellants
    left behind in Afghanistan would still exist upon their return and,  if
    it did exist, whether it would generate the same levels  of  income  as
    previously. These were factors relevant to the Article 15 (c) analysis.

 4. In the light of the problems identified in the judge's decision, I  set
    aside the decision. There will need to be a new  fact-finding  exercise
    which is better conducted in the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  which  this
    appeal is returned for that Tribunal to remake the  decision.  None  of
    the findings of fact shall stand.

Notice of Decision

 5. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal which  was  promulgated  on  27
    November 2017 is set aside. None of the findings of fact  shall  stand.
    The appeal is returned to the First-tier  Tribunal  for  that  Tribunal
    (not Judge Moxon) to remake the decision.


Signed                              Date 28 March 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

