









UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10571/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House              |Decision and Reasons Promulgated        |
|On: 14 August 2017                 |On:  4 September 2017                   |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer

                                   Between


                                    [U S]
                        anonymity direction not made

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


                 secretary of state for the home department

                                                                  Respondent
Representation

For the Appellant:     Mr M Bradshaw, counsel (instructed by Jein
Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a national of Sri Lanka, born on [ ] 1992. He appeals
      with permission against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  Judge
      promulgated on 13 January 2017, dismissing his asylum appeal.

   2. Upper Tribunal Judge  Frances  granted  the  appellant  permission  to
      appeal, stating that it is arguable that the Judge  erred  in  law  in
      failing to  properly  direct  herself  in  relation  to  the  Istanbul
      Protocol. Certain  of  the  appellant's  injuries  were  described  as
      "typical" and "highly consistent". The medical report states:  I  have
      shown the B scars  form  (sic)  the  burn  with  heated  flex  on  the
      photographs and body map. They cannot be from  any  other  means  than
      burns.

   3. She also  stated  that  it  is  arguable  that  the  Judge  failed  to
      appreciate the different levels of consistency and this  affected  the
      weight that she attached to the medical reports.

The background

   4. The appellant claimed that he was 15 years old  at  the  time  of  the
      explosions in January 2007. That occurred close to his father's garage
      when nine army officers were killed. He fled  the  scene  after  being
      pursued by the police. Both his and his father's garage were suspected
      of being involved in that explosion.

   5. The appellant was sent to stay with his  uncle  and  in  2009  he  was
      forcibly recruited by the LTTE and was involved in  the  fighting.  He
      returned to his family home in 2012  but  was  detained  by  the  army
      authorities and spent four years in prison from 2012 until 2016  where
      he was beaten and tortured. He was able to escape when  spending  time
      in the hospital on payment of money by his father - [18].

   6. The Judge found it implausible that the explosion  would  have  caused
      the authorities to focus their suspicions on the 15 year old appellant
      with the consequence that he was forced to flee on  account  of  being
      suspected by the authorities of involvement with the  explosions.  She
      did not accept that he was forcibly recruited  by  the  LTTE  in  2009
      [24].

   7. She did not find it plausible that five years after the explosion  the
      appellant would be detained by the authorities shortly after returning
      home and then be imprisoned for four years. She did not accept that he
      was detained by the authorities for the claimed four years [25].

   8. The appellant produced a short report from a  psychological  therapist
      dated 13 July 2016 in which it was found that the appellant  described
      a number of difficulties consistent with a diagnosis of post traumatic
      stress disorder. The Judge was not "persuaded" that he  was  suffering
      from severe mental health issues [26].

   9. The Judge also had regard to the report of Professor Lingam  dated  25
      September 2016. She set out his findings at [27]. She  noted  that  it
      was acknowledged that other causes than those  claimed  could  be  the
      reason for certain of the injuries  sustained  by  the  appellant  and
      although giving the report  its  due  weight  it  was  not  enough  to
      persuade her that the appellant was burned and acquired the scars that
      he has in the manner that he claimed. [27]

  10. Mr Bradshaw who did not represent the appellant at the hearing  before
      the First-tier Tribunal, contended that the Judge erred in failing  to
      give adequate reasons regarding her consideration and conclusions from
      the  medical  evidence  which  was  relied  on  to   corroborate   the
      appellant's account of  being  detained  and  tortured.  The  relevant
      'anxious scrutiny' was not given.

  11. In particular the Judge's reasoning was inadequate because it did  not
      show that she appreciated that the report was produced  in  accordance
      with the Istanbul Protocol and could be relied upon  to  evidence  the
      degree of consistency between lesions found and the claimed history.

  12. The Judge described some of the doctor's findings  that  lesions  were
      "consistent" with the appellant's account whereas in fact  the  doctor
      had used  the  Istanbul  Protocol  terms  showing  a  high  degree  of
      consistency rather than lesions merely being "consistent". Failure  to
      note that the doctor found a higher degree of consistency between some
      of  the  lesions  and  the  causes  attributed  by  the  appellant  is
      indicative of failure to appreciate  the  significance  of  a  medical
      report complying with the  Istanbul  Protocol.  The  Judge  failed  to
      appreciate  the  significance  of  the  terminology  used,  indicating
      different degrees of consistency.

  13. He submitted that in particular the Judge  did  not  record  that  the
      scars attributed to chemical burns found by the doctor were not merely
      "consistent"  but  were  "highly  consistent  with  the  history"  and
      according to the Istanbul Protocol the  lesion  therefore  could  have
      been caused by the trauma described and there were few other  possible
      causes.

  14. The doctor also found that the scars attributed to  the  beating  with
      heated flex were clinically diagnostic of burning, i.e.  according  to
      the Istanbul Protocol this lesion could not have been  caused  in  any
      way other than as described. Moreover,  there  were  "typical  of  the
      history  according  to  the  Istanbul  Protocol",  i.e.  this  is   an
      appearance that is usually found with this type of trauma,  but  there
      are other possible causes.

  15. Moreover, the Judge wrongly said of the claimed cigarette  burns  that
      Professor Lingam states that they are consistent with the history.  In
      fact he found them to be "typical."

  16. Accordingly, in line with the grounds of appeal Mr Bradshaw  submitted
      that the Judge's reasoning creates a real  doubt  as  to  whether  the
      Judge did as claimed give the report of Dr Lingam its due weight given
      that the report indicated a higher degree of consistency  between  the
      appellant's account and the lesions  found  than  the  Judge  in  fact
      appreciated.

  17. Mr Bradshaw referred to the findings of Professor Lingam  relating  to
      the scars on the back below his left scapula and  chemical  burns.  He
      has clinical evidence of severe burns from three  separate  mechanisms
      which  are  clinically  obvious.  These  are  highly  consistent  with
      chemical burns.  Since  he  worked  in  a  garage  it  could  be  from
      accidental injury at work. However, he went on to  state  that  it  is
      unusual to have it on the back from an accident. On balance he  stated
      that the finding is "highly consistent" with the history.

  18. With regard to the burns due to heated electrical flex,  the  clinical
      features shown on the photographs cannot be from any other means  than
      burns from heated equipment. These are not permanent as they are  less
      than two years old.

  19. Mr Bradshaw submitted that having regard to the appellant's answers at
      question 52 and question 60 of the interview, these assaults  occurred
      in the second half of his detention, i.e. within the two year period.

  20. In reply Mr Tarlow relied on the Rule 24 response. The  appellant  did
      not challenge the Judge's reasoning regarding the core of his account.
      She found that the appellant's evidence  was  internally  inconsistent
      with letters provided from the Sri Lankan lawyer and the Church of Our
      Lady of Refuge, in respect of  the  2007  explosion  and  his  alleged
      flight.

  21. The Judge considered the appellant's profile and age, namely  that  he
      was 15 years old without previous LTTE involvement and had  worked  at
      his father's garage. He had not been questioned in 2007 regarding  the
      explosions and yet his father decided to send him away. The Judge also
      noted that no reasonable explanation had been  advanced  for  why  the
      appellant would fall under suspicion for the explosion.

  22. The Judge found it implausible that the explosion  would  have  caused
      the authorities  to  focus  their  suspicions  on  this  15  year  old
      appellant resulting in his fleeing from the family home. She  did  not
      accept his account and did not accept that he was forced  to  flee  by
      the authorities or that he was forcibly recruited by the LTTE in 2009.



  23. With regard to his account of detention from 2012, she did not find it
      plausible that five years after the explosion the appellant  would  be
      detained by the authorities shortly  after  returning  home  and  then
      being in prison for four years. She failed to see  how  the  appellant
      could have been considered such a threat by the  authorities  in  2012
      such that he was in prison for four years until  2016.  She  therefore
      did not accept that he was detained or imprisoned as claimed [25].

  24. During his submissions, Mr Tarlow has very fairly  accepted  that  the
      approach of the Judge regarding the report of Professor Lingam  "looks
      to be compartmentalised" and was not assessed in the round.

  25. He noted that the Judge had found against the  appellant  on  all  the
      points  raised  and  had  not  ultimately   properly   addressed   the
      significance of the fact that the report was  produced  in  accordance
      with the Istanbul Protocol.

  26. He referred to [27] where the Judge stated that having considered  the
      report of Professor Lingam, other causes than those claimed  could  be
      the reason for certain of the injuries sustained by the appellant, and
      having afforded his report due weight, it was not enough  to  persuade
      her that the appellant was burned and acquired the scars that  he  has
      in the manner than he claimed.

      Assessment

  27. The Judge in her findings from [18] onwards set out the history of the
      appellant's claim as  well  as  his  evidence.  There  were  areas  of
      significant inconsistency as well as other inconsistencies  identified
      at [22-23].

  28. Having considered the claim she did not accept the appellant's account
      that he was forced to flee following the explosions in July  2007  and
      therefore did not accept that he was forcibly recruited by the LTTE in
      2009 - [24]. Further, she rejected his claim that he was  detained  by
      the authorities in 2012 and imprisoned for four years for the  reasons
      referred to in [25].

  29.  Having  made  adverse  findings  against  the  appellant,  she   then
      considered the report of the psychological therapist as  well  as  the
      report of Professor Lingam.

  30. However, she did not have regard to the significance of  the  Istanbul
      Protocol and the findings that he gave in accordance with the protocol
      which differentiates different degrees of consistency.

  31. Professor Lingam found a higher degree of consistency between some  of
      the lesions  and  causes  attributed  by  the  appellant  than  merely
      "consistent". Further, the chemical burns  were  found  to  be  highly
      consistent with the history rather than merely "consistent"  as  found
      by the Judge. There were accordingly few other possible causes.

  32. Moreover, the scars attributed to the beating with  heated  flex  were
      clinically  diagnostic  according  to  the  Protocol  so   that   this
      appearance would not have been caused  in  any  way  other  than  that
      described. Moreover, she wrongly described the claimed cigarette burns
      to have been consistent with the history. In  fact,  Professor  Lingam
      found them to be "typical".

  33. I have had regard to the contention raised  in  the  grounds,  and  in
      particular that set out in paragraph 2 and 5.

  34. It appears that the Judge  failed  to  consider  the  significance  of
      Professor Lingam's findings on the basis of the Istanbul Protocol when
      considering the appellant's claims. She was required to  consider  the
      evidence provided by the two experts as part  of  the  evidence  as  a
      whole and not simply as an 'add on' after making  adverse  credibility
      findings against the appellant. That is an impermissible approach.

  35. The very inconsistencies referred to by the Judge might well have been
      explicable on the basis of the reports from the experts. There was  in
      fact an addendum provided to Professor Lingam's statement relating  to
      discrepancies in autobiographical memories which had implications  for
      the assessment of asylum seekers.

  36. I accordingly find that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  Judge
      involved the making of an error on a point of law. I  accordingly  set
      it aside.

  37. Both parties agreed that in the event that I set it aside this was  an
      appropriate case for the appeal  to  be  remitted  to  the  First-tier
      Tribunal for a fresh decision to be made.

  38. I have had regard to the Senior President's practice statement.  I  am
      satisfied that the effect  of  the  error  has  been  to  deprive  the
      appellant of the opportunity for his case to be properly considered by
      the First-tier Tribunal.






      Notice of Decision


      The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making  of  an
      error on a point of law and is set aside. The case is remitted to  the
      First-tier Tribunal (Hatton Cross) for a  fresh  determination  to  be
      made before another Judge.


      No anonymity direction made.






      Signed                             Date 2 September 2017


      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge C R Mailer








