
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10390/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|on 1 August 2019                     |on 20 August 2019                    |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                    NGGM
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Ell instructed by Bankfield Heath solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs Pettersen Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.



                            DECISION AND REASONS


     1. On 1 May 2019 the Upper Tribunal found a judge  of  the  First-tier
        Tribunal had erred in law when allowing the appellant's  appeal  on
        Humanitarian Protection and human rights grounds. That decision was
        set aside, and the appeal listed for a further  hearing  to  enable
        the Upper Tribunal to substitute a  decision  to  either  allow  or
        dismiss the appeal.

Background


     2. The appellant is a citizen of Venezuela born on 23 July 1945 who is
        therefore now 74 years of age. The  appellant  entered  the  United
        Kingdom on 7 February 2018 lawfully as a family visitor but claimed
        asylum on 14 March 2018 due to country conditions in Venezuela.
     3. The findings of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  relating  to  the
        dismissal of the asylum and/or any other form of protection  claim,
        the appellant's immigration history, and the  finding  that  family
        life pursuant to article 8 will not be breached if the appellant is
        removed, are preserved findings.
     4. The First-tier Tribunal found at [21] of  that  decision  that  the
        appellant's name was published in Frontera newspaper, a daily local
        newspaper,  in  1983,  in  support  of  an   opposition   political
        candidate, but that there was no evidence produced of any  recently
        held posts in  any  opposition  political  party  or  to  show  the
        appellant had been politically active other than by voting  in  the
        country's elections. At [27] the First-Tier Tribunal Judge found:

             27.  However, given that no interest has  been  shown  in  the
                  Appellant to date on account  of  her  political  beliefs;
                  that she has been for the most part  politically  inactive
                  for 13 years; that she does not hold  any  party  position
                  and that she has travelled freely in and out of  Venezuela
                  in  2014  in  2017,  I  find  that  she  has   failed   to
                  substantiate her claim that she will be at  real  risk  of
                  persecution on account of her imputed political opinion if
                  she is returned to Venezuela.


     5. Directions were given by the  Upper  Tribunal  for  the  filing  of
        additional evidence. A further bundle has been  received  from  the
        appellant including a country expert report written by a Dr Michael
        McCarthy dated 3 July 2019.
     6. At the outset an issue was raised with Mr  Ell in that  the  report
        has endorsed upon it the specific wording  "Attorney  Work  Product
        Privileged  and  Confidential".  Mr  Ell  was  asked  whether  that
        endorsement created problems in either  the  admissibility  of  the
        report or the ability of the Upper Tribunal to refer to the same in
        its decision to which he responded that Dr McCarthy  was  aware  of
        the purpose for which the report had been commissioned. Mr Ell  was
        asked whether he waived any privilege  attached  to  the  document,
        which he confirmed he did. The report was accordingly admitted  and
        shall be referred to in detail below, where required.
     7. A further issue arose in relation  to  documents  provided  by  the
        appellant including what appear to be supermarket/shop receipts and
        copies  of  bank  statement  in  Venezuela  which  had   not   been
        translated. No explanation  for  why  this  had  not  occurred  was
        provided especially when other evidence, including a medical report
        from Venezuela, has been translated.
     8. In addition to the appellants pension there  appears  on  the  bank
        statements to be a further credit noted  as  'Pago  De  Nomina'  of
        12.322,00 Venezuelan Bolivar although as the documents has not been
        translated it is not clear what this is.  Rule 13(6) of  the  Upper
        Tribunal Procedure Rules providing: '(6) Subject to paragraph  (7),
        if a document submitted to the Upper Tribunal  is  not  written  in
        English,  it  must  be  accompanied  by  an  English  translation'.
        Paragraph 7 relates to documents in the Welsh language and  is  not
        applicable on the facts of this appeal.
     9.  The  other  observation  raised  by  Mrs  Pettersen  is  that  the
        applicant's own updated witness statement dated 3 July 2019 appears
        more of a critique and comment upon the reasons it  was  found  the
        First-tier Tribunal had erred in law rather than  establishing  the
        appellant's current situation. It is however  possible  to  extract
        from that statement that the appellant's position is as  it  always
        has been claimed, that if returned to Venezuela she is  an  elderly
        lady with no funds of her own, in a dangerous situation,  with  the
        collapse of the medical care system,  concerned  about  her  mental
        health, claiming that she will die from lack of food  and  lack  of
        medication and be a victim of indiscriminate violence  from  groups
        recognised by the government, face destitution as a result  of  the
        direct activities of the Venezuelan government,  that  her  pension
        does not provide her with sufficient money to live on as  a  result
        of the government's failure to manage the  economy,  and  that  she
        would like to remain in the United Kingdom with  her  daughter  and
        her family who live here.
    10. All  the  admissible  evidence  has  been  considered  including  a
        petition  signed  by  a  number  of  people  although  it  was  not
        established they have direct knowledge of the  appellants  position
        in Venezuela and did not attend to give oral evidence and have  not
        provided witness statements.




Discussion



    11. Initial discussion at the outset with the advocates  regarding  the
        correct test to be applied in relation to this  appeal  established
        that the correct approach for the Tribunal to take is not  that  of
        establishing whether the appellant met  the  high  threshold  in  N
        (which it is unlikely she will have  been  able  to  prove  on  the
        facts) but that in MSS v Belgium  and  Greece  which  requires  the
        Tribunal to have regard to the appellant's ability to cater for her
        most  basic  needs,  such  as  food,  hygiene  and   shelter,   her
        vulnerability to ill-treatment and the prospect  of  her  situation
        improving within a reasonable timeframe.
    12. Specific reference is made in the error of law finding at  [13]  to
        the decision of the Court of Appeal in MI (Palestine)  [2018]  EWCA
        Civ 1782 in the following terms:


         13.  There is a helpful discussion  of  the  principles  applicable
             when assessing an article  3  issues  and  destitution  in  MI
             (Palestine) v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
             [2018] EWCA Civ 1782 where it is written:
             The Article 3 jurisprudence
            16. Before considering the parties'  submissions  in  a  little
                more detail, I propose to summarise the law  on  Article  3
                which is well-settled by two decisions of  this  Court:  GS
                (India) v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 40; [2015] 1  WLR  3312  and
                SSHD v Said [2016] EWCA Civ 442; [2016] Imm AR 5.  At  [38]
                of GS (India) Laws  LJ  considered  how  the  Court  should
                address the issue of the ECHR being a  "living  instrument"
                whilst being loyal to the founders' agreement. He said:
                "The notion that the modern scope of  ECHR  rights  may  be
                resolved by asking whether the States  parties  might  have
                consented  to   this   or   that   outcome   suggested   by
                circumstances  which  were  or  might  have   been   beyond
                contemplation  when  the  text   was   agreed   is   surely
                problematic. I think the best one can do is to confine  any
                implication or enlargement to situations  which  have  some
                affinity with the paradigm case; situations which  are,  so
                to speak, within the spirit of  the  paradigm  case,  whose
                identification    therefore    assumes    a    considerable
                importance."
            17. At [39] he identified the paradigm case of a  violation  of
                Article 3 as an intentional act which  constitutes  torture
                or inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment. As Laws LJ
                noted later in his judgment at [46], the  case  of  someone
                whose life will be drastically shortened by the progress of
                natural disease if he is removed to his home state does not
                fall within the paradigm. Accordingly in  such  cases,  the
                Strasbourg Court had set a very high threshold as  to  when
                such a case would constitute  a  violation  of  Article  3,
                effectively limited to "deathbed" cases: D v United Kingdom
                (1997) 24 EHRR 423 and N v United Kingdom  (2008)  47  EHRR
                39. He cited at [50] of his judgment [42] and [43]  of  the
                judgment of the Strasbourg Court in N:
               "42. In summary, the Court  observes  that  since  D  v  the
               United Kingdom it has  consistently  applied  the  following
               principles. Aliens who are subject to  expulsion  cannot  in
               principle claim any entitlement to remain in  the  territory
               of a Contracting State in order to continue to benefit  from
               medical, social or other forms of  assistance  and  services
               provided  by  the  expelling  State.  The  fact   that   the
               applicant's circumstances, including  his  life  expectancy,
               would be significantly reduced if he were to be removed from
               the Contracting State is not sufficient in  itself  to  give
               rise to breach of Article 3. The decision to remove an alien
               who is suffering from a serious mental or  physical  illness
               to a country where the facilities for the treatment of  that
               illness are inferior to those available in  the  Contracting
               State may raise an issue under Article 3, but only in a very
               exceptional case, where the humanitarian grounds against the
               removal are compelling.  In the D case the very exceptional
               circumstances were that the applicant was critically ill and
               appeared to be close to death, could not be  guaranteed  any
               nursing or medical care in his country of origin and had  no
               family there willing or able to care for him or provide  him
               with even a basic level of food, shelter or social support.


               43. The Court does not exclude that there may be other  very
               exceptional cases where the humanitarian considerations  are
               equally compelling. However, it  considers  that  it  should
               maintain the high threshold set in D v the  United  Kingdom
               and applied in its subsequent case-law, which it regards  as
               correct in principle, given that in such cases  the  alleged
               future harm would emanate not from the intentional  acts  or
               omissions of public authorities  or  non-State  bodies,  but
               instead from a naturally occurring illness and the  lack  of
               sufficient resources  to  deal  with  it  in  the  receiving
               country."
             18.  Laws LJ then reviewed the  decisions  of  the  Strasbourg
               Court in MSS v Belgium and Greece and Sufi & Elmi  v  United
               Kingdom (2012) 54  EHRR  9.  The  latter  is  of  particular
               relevance  in  the  present  context.  The  case   concerned
               Somalian nationals who had committed  criminal  offences  in
               this country. The Secretary of State was proposing to deport
               them to Somalia, which was resisted on the grounds that  the
               dire humanitarian conditions in Somalia were such that their
               return would be  a  breach  of  Article  3.  The  Government
               contended that the appropriate test  for  assessing  whether
               the dire  humanitarian  conditions  reached  the  Article  3
               threshold was that set out in N v  United  Kingdom  so  that
               humanitarian conditions would only reach  the  threshold  in
               very exceptional cases where  the  grounds  against  removal
               were compelling.
            19. The  Strasbourg  Court  rejected  that  contention  in  the
                particular  circumstances  of   that   case   because   the
                humanitarian crisis in Somalia was predominantly due to the
                direct and indirect actions of the parties to the  conflict
                there, so that the "very exceptional circumstances" test in
                N was not applicable. At [282]-[283], the Court said:
                  282. If the dire humanitarian conditions in  Somalia  were
                  solely or even predominantly attributable to poverty or to
                  the State's lack of resources to  deal  with  a  naturally
                  occurring phenomenon, such as a drought, the test in  N  v
                  the United Kingdom may well have been considered to be the
                  appropriate one. However, it is clear that  while  drought
                  has contributed to the humanitarian crisis, that crisis is
                  predominantly due to the direct and  indirect  actions  of
                  the parties to the conflict. The reports indicate that all
                  parties  to  the  conflict  have  employed  indiscriminate
                  methods of warfare in densely populated urban  areas  with
                  no regard to the safety of the civilian population... This
                  fact alone has resulted in widespread displacement and the
                  breakdown    of    social,    political    and    economic
                  infrastructures. Moreover, the situation has been  greatly
                  exacerbated   by   al-Shabaab's    refusal    to    permit
                  international aid agencies to operate in the  areas  under
                  its control, despite the fact that between a third  and  a
                  half of all Somalis are living in a situation  of  serious
                  deprivation...
                  283.  Consequently,  the  Court  does  not  consider   the
                  approach  adopted  in  N  v  the  United  Kingdom  to   be
                  appropriate in the  circumstances  of  the  present  case.
                  Rather, it prefers the approach adopted in MSS  v  Belgium
                  and Greece,  which  requires  it  to  have  regard  to  an
                  applicant's ability to cater for  his  most  basic  needs,
                  such as food, hygiene and shelter,  his  vulnerability  to
                  ill-treatment and the prospect of his situation  improving
                  within a reasonable time-frame  (see  MSS  v  Belgium  and
                  Greece, cited above, paragraph 254)."
            20. Laws LJ commented on that case and MSS in [57]-[59] of  his
                judgment:
                "57. There appears to be a fork in the road, on the court's
                own reckoning, between the approach in N v UK  on  the  one
                hand and MSS on  the  other.  It  is  on  the  face  of  it
                difficult to find any governing principle,  applied  across
                the learning, which provides  a  rationale  for  departures
                from the Article 3 paradigm. There  are,  however,  certain
                strands of reasoning. In MSS it is to be noted that  Greece
                (unlike Belgium) was not impugned for breach of  Article  3
                on account of anything that would happen to  the  applicant
                in a third country to which Greece proposed to remove  him,
                but by reason of his  plight  in  Greece  itself.  One  may
                compare the case of Limbuela [2006] 1 AC 396, in which  the
                House of Lords was concerned with the dire straits to which
                certain asylum-seekers in this  country  were  reduced  for
                want of access to public funds, and held that there  was  a
                violation of Article 3. In MSS a critical  factor  was  the
                existence of legal duties owed by Greece under its own  law
                implementing EU obligations: paragraphs 250 and 263 which I
                have cited;  and  it  is  clear  that  the  court  attached
                particular importance to the fact that the applicant was an
                asylum-seeker.
                58.  In  Sufi  &  Elmi  the  court  avowedly  followed  MSS
                (paragraph 283). In this case the critical factor was  that
                the "crisis is predominantly due to the direct and indirect
                actions of the parties to  the  conflict":  paragraph  282.
                This is closer to the paradigm than  the  ill-treatment  in
                question in MSS, for it must have involved deliberate acts.


                59. Thus in MSS and  Sufi  &  Elmi  the  court  looked  for
                particular features  which  might  bring  the  case  within
                Article 3, and found them - in Greece's  legal  duties  and
                the applicant's status as  an  asylum-seeker,  and  in  the
                nature of the crisis in Somalia."
             21.  Said concerned a Somalian national  who  had  received  a
                sentence of 5 years imprisonment for rape in 2009  and  was
                thus subject to the automatic deportation provisions  under
                the UK Borders Act 2007. He  resisted  deportation  relying
                inter alia on Article 3.  The  Upper  Tribunal  upheld  his
                appeal from the First-tier Tribunal, holding that following
                the  Country  Guidance  case  MOJ  and  others  (Return  to
                Mogadishu) Somalia CG [2014] UKUT 442 (IAC) he would be  at
                risk of being destitute and finding himself in a  camp  for
                internally displaced persons (IDP)  where  conditions  were
                poor. The Upper Tribunal Judge found that he suffered  from
                depression and PTSD and was thus  a  vulnerable  individual
                who would be unable to cope with the stress of living in an
                unstable  environment  and  had  little   prospect   of   a
                livelihood on return.
            22. In the main judgment, given by Burnett LJ, as he then  was,
                the Article 3 jurisprudence summarised above  was  set  out
                and the conclusion reached at [18]:
               "These  cases  demonstrate  that  to  succeed  in  resisting
               removal on article 3  grounds  on  the  basis  of  suggested
               poverty  or  deprivation  on  return  which  are   not   the
               responsibility of the receiving country  or  others  in  the
               sense described in para 282 of Sufi and Elmi, whether or not
               the feared  deprivation  is  contributed  to  by  a  medical
               condition,  the  person  liable  to  deportation  must  show
               circumstances which bring him within  the  approach  of  the
               Strasbourg Court in the D and N cases."
               This Court evidently considered that  the  Country  Guidance
               case showed that the conditions in Somalia, although  harsh,
               could no longer be attributed to  the  direct  and  indirect
               actions of the parties to the former conflict so that the  N
               test applied to  the  applicant's  case  and  he  could  not
               satisfy that test, hence the  Secretary  of  State's  appeal
               succeeded.
    13. The reason for adopting  this  approach  is  the  evidence  in  the
        appellants appeal bundle which clearly shows the crisis within  the
        economy in Venezuela, giving rise to hyperinflation,  the  collapse
        of health service and other resources including  food  imports  and
        shortages, are not  as  a  result  of  indiscriminate  violence  or
        conflict within Venezuela but rather the activities of the previous
        and current Venezuelan government and their  mismanagement  of  the
        Venezuelan economy.
    14. In his report Dr McCarthy refers  to  the  humanitarian  crisis  in
        Venezuela together with specifically considering the needs of  this
        appellant. In relation  to  the  humanitarian  crisis  Dr  McCarthy
        writes:


             71.  The Venezuelan humanitarian crisis is  manifest  at  both
                  the domestic and international levels.


             72.  Domestically, the humanitarian crisis involves more  than
                  poverty, which measures at 87% for total poverty  and  61%
                  for extreme poverty, according to the Venezuelan  National
                  Household Conditions Survey for 2018  (ENCOVI,  2018).  In
                  terms of its most severe impacts, the humanitarian  crisis
                  entails the  severe  shortage  of  basic  food  goods  and
                  medicines, ranging from a lack of vaccines and  treatments
                  to more sophisticated medical services such as dialysis or
                  chemotherapy.


             73.  According to a report jointly published by the Venezuelan
                  Health Observatory - a University research group - and the
                  Bengoa Foundation - an NGO dedicated to nutrition issues -
                  the  levels  of   both   malnutrition   and   death   from
                  malnutrition increased considerably in  2017.  The  report
                  indicates that around 80% of homes suffer from a situation
                  of food insecurity, nine  out  of  ten  surveyed  for  the
                  ENCOVI report not having a high  enough  income  to  cover
                  food expenses, and over half the population reports  going
                  to bed hungry.


             74.  The crisis  in  the  health  sector  includes  increasing
                  levels of infant and maternal mortality, the  re-emergence
                  of what was thought to be completely  eradicated  tropical
                  diseases (e.g. malaria) in urban centres,  and  decreasing
                  level of vaccines for diphtheria and measles.


             75.  This  shortage  of  medicine  and  medical  services  has
                  coincided with a significant increase  in  the  uninsured.
                  The percentage of uninsured reportedly rose  from  50%  to
                  68% between 2014 and  2017  while  the  costs  of  medical
                  services have skyrocketed.


             76.   As  an  illustrative  example  of  the  access  to  case
                  implications for the severe health  crisis,  consider  the
                  following  case.  Consultations   with   medical   doctors
                  revealed that in the public healthcare system, where  care
                  is free, doctors are currently able to treat about 70%  of
                  dialysis cases. Under improved economic conditions - those
                  in existence prior to the  Maduro-era  economic  crisis  -
                  would have been able to cover closer to 100% of  all  such
                  cases. Due to the ongoing power grid crisis that regularly
                  causes blackouts  throughout  the  country,  including  in
                  major cities, such as the capital Caracas where  the  best
                  hospitals are located, as  well  as  severe  shortages  of
                  medication  and  equipment,  it  is  possible  that   this
                  treatment rate could decline even further. Before multiple
                  power  outages  took  place  in  March  2019,  the  likely
                  scenario was that the health sector,  hospitals  included,
                  would remain dangerously close to  a  situation  of  total
                  collapse  in  which  power  would  not  be  available   at
                  hospitals. Now after the  power  outages,  total  collapse
                  appears to have begun, with the Maduro government  finally
                  agreeing to accept international  humanitarian  assistance
                  at hospitals via the delivery networks  and  donations  of
                  the International Red Cross.


             77.  The international dimensions of the humanitarian  crisis,
                  driven by  both  Venezuela's  increasingly  dire  economic
                  situation and  political  repression,  is  taxing  all  of
                  northern South America, with no remedy insight. In what UN
                  High Commission for Refugees officials call  "one  of  the
                  largest  mass  population  movements  in  Latin   American
                  history", an estimated 3.2 million Venezuelans - about 10%
                  of the country's population - have left the country  since
                  2014.  According  to  UNHCR,  more  than  half  of   these
                  emigrants suffer  from  malnutrition,  and  a  significant
                  percentage suffer from diseases, such  as  diphtheria  and
                  measles, previously thought to be under control.


             78.  Venezuela's humanitarian crisis is roiling Latin America,
                  and the crisis is posing economic and security  challenges
                  to neighbouring countries. As a result, tensions over  the
                  costs of hosting  and  integrating  migrants  are  quickly
                  rising. The fundamental  drivers  of  the  continued  high
                  level of migration are, on the  one  hand,  the  country's
                  economic crisis and its various impacts on  the  country's
                  state welfare institutions, and, on the other hand, regime
                  driven persecution of the opposition.


             79.   UNHCR  estimates  that  the  population   of   displaced
                  Venezuelans is at least 4 million and that, by the end  of
                  2019, this population could grow to 5 million.


             80.  Currently, there is neither  an  end  in  sight  for  the
                  migration crisis, nor for the multi dimensional in country
                  crisis. The current status quo  suggests  the  crisis  may
                  worsen on all fronts. Political persecution against regime
                  opponents, both  ordinary  citizens  and  public  figures,
                  seems set to continue for  the  foreseeable  future,  with
                  this  practice  potentially  growing  more  arbitrary  and
                  erratic  due  to  the  overall  unpredictability  of   the
                  situation and  the  government's  dysfunctional  brand  of
                  authoritarian rule.


    15. In relation to the situation  appertaining  to  the  appellant,  Dr
        McCarthy writes:


             81.  [NGGM] account of the events surrounding her decision not
                  to return to Venezuela and  instead  seek  asylum  in  the
                  United  Kingdom,  or  in  the  alternative,   humanitarian
                  protection, is consistent with what high quality  research
                  on the country's political crisis - including my own - has
                  documented.


             82.   Given  the  inseparable  nature  of  the  political  and
                  humanitarian crisis in Venezuela, and the fact that [NGGM]
                  has an antiregime  political  affiliation  and  has  spent
                  considerable time abroad in a country that has  sanctioned
                  the Maduro government, she is at risk of  being  subjected
                  to practices of intolerance  and  discrimination  such  as
                  verbal  harassment  and   bullying,   and,   even   worse,
                  persecution via politically intentioned  efforts  to  deny
                  her access to public goods, including  food  supplies  and
                  healthcare. She faces the risk  of  political  persecution
                  for  her  constitutionally  guaranteed  political  dissent
                  while the denial of her constitutional  access  to  public
                  goods  could  well  result  in  her   being   deliberately
                  subjected to inhumane treatment.


             83.  Some respected analysts have compared  Venezuela's  multi
                  dimensional crisis to the internal armed conflict  in  the
                  country of Syria. Despite the similarities at  the  levels
                  of  the  refugee  crisis  and  the  overall   humanitarian
                  emergency, this comparison is not accurate,  in  my  view.
                  Still,  the  extent  of  lawlessness  in  the  country  of
                  Venezuela has  generated  conditions  that  are  ripe  for
                  rampant  political  violence  from   gorilla   and   other
                  established groups, organised crime, and criminality  more
                  broadly and in fact the specific types of actors have been
                  the perpetrators of both the common criminal and political
                  violence that regularly takes place in the country.


             84.  Due to her age, and  perceived  vulnerabilities  stemming
                  from her age and gender, [NGGM] would face a serious  risk
                  of physical harm upon return to Venezuela from  unprovoked
                  attacks or burglaries, crimes that  are  committed  at  an
                  alarmingly high rate in all major  urban  centres  of  the
                  country.


             85.  [NGGM] would not be able to seek protection against  such
                  crime from the authorities. She would not be able to  seek
                  this protection due to two factors. One, the  country  has
                  the worst ranking in the World Justice  Projects  Rule  of
                  Law  Index  (126  out  of  126  ranked)   and,   moreover,
                  authorities corruption is  so  severe  that  there  is  no
                  plausible reason  to  believe  that  protection  would  in
                  practice  be  granted.  Two,  due  to   [NGGM]   political
                  affiliation, she would be at great risk of not only  being
                  denied protection, but also  facing  the  risk  of  verbal
                  harassment and/or physical abuse.


             86.   Venezuela's  economic  crisis   has   reached   alarming
                  proportions, with hyperinflation not  only  affecting  the
                  value of the local currency but also increasing  the  cost
                  of living for those who have access to  foreign  currency.
                  Ecoanalitica, a respected economic  consultancy  based  in
                  Caracas, estimates that from December 2018 to April  2019,
                  the cost of  living  in  dollars  increased  555%.  Though
                  hyperinflation has tapered off a bit from the monthly rate
                  of 190% in January 2019,  it  is  apparent  that  the  lag
                  effects of this hyperinflationary  cycle  will  result  in
                  continued speculation. The vicious hyperinflationary cycle
                  of cost of living  increases  means  that  a  person  like
                  [NGGM] who lacks strong financial support from her family,
                  would face great difficulty being able to sustain  herself
                  financially. I am aware that [NGGM] does have  a  pension,
                  however, due to hyperinflation, I feel it  is  crucial  to
                  note that a pension is equivalent to a trivial  amount  of
                  income. I am very concerned she would  end  up  destitute,
                  increasing the likelihood of suffering.


             87.  If [NGGM] were forced to return to Venezuela,  she  would
                  likely have to depend  on  foreign  currency  from  family
                  members  currently  living   abroad.   There   are   risks
                  associated  with  depending  on  foreign   transfers   and
                  remittances, some of which stem from  problems  associated
                  with  US  sanctions  imposed  on  the  Central   Bank   of
                  Venezuela. Though the sanctions do  not  bar  humanitarian
                  aid, they have created problems  for  counter-part  banks.
                  Moreover,  the  Maduro  governments  erratic  nature   has
                  resulted in a high policy volatility when it comes to  the
                  relationship between the state and the  banking  industry.
                  As a result, it can be expected that there will be  future
                  haphazard  policy  decisions  that  create  hardships  for
                  citizens dependent on foreign currency, as  would  be  the
                  case for [NGGM]. Finally, the risk of an out right  across
                  the  board  nationalisation  of  the  banking  sector   is
                  nontrivial, the risk that throws into doubt  the  security
                  of deposits and calls into question the ability to  access
                  private accounts.


             88.  I am not able to confirm reports that the  government  of
                  Nicholas Maduro would be willing  to  trace  back  to  the
                  source of remittances and follow this trace to  carry  out
                  punishment against regime  opponents,  though  I  have  no
                  doubt that radical elements of the Maduro government  will
                  be willing to do this to carry out repression  while  less
                  radical, but no  less  cynical,  elements  might  use  the
                  information for purposes of extortion.


    16. In her submissions Mrs Petterson referred to  the  fact  the  Upper
        Tribunal was  considering  a  narrow  issue  namely  conditions  in
        Venezuela for the appellant if she was to be returned.
    17. The appellant refers to availability of medical treatment.  In  her
        bundle at page 47 is an English translation of the document written
        in Spanish appearing at page 49. This states  that  the  appellant,
        described as a 72-year-old  female  patient,  is  controlled  as  a
        cardiology outpatient as  a  result  of  a  diagnosis  of  arterial
        hypertension. The report states the appellant  requires  continuous
        and permanent medical treatment with Valsartan and  Concor,  daily,
        to deal with her increased blood pressure. The report is said to be
        dated 15 February 2017 issued in the city of Maracay. There  is  no
        indication in the report of the actual readings taken to assess the
        appellant's blood pressure and her evidence is that since being  in
        the UK there have been no concerns regarding her blood pressure  or
        need to be prescribed or take any  medication.  If  the  stress  of
        being returned and living in Venezuela causes the appellant's blood
        pressure to increase it was not made out the  appellant  would  not
        have adequate resources to secure such medication as she  required.
        It was not made  out  in  relation  to  medical  aspects  that  the
        appellant was able to meet the high threshold set out in N and  had
        not demonstrated a breach of article 3 on medical grounds.
    18. The appellant's assertion before the First-tier Tribunal  that  she
        would have no access to her funds in her bank in Venezuela  is  not
        made out. The finding by the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  that  the
        appellant would have no access to her account has been shown to  be
        incorrect as the appellant's evidence is that she was able, online,
        to authorise her son who still lives in  Venezuela  to  access  her
        account and withdraw funds from  the  same.  The  appellant  claims
        these funds are being used  by  her  son  who  has  his  wife,  two
        children and two nephews to support, to meet his own living  costs;
        but the evidence did not support the  appellant's  contention  that
        she would not have access to her pension. There is also,  as  noted
        above, a possible further source of  income  being  paid  into  the
        appellant's account.
    19. It is also the case that the letter from  the  appellant's  son  in
        Venezuela, dated 9 September  2018  at  pages  140  -  141  of  the
        appellant's appeal bundle, only refers to his son and his  daughter
        living at  home,  his  previous  occupation  within  the  army  and
        subsequent qualification as a lawyer.  He  claims  not  to  have  a
        stable job and refers to hyperinflation but does  not  specifically
        claim that he cannot accommodate or  is  unwilling  to  assist  the
        appellant as far as he is able, if she is returned. The appellant's
        son claims his mother was forced  to  leave  Venezuela  as  it  was
        impossible for him to help as  his  monthly  salary  by  way  of  a
        military pension  was  spent  when  it  arrived  in  light  of  the
        inflationary pressures within Venezuela.
    20. The fact the appellant's evidence is that her son is able to access
        the content of her bank account in Venezuela clearly shows that she
        too will be able to access that account  and  the  funds  contained
        therein  which  have  continued  to  be  paid  by  the   Venezuelan
        authorities. Although Dr McCarthy refers to risk to  the  appellant
        as a result of what is said to be an adverse political  profile  it
        is a preserved finding of the First-tier Tribunal that no such risk
        arises.
    21. It is not made out that if returned to Venezuela the appellant will
        need ongoing medical assistance or that if same is required it will
        not be available to her.
    22. The appellant confirmed in her evidence that her son, his wife  and
        their two children and two nephews live in Venezuela supporting the
        respondent's contention the appellant will not be alone on  return.
        There was insufficient evidence to establish it is  not  reasonable
        in all the circumstances for the appellant to be able to live  with
        or near to such family members which undermines the claim  that  if
        returned she will be a lone single elderly  female  without  family
        support. The son has no right to rely upon the appellant's  pension
        which is her personal resource.
    23. Notwithstanding this issue having been  clearly  canvassed  in  the
        earlier proceedings there was insufficient evidence  to  show  that
        the buying power of the appellant's pension will not be  sufficient
        to enable her to meet basic needs in Venezuela with the support  of
        remittances from family in the United Kingdom. It was not made  out
        that the family in the UK, who have clearly done all  they  can  to
        support the appellant, will abandon her  if  she  was  returned  to
        Venezuela. The appellant's son-in-law, Dr Stuart John Williams,  in
        his witness statement dated 17 September 2018 confirms at [17] that
        he and his wife, the appellant's daughter Damaris who holds  a  PhD
        in  Chemistry  obtained  in  the  UK,  have  always  supported  the
        appellant financially and that she will never be a drain on  public
        funds. Both he and his wife are in stable well-paid  jobs  and  can
        support the appellant in every aspect of life. That is taken  as  a
        reference to life in the United Kingdom where the cost of living is
        substantially  higher  than  in  Venezuela.  If  the  family   have
        sufficient resources to meet all of the appellant's needs in the UK
        they will clearly have resources available to  meet  her  needs  in
        Venezuela where the cost of living is considerably cheaper.  It  is
        not made out that any funds or remittances sent would not reach the
        appellant for use in meeting her personal needs.  The  availability
        of resources from this source was not challenged or contested by Mr
        Ell in his submissions.
    24. Dr McCarthy acknowledges that as  a  result  of  hyperinflation  in
        Venezuela the appellant will be  dependent  upon  remittances  from
        abroad but at the date of the hearing it was not made out that such
        remittances would not be  available  from  the  UK,  would  not  be
        sufficient, would not be credited to the appellant's bank  account,
        or that the appellant will be targeted for adverse  attention  such
        as harassment if such remittances  were  made.  The  appellant  was
        clearly able to access her bank account online from the UK and give
        instructions for her son to be  able  to  withdraw  funds  from  it
        without evidence of the account being closed or her  pension  being
        stopped. Whilst it may assist  the  family  in  Venezuela  to  have
        access to these additional funds it was not made out there was  any
        legal obligation upon the appellant to allow her son  to  use  such
        funds to her own detriment.
    25. The cost of living in Venezuela is much cheaper  being  around  58%
        lower  than  in  United  Kingdom,  excluding  rent,  with  rent  in
        Venezuela being 75% lower than in United Kingdom, on average.
    26. Mr Ell in his submissions referred at length to the content of  the
        expert  evidence  identifying  the  causes  of  the  crisis  within
        Venezuela and actions of the authorities and  the  use  of  a  two-
        strand method by the authorities  to  create  direct  conflict  and
        through the use of welfare services. It was not disputed  that  the
        country situation is poor, but it was not made out that this is  as
        a result of indiscriminate violence in a situation of  internal  or
        international armed conflict but is rather as a result of  economic
        mismanagement and the actions of the current regime.
    27. It is  accepted  the  US  State  Department,  together  with  other
        information provided by the appellant, supports the submission that
        women and the elderly and those with health problems are  the  most
        vulnerable in Venezuela at this time. It is not disputed there  are
        economic difficulties and that life for those  within  the  country
        and those returning is likely to be difficult; but that is not  the
        required test.
    28. It is not made out the appellant's profile, actual or  imputed,  is
        such that she will be at risk of suffering serious harm as  defined
        in paragraph 339CA of the Immigration Rules.  The key  question  is
        whether the appellant has made out that if  returned  to  Venezuela
        she will not receive or  be  able  to  access  funds  and  services
        sufficient to cater for her most basic needs such as food,  hygiene
        and shelter.
    29. Mr Ells referred to the presence of hyperinflation within Venezuela
        being a strong balancing element in favour of the appellant and  in
        his  submissions  accepted  that  the  issue  is  not   necessarily
        availability of finances but the  lack  of  resources  that  drives
        hyperinflation making cash-based services  too  expensive;  meaning
        the appellant will be unable to afford products that she  requires.
        In light of the availability of resources from the  United  Kingdom
        it was not made out at the date of hearing that this is  the  case.
        The appellant refers in her earlier witness statement to  shortages
        of food items in some retail outlets, the need to queue to purchase
        goods required, and having  to  return  home  when  incidents  have
        occurred in areas where she has been queueing, on occasions. Whilst
        that is the reality according to  country  information  and  people
        have had to adapt to buying cheaper more staple items  rather  than
        those they may have purchased  previously  the  appellant  has  not
        established that she would not be able to access items required  to
        meet her basic needs, the denial  of which could  give  rise  to  a
        claim pursuant to article 3 ECHR.
    30. Both parties accept this is a somewhat unusual  case  in  that  the
        difficulties do not arise as  a  result  of  internal  or  external
        conflict but as a result of policies adopted by the government that
        has created difficulties and caused some ordinary people  with  few
        resources or an inability to fund medical care to have to leave the
        country to survive. It was submitted by Mr Ell  that  it  is  as  a
        result of such an unusual combination of factors that the appellant
        is prevented from returning.
    31. The difficulty for the appellant is that identified above which  is
        that on the evidence made available it was not made out  that  food
        and shelter would not be available to her. It was not made out that
        her pension income together with  resources  provided  from  family
        members, such as those in the UK, will be insufficient even  taking
        into account the current evidence regarding inflationary  pressures
        within the Venezuelan economy, to enable the appellant to meet  her
        basic needs. It was not made out the appellant will not have family
        support available to her in Venezuela or be at risk.
    32. Although the country information refers to the use of an ID card as
        a means to access basic services it  was  not  made  out  that  the
        appellant will be denied the same or be targeted for persecution or
        face restrictions on access to the services available to the normal
        population in Venezuela as a result of her profile,  especially  in
        light of the preserved findings.
    33. Even accepting that life for the appellant on return  to  Venezuela
        will be difficult, and that she prefers to  remain  in  the  United
        Kingdom with her family members,  it  is  not  made  out  that  the
        appellant has established that lack of services and goods will lead
        to destitution or ill-treatment sufficient to engage article 3.
    34. It is not made  out  the  appellant  is  entitled  to  a  grant  of
        international protection.
    35. Mr Ell submitted that if the appellant was  unable  to  succeed  on
        article 3 grounds it would still be possible  for  her  to  succeed
        pursuant to article 8 ECHR on the basis of an unlawful interference
        with her private life.
    36. It was accepted that it may be difficult to succeed on article 8 if
        the appellant failed in relation to article 3 and the  findings  in
        relation to article 3 have  equal  application  to  the  article  8
        assessment, where it has been established  that  notwithstanding  a
        degree of difficulty being experienced the appellant  will  not  be
        destitute.
    37. Article 8 does not give a person the right  to  choose  where  they
        wish to live. Whilst the  appellant  prefers  to  remain  with  her
        family in the UK, where life for her is much easier,  that  is  not
        the determinative factor.
    38. The appellant's private life has been developed during the time her
        presence in the  United  Kingdom  has  been  precarious  warranting
        little weight being attached to the same pursuant to  section  117B
        of the 2002 Act. It is a preserved  finding  the  appellant  cannot
        succeed pursuant to article 8 on the basis of her family life.
    39. It is not made out the appellant will be unable to maintain contact
        with  family  in  the  United  Kingdom,  as  she  was  able  to  do
        previously, if she is returned.
    40. Whilst it is accepted the private life she has as a member  of  the
        household of the  UK  based  family  cannot  be  replicated  within
        Venezuela, in all other respects communication permitting points of
        discussion and matters passing between them can be continued albeit
        by different means.
    41. Whilst the appellant's date of birth shows that she is  an  elderly
        woman being returned she is a citizen of Venezuela whose has  lived
        there all her life with family support.
    42. In Botta v. Italy (Application No. 21439/93), 24 February 1998, the
        European  Court  established  that  private  life  encompasses  the
        physical, moral and psychological integrity of a person.  This  was
        confirmed  to  be  the  case  in  Bensaid  v.  The  United  Kingdom
        (Application No. 44599/98), (6 February 2001) where the  applicant,
        undergoing  treatment  for  schizophrenia,  complained   that   his
        proposed expulsion to Algeria  would  leave  him  without  adequate
        medical treatment, threatening his physical  and  moral  integrity.
        The Court elaborated that ''private  life'  is  a  broad  term  not
        susceptible to exhaustive definition' and 'that  elements  such  as
        gender identification, name and sexual orientation and sexual  life
        are important elements of the personal sphere protected by  Article
        8'.
    43. In addition it established that:


        A person's body is an intimate aspect of his or  her  private  life
        (Y.F v Turkey) and a sound mental state is an important factor  for
        the possibility to enjoy the right to private life  (Bensaid  v  UK
        para 47). Measures which affect the physical  integrity  or  mental
        health have to reach a certain degree of severity to qualify as  an
        interference with  the  right  to  private  life  under  Article  8
        (Bensaid v UK, para 46). However, the Court has also held that even
        minor interferences with a person's  physical  integrity  may  fall
        within the scope of article 8  if they  are  against  the  person's
        will (Storck v Germany, para 143)


        As far as the physical integrity is concerned, the scope of article
        8 overlaps with the ambit of article  3 ECHR. As pointed out above,
        the Court distinguishes the fields  of  application  of  these  two
        provisions according to the gravity of the interference.  While  it
        considers article 3 lex specialis if  grave  interferences  with  a
        person's well-being are in question,  the  right  to  private  life
        comes into play when the interference does not reach the  threshold
        required to qualify it as torture or inhuman treatment.


    44. Mental health must also be regarded as a crucial  part  of  private
        life  associated  with  the  aspect   of   moral   integrity.   The
        preservation  of  mental  stability   is   in   that   context   an
        indispensable precondition to effective enjoyment of the  right  to
        respect for private life.
    45. In relation to the  appellant's  concerns  regarding  her  personal
        safety, there is no clear evidence the  appellant  could  not  live
        near her son preventing her becoming isolated. There  is  reference
        in the expert report to politically motivated violence, but  it  is
        not made out the appellant will be specifically  targeted  for  the
        same. There is the possibility the appellant may witness events and
        may have been caught up  in  the  same  in  the  past  creating  an
        understandable subjective fear, but it  has  not  been  objectively
        established that she will be specifically targeted. It is  accepted
        the deteriorating situation in Venezuela has spurred  violence  and
        criminal activity disassociated from  politics  and  that  criminal
        gangs appear to be a problem within Venezuela. There is within  the
        appellant's bundle a letter of 24 September 2018  written  by  Jane
        Taylor a private practitioner for  psychotherapy,  counselling  and
        trauma specialist reporting upon counselling/psychotherapy sessions
        with Stuart John Williams in  2009  as  a  result  of  difficulties
        experienced whilst working in  Venezuela  and  concern  for  family
        members in Venezuela left behind when he returned to the UK.
    46. Dr McCarthy specifically  considered  the  issue  of  risk  to  the
        appellant at [84 - 85] referred to above.
    47. The appellant fails to establish an entitlement  to leave to remain
        on the basis of any disproportionate breach of her moral  integrity
        on the basis of that term as 'an innate moral conviction  to  stand
        against things that are not virtuous or morally right'.
    48. In relation to the appellant's  physical  integrity,  I  find  this
        applies to the physical and mental health problems  caused  by  any
        illness arising from the situation in Venezuela, if any.
    49. In GS (India); EO (Ghana); GM (India); PL (Jamaica); BA (Ghana) and
        KK (DRC) v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 40  it was held that if the Article
        3 claim failed, Article 8 could not prosper without  some  separate
        or additional factual element which brought  the  case  within  the
        Article 8 paradigm: the core value protected being the  quality  of
        life, not its continuance. That meant that a specific case must  be
        made under Article 8. The rigour of the D exception for the purpose
        of Article 3 in such cases as these applied with no less force when
        the claim was put under Article 8.  Although  the  UK  courts  have
        declined to state that Article 8 could  never  be  engaged  by  the
        health consequences of removal from the UK, the circumstances would
        have to  be  truly  exceptional  before  such  a  breach  could  be
        established (paras 45, 85 - 87 and 106 - 111).  At  paragraph  111,
        Underhill LJ said this "First, the absence or inadequacy of medical
        treatment,  even  life-preserving  treatment,  in  the  country  of
        return, cannot be relied on at all as a factor engaging Article  8:
        if that is all there is,  the  claim  must  fail.  Secondly,  where
        Article 8 is engaged by other factors, the fact that  the  claimant
        is receiving medical treatment in this country  which  may  not  be
        available in  the  country  of  return  may  be  a  factor  in  the
        proportionality exercise; but that factor cannot be treated  as  by
        itself giving rise to a breach since that would contravene the  'no
        obligation to treat' principle."
    50. In SL (St Lucia) v SSHD [2018] EWCA Civ 1894 the  Court  of  Appeal
        commented that the focus and structure of Article  8  is  different
        from Article 3.  They were  unpersuaded  that  Paposhvili  had  any
        impact on the approach to Article 8 claims.  An absence of  medical
        treatment in the country of  return  would  not  of  itself  engage
        Article  8.   The  only  relevance  would  be  where  that  was  an
        additional factor  with  other  factors  which  themselves  engaged
        Article 8.  Razgar was referred to for the  proposition  that  only
        the most compelling  humanitarian  considerations  were  likely  to
        prevail over legitimate aims of immigration control.  The  approach
        set  out  in  MM  (Zimbabwe)  and  GS  (India)  was  unaltered   by
        Paposhvili.
    51. Having given very careful consideration to the  available  evidence
        and the detailed submissions made by the advocates on  the  day,  I
        conclude that the appellant has failed to establish  on  the  facts
        that she is able to meet the high threshold of article 3  and  that
        the respondent has established that  the  decision  to  return  the
        appellant  is  proportionate  pursuant  to  Article  8  ECHR.   The
        appellant's desire to remain in the United Kingdom with her family,
        whilst understandable, is not  enough  in  light  of  the  relevant
        prevailing legal considerations.
    52. No breach of article 3 is  made  out.   It  is  not  made  out  the
        appellant's physical or moral integrity will be adversely impacted,
        despite the difficulties she will  face,  sufficient  to  make  any
        interference in such private life disproportionate.


Decision

    53. This appeal is dismissed.


   Anonymity.


    54. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)  of
        the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


I make such order pursuant to rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure     (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008.



Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 2 August 2019












