
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10212/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons           |
|                                              |Promulgated                  |
|On 22 July 2019                               |On 30 July 2019              |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                 SARKAWT [N]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Holme, instructed by Parker, Rhodes Hickmotts
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. By a decision promulgated on 15 April 2019, I found that the First-tier
    Tribunal had erred in law such that its decision fell to be set  aside.
    I reasons were as follows:

    1.   The appellant was born on 1 July 1985 and is  a  male  citizen  of
    Iraq. He entered the  United  Kingdom  in  February  2016  and  claimed
    asylum. By a decision dated 7  August  2018,  the  Secretary  of  State
    refused his claim. He appealed to the First-tier Tribunal which,  in  a
    decision promulgated on 12 October  2018,  dismissed  the  appeal.  The
    appellant now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

    2.   The judge  has  carried  out  a  thorough  and  careful  analysis.
    However, I find that she has fallen into error. The  judge  found  that
    the appellant has a subjective fear of his uncle but she concluded that
    the appellant  could  relocate  within  the  IKR  (Independent  Kurdish
    Region). At [25-26], she found that the appellant's uncle did not  have
    such influence over the police and local authorities in the IKR that he
    would be able to locate and to harm the appellant throughout  the  IKR.
    That latter finding I consider to be entirely sound. The  problem  lies
    in the judge's analysis of the circumstances which the appellant  would
    find himself in should be relocated to the  IKR  and,  as  importantly,
    whether he would be able to make his way safely from Baghdad (the  city
    to which he would be returned from the United Kingdom) to the IKR.  The
    appellant has a CSID in Germany although he has  photocopies  with  him
    here in the United Kingdom. The judge has not  considered  how  exactly
    the appellant will go about obtaining either his  original  CSID  or  a
    replacement. As regards a  replacement,  the  appellant  may  face  the
    difficulty of having to travel to his home area from Baghdad and  there
    has been no complete analysis of those problems and the risks to  which
    the appellant may be exposed following arrival in Baghdad.

    3.   The grounds of appeal also argue that, given  that  the  appellant
    has fallen out with his father's family, he would have to rely upon his
    sister to assist him in obtaining replacement identity  documents.  The
    headnote of AAH (Iraqi Kurds - internal relocation) Iraq  CG  UKUT  212
    (IAC)  asks:

    Are there male family members who would be able and willing  to  attend
    the  civil  registry  with  P?  Because  the  registration  system   is
    patrilineal it will be relevant to consider  whether  the  relative  is
    from the mother or father's side. A maternal uncle in possession of his
    CSID would be  able  to  assist  in  locating  the  original  place  of
    registration of the individual's mother, and from there the trail would
    need to be followed to the place that her records were transferred upon
    marriage. It must also be borne in mind that a  significant  number  of
    IDPs in Iraq are themselves undocumented; if that is  the  case  it  is
    unlikely that they could be of  assistance.  A  woman  without  a  male
    relative to assist with the process of redocumentation would face  very
    significant obstacles in that officials may refuse  to  deal  with  her
    case at all.

    4.   Mr Greer, who appeared for the appellant  at  the  Upper  Tribunal
    initial hearing, submitted  that  there  was  nothing  the  appellant's
    sister could  do  before  the  appellant  arrived  in  Iraq  to  obtain
    replacement  documentation  for  the  appellant.   He   dismissed   the
    respondent's argument that, given that the  sister  had  been  able  to
    obtain death certificates for family members, she would also be able to
    obtain replacement identity documentation for  the  appellant.  In  his
    submission, such an argument contradicted the findings of the  tribunal
    in AAH. The passage of AAH which I have quoted above deals in the  last
    sentence with a female returnee seeking documentation for  herself;  it
    is not as clear as Mr Greer submits that any efforts made by the sister
    on the appellant's behalf to obtain documents for him would necessarily
    be futile.

    5.   I see no reason to set aside the main  findings  of  fact  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal. The judge's findings  that  the  appellant  has  a
    subjective fear of his uncle, but that the uncle would not be  able  to
    locate or harm the appellant should he return to live in a part of  the
    IKR where the uncle would be unaware of the  appellant's  presence  are
    preserved. However, I  am  not  satisfied  that  the  judge  has  dealt
    conclusively with the following questions posed by this appeal; whether
    the appellant would be able to obtain his original  documentation  from
    Germany;  if  you  could  not  do  so,  how  exactly  he  might  obtain
    replacement documentation before travelling to Baghdad; the  extent  to
    which the appellant's sister would  be  able  to  assist  in  obtaining
    documentation; whether the appellant would be exposed to a real risk of
    ill-treatment between arriving in Baghdad and relocating  to  the  IKR;
    whether, having reached the IKR, it would be unduly harsh to expect the
    appellant to reside there even though he would not be at risk from  his
    uncle. These are the issues which the Upper Tribunal  will  address  at
    the resumed hearing at or  following  which  the  Upper  Tribunal  will
    remake the decision. The parties  should  attend  the  resumed  hearing
    prepared to deal with these questions. The appellant's representatives,
    in particular, should file and serve a skeleton argument no later  than
    5 days before the resumed hearing. Both  parties  may  file  and  serve
    additional evidence provided they do so no later than 10 days prior  to
    the resumed hearing.

    Notice of Decision

    6.   The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside. The findings
    of fact, save for  those  concerning  the  risk  to  the  appellant  in
    Baghdad, travelling from Baghdad to the IKR and  living  thereafter  in
    that region, are preserved. The decision will be remade  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal (Upper Tribunal Judge Lane) at or following a resumed  hearing
    at Bradford on a date to be fixed.

 2. At the resumed hearing, Mr McVeety, who appeared for the  Secretary  of
    State, submitted that there existed sufficient circumstances particular
    to this appellant which would give rise to  the  reasonable  conclusion
    that it would be safe for him and his family to return to live  in  the
    IKR. In particular, the appellant himself is from the  IKR;  he  has  a
    photocopy of his CSID although he does not possess the original;  there
    is the possibility that male family members (by marriage)  in  the  IKR
    (Iraqi Kurdish Region) would be able to vouch for him and assist him in
    obtaining a new CSID. The appellant has a sister living in the IKR  but
    it is unclear whether she is or is not married; appellant would  be  to
    fly from Baghdad to the IKR; the appellant would be able  to  obtain  a
    new CSID are still in the United Kingdom from the Iraqi embassy.

 3. Mr Holmes, who appeared for the appellant, submitted that there was  no
    reliable evidence that a male family member would be able to assist the
    appellant. The relevant country guidance (AAH (Iraqi Kurds  -  internal
    relocation) Iraq  CG  UKUT  00212  (IAC))  indicated  that,  without  a
    passport, the appellant would be unable to obtain  a  replacement  card
    while still in the United Kingdom and would, in effect, be  trapped  in
    Baghdad airport as he would be unable to  travel  by  air  to  the  IKR
    whilst he would be probably unable and certainly unsafe to travel  with
    his family over land without a CSID.

 4. I should say at the outset that  the  possibility  that  the  appellant
    would be up to obtain his original CSID from the authorities in Germany
    appears to have evaporated. Both parties have  written  to  the  German
    authorities in vain to seek information about the card.

 5. Following a discussion, both parties agreed  with  me  that  the  lower
    standard of proof of reasonable likelihood was the appropriate standard
    to apply in the case of the discrete issue before the  Upper  Tribunal,
    namely the ability of the  appellant  to  obtain  replacement  identity
    documentation.

 6. It is an established fact that the appellant has a sister living in the
    IKR. No evidence has been produced to show that she is married or that,
    even if she is married, that her  husband  or  any  other  male  family
    member would be willing to assist  the  appellant  and  his  family  in
    obtaining the necessary documentation. Is on the basis of the  Tribunal
    must proceed to make its findings. Moreover, I am  prepared  to  accept
    the submission of Mr Holmes that, in practical terms,  it  will  simply
    not be possible for the appellant to obtain replacement CSID whilst  he
    is still in the United Kingdom; there is no evidence  to  suggest  that
    the possession of a photocopy of a CSID  will  be  sufficient  for  the
    appellant to obtain a replacement card. The appellant will,  therefore,
    returned with his family to Baghdad with a laissez passer issued by the
    United Kingdom government and, presumably, his photocopy CSID.  Without
    the necessary documentation, the appellant would be unable to  board  a
    plane in Baghdad and fly to Erbil notwithstanding the  fact  that  such
    scheduled flights are now available. It is also not  been  established,
    in my opinion, that the appellant could obtain a replacement card  from
    Iraq through the agency of his  sister;  given  the  complete  lack  of
    evidence, I have discounted the possibility that some  male  member  of
    the family by  marriage  either  exists  or  would  be  able  to  offer
    practical assistance. I find that the appellant and his family would be
    unable to advance from Baghdad to the IKR because they would  face  the
    dual problem of having no passports (making travel by  air  impossible)
    and no CSIDs (rendering travel overland dangerous). I find that, on the
    particular facts of this case and notwithstanding  the  fact  that  the
    family is from the IKR, the family would face an  inevitable  delay  in
    Baghdad where they would be living without CSIDs. The country  guidance
    is clear in such circumstances; the family, as Kurds in Baghdad,  would
    be at real risk.

 7. As matters stand out is that the date of today's hearing, I  find  that
    the appellant is entitled to humanitarian  protection.  That  situation
    may, of course, change. Travel overland from Baghdad to the IKR may  in
    the future become a possibility. Moreover, if the Secretary of  State's
    policy of returning all Iraqi citizens to Baghdad is changed and  those
    from the IKR and of Kurdish origin fly directly from London  to  Erbil,
    then the particular problems faced by this  appellant  at  the  present
    time may be circumvented.



Notice of Decision

The appellant's appeal against the decision of the Secretary of State  dated
7 August 2018 is allowed on humanitarian protection grounds.


Signed                              Date 22 July 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane

