
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Numbers:
PA/10527/2016

                                              PA/10525/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester                     | Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 17 September 2018                    | On 01 October 2018                 |
|                                        |                                    |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

                                   Between

                                   Ms J M
                                   Ms G A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr V Jagadeshan, Counsel, instructed by Greater
                    Manchester Immigration Aid Unit
For the Respondent:    Mr A Tan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   Following a decision made by me on 14 August 2018 setting aside for
material error of law the decision of Judge Brookfield, I directed that
there be a further hearing in which "any examination of the evidence of the
appellants can be confined to the issue of the circumstances of [the
appellants'] release from detention".  In my decision at paragraph 10, I
specifically preserved Judge Brookfield's findings of fact that: the
appellants had been arrested and detained at a high-profile political
convention (the Filimbie Convention); that the first appellant had attended
this Convention as a journalist working for Forum des AS to write a report
on the convention, and the second appellant to assist her with the
photography equipment; that both had been interrogated and beaten; that the
second appellant had been raped whilst still in custody and the first
appellant had been sexually abused.  I also expressly preserved the judge's
findings regarding the mental health problems of the second appellant.

2.   At the outset of the hearing Mr Tan asked whether my decision also
intended to preserve the judge's findings that the appellants had left the
DR (using false documents).  I clarified that I had so intended.  It is
clear from my decision that I identified no legal error in the judge's
findings at 11(xxiv) that "the appellants left the DRC using false
passports provided by an agent".  I also set out that I considered the fact
of the appellants' case, in respect of document fraud, to require
application of Tribunal country guidance as set out in BM and Others and BM
(false passport).

3.   Following discussion between the parties it was agreed that the first
appellant would be called to give evidence regarding the issue of the
circumstances of her release from detention.  Despite a Lingala interpreter
being booked, none was available and it was agreed the first appellant
would seek to give evidence in English, although if necessary I would
consider convening a further hearing with a Lingala interpreter.

4.   I then heard evidence from the first appellant.  She confirmed that
her witness statement of 23 June 2017 was true and correct, including as
regards her statement that when she and her sister had been driven away
from the detention centre in a jeep, there was only one man in the jeep.
Mr Tan then asked her to explain why she had said at paragraph 140 of her
asylum interview that there were two men in the jeep ["car"].  The
appellant said that when in the back of the jeep she and her sister were
blocked off from the front.  Whilst she heard two voices she only saw one
man.

5.   I then heard submissions from the representatives, both well-
presented.

6.   I have concluded that I do not need to hold a further hearing to hear
the first appellant give evidence through a Lingala interpreter.  My reason
for so concluding will be made apparent below.

7.   Having considered the evidence as a whole I am satisfied to the lower
standard of proof that the appellants have given a credible account of
their experiences in the DRC.  As noted earlier, it has already been found
that the appellants arrested, detained and ill-treated following their
attendance at the Filimbie Convention.  I accept Mr Jagadeshan's submission
that this in effect means that they have already been found credible as
regards the core of their claim to have experienced persecution.  Whilst
the circumstances of their escape are pertinent to the issue of how they
would be viewed on return, there is no disputing that they suffered past
persecution and that past persecution is a strong indication of future
persecution unless there are good reasons to consider there would not be a
repetition.

8.   As regards the appellants' account of their escape, there are two
aspects of importance.  The first is that it is amply supported by the
background evidence, in particular the Freedom from Torture report dated
June 2014 stating that most of the women detained during this Convention
were enabled to escape by someone in the detention facility.  Mr Tan argued
that this report stated that this assistance was based on guards
recognising a common ethnic or tribal origin or tribal and family
connection; however, this report says that this was "[m]ostly" the case,
not that it was in all instances and the appellants would not necessarily
have known if their guard was moved to assist them for reasons of tribe or
ethnicity or simply because of their relatively young age.  Second,
although the first appellant's evidence before me was inconsistent as to
whether there were one or two guards in the jeep, her more detailed witness
statement at paragraph 36 does not say in terms that there was only one
man; indeed her reference to "the man who brought me to the jeep opened the
door ..." rather implies there was another man.  In any event I am prepared
to accept, given the accepted credibility of their account on their arrest
and detention, that the first appellant really only knew for certain there
was one man but could not exclude there was another (as indeed she said in
her asylum interview when she did have interpreter assistance).

9.   I have already noted external evidence supporting the plausibility of
the appellants' account.  Mr Tan has submitted that if there were two
guards that doubled the risks to them of getting into trouble with their
own superiors for letting them go.  However, it is clear from the FT report
that a number of guards were prepared to take that risk, so there is no
good basis for finding the appellant's claim implausible for this reason.

10.  Having found that the entirety of the appellants' account of their
past experiences in the DRC is credible, I turn to consider whether they
would be at risk on return.  Applying the guidance set out in BM 1 and BM
2, I have no hesitation in considering that they would be at risk.  Clearly
at a minimum they will be questioned on return, particularly given their
use of a false passport to leave the DRC.  At 119(iv) of BM 1,  it was
stated that the DRC authorities have an interest in certain types of
suspected offenders, including those who committed document fraud when
departing the DRC.  Clearly, as well, the authorities will establish during
their enquiries that the appellants were arrested and detained as a result
of their attendance at a high-profile oppositionist political event and
that they unlawfully escaped from detention.  Paragraphs 17 and 119(iv) of
BM 2, with reference to paragraph 31 of BM 1, indicate that the authorities
will have an interest in persons who have escaped from prison.  The
political dimension to their original detention will only add to the
reasons why the DRC authorities are likely to re-detain the appellants.  It
is not in dispute that if they are subjected to (further) detention this
will give rise to ill-treatment tantamount to persecution.  The Refugee
Convention reason of political opinion will clearly be engaged given the
government's overt hostility to those involved in the Filimbie Convention.

11.  For the above reasons the decision I remake is to allow the
appellants' appeal against refusal of their protection claims.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.




Signed:                                 Date: 26 September 2018

             [pic]
Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal




