
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/10408/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 2 October 2020                             |On 18 March 2021              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE OWENS


                                   Between

                                     ZXW
                           (ANONYMITY order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Devlin, Counsel instructed by Chung Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Pettersen, Home Office Presenting Officer
Interpretation:  Ping Wang in the Mandarin language


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   Introduction

   1. The appellant is a citizen of the Republic of China born on 28 October
      1971.  She was trafficked into the United Kingdom on 10 April 2013 and
      claimed asylum on 27 March 2019. On 11 March 2019 she was referred to
      the National Referral Mechanism and on 26 September 2019 a 'conclusive
      grounds' decision was made finding that the appellant was a victim of
      human trafficking or slavery, servitude and/or forced compulsory
      labour.



   2. Her claim for asylum was  refused  on  16  October  2019.   An  appeal
      against that decision was dismissed on 10 December 2019 by  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Clapham.  Permission to appeal  was  granted  by  Upper
      Tribunal Blum on all grounds  on  18  February  2020.  The  respondent
      indicated that she did not oppose the application  for  permission  to
      appeal and I dealt with the error of law decision on the papers  on  9
      June 2020. I was satisfied that First-tier Tribunal Judge Clapham  had
      erred in law for the reasons set out in my decision  of  9  June  2020
      which is appended to this decision at Appendix  A.  I  set  aside  the
      decision on 10 December 2019, preserving the findings of fact set  out
      below. The matter came before me to re-make the appeal.

      The Appellant's Claim

   3. The appellant came from a poor family and left school early  in  order
      to work. At the age of  16  she  was  tricked  into  travelling  to  a
      different part of China for better paid work with other  young  women.
      There, she was held against her will for a year and repeatedly beaten.
      She was then sold to a man who over the period of 26 years  beat  her,
      raped her, forced her to have sex with other men in order to  pay  his
      gambling debts. The appellant tried to run away but  her  husband  had
      links with the local police. He also cut her achilles heel to  prevent
      her from running away. The appellant's husband borrowed a large amount
      of money to pay for his gambling debts. In 2013 he sold the  appellant
      on to loans sharks to pay  off  the  debt.  The  appellant  was  taken
      against her will. She was trafficked to the  UK  where  she  was  held
      against her will and forced into prostitution for over a year.  During
      that period, she was not paid. She  was  beaten  and  badly  assaulted
      before she escaped. She claims that she cannot return to China because
      she is at risk of harm from her previous partner and  is  at  risk  of
      being re-trafficked. She is also unable to relocate to another part of
      China.  She now has serious mental health problems.

      Reasons for Refusal

   4. It is accepted by the respondent that the appellant  is  a  victim  of
      human trafficking and domestic abuse, however the respondent is of the
      view following HC & RC (Trafficked women)  China  [2009]  UKAIT  00027
      that there is sufficiency of protection for the appellant in China and
      that the option of internal relocation is open  to  her.   It  is  not
      considered  that  there  are  very  significant   obstacles   to   the
      appellant's integration to China because she  speaks  Mandarin,  spent
      her formative years in China and is  familiar  with  the  culture  and
      customs.  There are no exceptional circumstances which would result in
      unjustifiably harsh consequences for the appellant. The  appellant  is
      able to obtain medical treatment for  her  mental  health  conditions.
      There  are  no  exceptional  circumstances  which  would  warrant  the
      exercise of discretion outside  of  the  context  of  the  Immigration
      Rules.



      Grounds of Appeal

   5.  The appellant asserts that she is at risk of serious harm in China in
      contravention of the Refugee Convention by virtue of her membership of
      a social group and that to remove her to China would also be a  breach
      of Article 3 ECHR because she is at risk of being  re-trafficked.  Her
      removal from the UK would also constitute a breach of Article 8 ECHR.

      The Burden and Standard of Proof

   6. The burden of proof is on the appellant to demonstrate that as at  the
      date of the hearing there are substantial grounds for believing, or  a
      real risk that she meets the requirements of the Refugee or Person  in
      Need of International Protection (Qualification) Regulations 2006.

   7. In respect of Article 8 ECHR,  the  burden  is  on  the  appellant  to
      demonstrate on the balance of probabilities that  Article  8  ECHR  is
      engaged at which point the burden shifts to the Secretary of State  to
      demonstrate that the interference is justified.

   The Law

   8. In order to qualify for international protection, the  appellant  must
      meet the requirements of the 1951 Convention, Article 1A, as reflected
      in  the  Refugee  or  Person  in  Need  of  International   Protection
      (Qualification)  Regulations  2006  and  the  provisions  set  out  in
      paragraphs 327 to  339P  of  the  Immigration  Rules  which  implement
      Council Directive 2004/83/EC of 29 April 2004 on minimum standards for
      the qualification and status of third country nationals as refugees or
      as persons who otherwise need international protection.

   9. Paragraph 339L of the immigration rules (implementing Article 4(5)  of
      the Directive) indicates that it is  the  duty  of  the  appellant  to
      substantiate the claim and sets out the relevant conditions to be  met
      when assessing evidence.

   Documentation

  10. At the outset of the appeal, I clarified with the parties that we  all
      had the same documentation.  This comprised of the respondent's bundle
      enclosing  the  appellant's  screening  interview,  statement,  asylum
      interview and documents provided in support of  her  asylum  claim  as
      well as the appellant's previous appeal bundle.

  11. The appellant sought to adduce new evidence not  before  the  previous
      Tribunal in  the  form  of  a  new  bundle  containing  an  up-to-date
      psychiatric report,  Country  expert  report  and  further  background
      material. The  appellant's  representative  filed  the  relevant  Rule
      15(2A) notices.

  12. I am satisfied that  in  a  protection  and  human  rights  claim  the
      relevant date is the date of the hearing and that it was fair and just
      to allow the appellant to adduce  further  evidence  relevant  to  her
      current state of mental health as well as the circumstances  in  which
      she would find  herself  in  China.  I  am  also  satisfied  that  the
      background  material  was  not  available  at  the  last  hearing.  Ms
      Pettersen did not object to the  evidence  being  admitted.  In  these
      circumstances, I admitted the new bundle of evidence.

  13. I was also provided with an up to date skeleton argument. Both parties
      confirmed that they had had sight of all of the documents.

  14. I have considered all of the  documentation  before  me  even  if  not
      specifically mentioned.

   The Hearing

  15. Given that it is agreed that the appellant has complex PTSD and  is  a
      vulnerable witness. Since the  factual  findings  in  respect  of  her
      personal  history  are  agreed,  both  parties  agreed  that  it   was
      appropriate to procced by way of submissions only. These are  set  out
      in the Record of Proceedings.

   Findings and Reasons

  16. First-tier Tribunal Clapham accepted the appellant's  account  in  its
      entirety and the Secretary of State does not seek to  challenge  these
      findings. His findings are preserved.

  17.  On  this  basis  the  findings  in  relation   to   the   appellant's
      circumstances are as follows: The appellant came from a  poor  family.
      Her father was a miner. She was born in Guizhou province  in  Southern
      China which is one of the poorest and most economically underdeveloped
      provinces in China. She completed primary education but did not finish
      her secondary school. She had to work so that she  could  continue  in
      education. She was working in a caf� when she and some  of  the  other
      young women who worked there were approached by well dressed  men  who
      offered them well paid work in another part of  China.  The  appellant
      and her friends agreed to go. At this time, she was 16 years old.  The
      girls were taken to  Fujian  province  where  they  were  held  in  an
      abandoned house. The appellant refused to sleep with the men who  were
      brought to the house and remained longer than  the  other  girls.  Her
      captors then threatened to kill her if she did not agree to marry  the
      next man who came. She was then sold to the next man who came  to  the
      house a Mr WBZ. He was ten years older than her.

  18. She was taken to his home in Da Zhi in Fujian province. The  appellant
      was not formally married to the man who purchased her, but she  refers
      to him as her "husband". Mr WBZ was a gambler and a very violent  man.
      Over  a  period  of  26  years  the  appellant  lived  in   unbearable
      conditions. Her husband raped her. He beat her and he  forced  her  to
      have sex with his friends when he needed to raise  money  to  pay  his
      gambling debts. The appellant was desperate. She tried to escape on  a
      few occasions, but the village  was  remote  and  her  husband  always
      managed to find her and bring her back with the help of a relative who
      worked at the police station. Her husband also cut her Achilles tendon
      to prevent her from running away. The appellant was  living  in  fear.
      She had two children, but she  gave  them  to  others  to  look  after
      because she thought her husband would mistreat them. Her husband  said
      they were not his children in any event. The appellant did report  the
      domestic abuse to the police but was told that  this  was  a  domestic
      matter.  The police refused to get involved.

  19. In 2013 loan sharks came to the house and informed the appellant  that
      her husband owed them money for gambling debts and that she would have
      to work for three years to pay off the debts. She was threatened  that
      if she refused to come or if she tried to escape, they would hurt  her
      children. The appellant was taken against her will and trafficked  via
      Malaysia and on to the UK. She was taken to Birmingham where  she  was
      locked in a room in a house. She was not allowed  to  leave.  She  was
      forced to have sex with up to 40 different men  a  day  on  a  regular
      basis. The appellant had a serious vaginal  infection  which  was  not
      treated.  She frequently cried and tried to refuse to do what she  was
      told.  As a result, her minder locked her in a cellar for 5 or 6  days
      with no food. When she was let out of the cellar,  the  minder  and  a
      guard attacked her and then poured boiling oil  over  her  legs  which
      became infected and were very painful.  Her captors  refused  to  take
      her to the hospital and she attempted suicide. After that  she  worked
      as the cleaner/domestic in the brothel until one of  the  guards  took
      pity on her and let her out one  night.  On  escaping,  the  appellant
      approached  a  Chinese  stranger  and  explained  her  situation.  The
      stranger put her in touch with another Chinese  national  who  offered
      her work as a nanny in exchange for food and accommodation. When  that
      family moved, they put  her  in  touch  with  other  people  who  were
      prepared to feed and accommodate her in return for work as  a  cleaner
      in Edinburgh. She was too frightened to contact the authorities in the
      UK because of her fear of being sent back to China.

  20. To quote Dr Craig White;

           "[the appellant has] experienced lack of shelter, lack  of  food
           or  water,  ill  health  without   access   to   medical   care,
           confiscation or destruction of personal  property,  beatings  to
           her  body,  rape,  other  types  of  sexual  abuse   or   sexual
           humiliation, knifing or axing,  torture  that  has  involve  the
           systematic  infliction  of   mental   or   physical   suffering,
           imprisonment forced labour, extortion or robbery,  brainwashing,
           forced to hide, kidnapped, other forced separation  from  family
           members, enforced isolation from others, someone was  forced  to
           betray her and place her at risk of death or injury,  witnessing
           beatings to the head and body,  witnessing  torture,  witnessing
           killing or murder, witnessing rape or  sexual  abuse  and  other
           situations where she was very frightened or in  which  she  felt
           her life was in danger.

           She reported that she has  experienced  beatings  to  her  head,
           suffocation or strangulation,  near  drowning,  other  types  of
           injury to her head  such  as  burns  and  starvation.  Following
           instances when she received beatings and other types  of  injury
           to her head, she experienced a loss of consciousness lasting  in
           the region of a few hours and she reported being near  to  death
           following the episode of starvation".

      Mental health evidence

  21. From the outset of her  asylum  claim,  the  appellant  has  described
      suffering from mental health  problems.  In  the  appellant's  initial
      asylum interview she reports having problems sleeping, suffering  from
      nightmares and headaches. She also states that  she  is  very  anxious
      about going out and meeting strangers and that she  worries  that  the
      traffickers will see her.  She  states  that  her  previous  life  was
      'hell'.

  22. I had before me medical evidence  addressing  the  appellant's  mental
      health. There was a letter from Dr Elspeth Traynor, principal Clinical
      Psychologist Glasgow Psychological Trauma Service dated 24  June  2019
      which was produced by the  appellant  in  support  of  her  claim  for
      asylum,   a  letter  from  Dr   Rachel   Bonney   Principle   Clinical
      Psychologist Glasgow City Health and Social Care Partnership dated  20
      November 2019 which was produced in support of the appeal  before  the
      First-tier Tribunal and more recent evidence in the form of an  expert
      psychiatric opinion by  Professor Craig White issued on  17  September
      2020.

  23. The medical evidence is all consistent in reporting that the appellant
      has severe mental health problems and has been  experiencing  symptoms
      of trauma, which is unsurprising, given  the  appellant's  history  of
      significant, prolonged and intense abuse.

  24. The respondent did not seek  to  challenge  the  medical  evidence.  I
      accept the medical evidence in its entirety.  The  first  two  letters
      were  written  by  senior  clinical  practitioners  working  with  the
      appellant and  Professor  Craig  White  manifestly  has  the  clinical
      expertise to examine the appellant and give an opinion on  her  mental
      health problems.

  25. Professor Craig White's  professional  qualifications,  expertise  and
      experience are set out at paragraphs 4 to 17 of the report and  he  is
      clearly qualified to prepare an expert psychological report.  He  sets
      out the information and evidence he had before him which includes  the
      medical evidence I have listed above, and at paragraphs 37  to  61  he
      explains the manner and tools  of  assessment  including  the  Harvard
      Trauma Questionnaire and Hopkins Symptom  checklist  and  he  declares
      that he believes his opinions to be true.

  26. In  terms  of  symptoms,  the  appellant  is  reported  to  experience
      recurrent thoughts or memories of hurtful and  terrifying  events,  to
      feel as if the events were  happening  again  as  well  as  experience
      recurrent nightmares. She  also  feels  detached  and  withdrawn  from
      people and is jumpy and easily startled.  She  has  trouble  sleeping,
      feels that she has no future. She feels exhausted and has bodily pain.
       She also experiences guilt, blames herself and  feels  humiliated  by
      her experience.  She also  has  difficulty  concentrating  and  making
      plans, has outbursts of anger has lost interest in  daily  activities.
      She feels betrayed, a lack of trust, powerless and  feels  that  other
      people are hostile to her. She also feels terror,  feelings  of  panic
      and extreme nervousness.

  27. She indicated a significant fearlessness of death and  has  previously
      attempted suicide. She has  planned  to  kill  herself  with  sleeping
      tablets and her partner is keeping a close eye on her.

  28. The expert also points to the increased distress to the  appellant  of
      her mental health problems because in her culture, admission of mental
      illness marks someone as weak and mental affliction is seen as  source
      of humiliation and potential ridicule.  He also points  to  the  shame
      and stigma experienced by her.

  29. His unchallenged opinion is that the appellant;

           "has  been  experiencing  clinically  significant  psychological
           symptoms that meet internally recognised diagnostic criteria for
           Complex Post Traumatic Stress Disorder (C-PTSD)  and  Depressive
           Order (see Annex A). This is consistent with research  that  has
           identified  the  cumulative  effect  of  pre-trafficking  trauma
           exposures and trafficking-related trauma, leading to significant
           negative psychological outcomes  beyond  PTSD.  Sex  trafficking
           survivors report significantly more C-PTSD symptoms are,  as  in
           Ms W's case, more likely to have comorbid PTSD and depression."

  30. Professor Craig White points to the fact that there is a real risk  of
      severe and continuing mental health disorders  because  the  appellant
      has  experienced  multiple  intensely  traumatic  events   which   are
      difficult to process.  He also concludes that;

           "The presence of severe  complex  PTSD  symptoms  and  secondary
           depressive   symptoms   are    associated    with    significant
           dysregulation in [her] ability to consider interpersonal  risks,
           threats to her welfare  and  wellbeing,  to  form  trusting  and
           supportive relationships and reliably assess the  intentions  or
           motive of other people. It is my opinion that there  is  a  real
           and significantly heightened risk that she  would  be  extremely
           vulnerable to further exploitation, revictimization and abuse".

  31. In short, the appellant has particularly  complex  and  severe  mental
      health problems. Her neurophysiological  and  psychological  processes
      have been damaged by significant trauma which impact on  her  response
      to fear and threat assessment. She does not have an ability  to  self-
      regulate. At 68 of his report,  Professor  White  points  to  research
      which indicates that people with clinical symptoms and  severe  trauma
      history similar to the  appellant  are  three  times  more  likely  to
      experience and encounter unsafe relationships and revictimization.  He
      also points to the fact that the appellant is at  risk  of  committing
      suicide because she has reported a strong sense of entrapment, is  not
      fearful of death, has made prior attempts, has current specific  plans
      and is experiencing suicidal ideation.



  32. He concludes;


           "This represents a real risk of intensification of suffering and
           on account of her suicide risk, real and present threat  to  her
           life expectancy".



  33. He concludes that without  treatment,  the  appellant's  prognosis  is
      poor. She requires an integrated multidisciplinary care and  treatment
      plan.  The  appellant  is  not  able  to  cope  in  the  UK  with  the
      psychological injuries and being returned to China is likely to worsen
      her mental state.



  34. Professor Craig has researched treatment for mental health  issues  in
      China at 69 to 76. He comments that it is  recognised  that  there  is
      insufficient mental health resources and service  capacity.  According
      to the WHO report the recognition rate of global mental  disorders  in
      China is far below the world average for  instance  21%  in  Shanghai.
      There is a lack of suitably trained mental health staff.  One  of  the
      main problems is perceived stigma in accessing services and  Professor
      Craig's view is that this  with  inadequate  mental  health  services,
      insufficient funding and fragmented  hospital  centred  mental  health
      care  mean  that  the  appellant  would  have  difficulties  accessing
      services.


  35. The lastest Respondent's Country Policy and Information Note on  China
      dated 2021 states at 7.2.2;


           "The 2019 DFAT report noted that: 'Mental  health  services  are
           governed by the Mental Health Law (2013; amended 2018)  and  the
           National Planning Guideline for the  Healthcare  Service  System
           (2015-2020). The government has increased investments in  mental
           health services over the last decade; however,  services  remain
           inadequate to meet demand and mental illness  remains  a  public
           health challenge in China.



           'Estimates suggest 54 million people reportedly  had  depression
           in 2017,  173  million  had  a  diagnosable  mental  illness  or
           psychiatric disorder in 2012 (and only 15  million  of  the  173
           million people sought treatment), and China accounted for 26 per
           cent of global suicides in 2016. Women suicided  at  a  rate  at
           least three times higher than men (the only country in the world
           where this is the case), and those in rural areas suicided at  a
           rate at least three times higher  than  those  living  in  urban
           areas. Unlike in other  parts  of  the  world,  a  low  rate  of
           psychiatric  illness  (particularly  clinical   depression)   is
           associated with suicides in China. This is due to a  combination
           of the unique cultural-socioeconomic  disadvantages  experienced
           by  rural  females  in  China  and  cultural  attitudes   toward
           suicide".




  36. The evidence cited by the  respondent  confirms  the  lack  of  mental
      health professionals, the lack of  funding,  gaps  in  the  supply  of
      services, demand outstripping supply,  the  stigma  attached  to  both
      seeking help and incentivising people from working in the industry.


Expert evidence

  37. There was before me an expert report by Dr Elena Consiglio who I  find
      is qualified to give an opinion on the situation in China. I note that
      much of the source material relied on in her report is similar to that
      relied on by the respondent and her general conclusions in respect  of
      the situation in China do not differ greatly from the Respondent's own
      recent Country Policy  and  Information  Note  on  Modern  Slavery  in
      January 2021. Where there  are  differences,  I  have  relied  on  the
      respondent's own guidance.

      Refugee Claim

  38. It is accepted that the appellant is the victim  of  past  persecution
      and  that  trafficked  women  in  China  fall  into  the  category  of
      particular social group.

  39. It is the  respondent's  primary  position  that  following  HC  &  RC
      (Trafficked women) China  [2009]  UKAIT  00027  there  is  in  general
      sufficiency of protection for trafficked women in China.

  40. Paragraph 2 of the headnote in HC & RC begins;

           "Women and girls in China do not in general face a real risk  of
           serious harm from traffickers".

  41.  Mr  Devlin  submitted  that  the  underlying  reasoning  behind  this
      statement is set out at [55] to [63] of HC. The Tribunal  noted  inter
      alia that China's population numbered 1,330,044,605,  that  the  three
      sending provinces in central China (Anhui,  Henan  and  Hunan)  had  a
      combined population of 223 million inhabitants and that NGOs estimated
      that the number of victims trafficked each year was between 10,000  to
      20,000. The Tribunal concluded that;

           "Although the problem of trafficking in China is a large one  in
           terms of overall numbers, given the small  numbers  involved  in
           relation to the size of  the  female  population  in  China,  it
           cannot be said that the deficiencies  in  the  system  of  state
           protection in themselves  give  rise  to  a  serious  harm  from
           traffickers for women and girls generally...."

  42. However, Headnote (2) continues;

           "Where, however, it can be established in a given  case  that  a
           woman or a girl does face a real risk of being forced or coerced
           into prostitution by traffickers, the issue of whether she  will
           be able to receive effective  protection  from  the  authorities
           will need careful  consideration  in  the  light  of  background
           evidence highlighting significant deficiencies in the system  of
           protection for victims of trafficking. But each  case,  however,
           must be judged on its own facts. China is a vast country, and it
           may be, for example, that in a  particular  part  of  China  the
           efforts to eliminate trafficking are determined and the level of
           complicity between state officials and traffickers is low. If an
           appellant comes from such an area, or if  she  can  relocate  to
           such an area, there may be no real risk to her".

  43. I am satisfied that in the individual case  of  the  appellant,  there
      there is a real risk of her being forced or coerced into  prostitution
      or being re-trafficked for the reasons set out below. In this  respect
      I rely on paragraph 399K of the immigration rules. The  appellant  has
      already been subject to significant, repeated, sustained serious  harm
      and I can see no reason that this would not be repeated. This involves
      considering the appeal on its own facts.



  44. The agents of persecution in this appeal are third  parties  including
      the traffickers and the appellant's husband. I  consider  first  those
      areas where the appellant has already been subject to serious harm and
      whether there is sufficiency of protection available to her  in  those
      areas.

   General comments on sufficiency of protection

  45. HC & RC states at paragraph (1) of the headnote;

     1) Although the Chinese  authorities  are  intent  upon  rescuing  and
        rehabilitating women and  girls  trafficked  for  the  purposes  of
        prostitution, there are deficiencies  in  the  measures  they  have
        taken  to  combat  the  problem  of  trafficking.   The   principal
        deficiencies are the lack of a determined effort to deal  with  the
        complicity of corrupt law enforcement officers and state  officials
        and the failure to penalise as trafficking acts of  forced  labour,
        debt bondage, coercion, involuntary servitude or offences committed
        against male victims.

  46. It is therefore recognised in HC & RC that  there  is  corruption  and
      complicity at a local level between law  enforcement  officers,  state
      officials and traffickers. This headnote was based on what was said in
      the 2008 US Department of State Trafficking in  Persons  Report  which
      was before the Upper Tribunal. At [58] of the decision the Tribunal in
      HC & RC referred to  the  report  and  noted  that  it  provided  that
      "although China was making significant  efforts  to  comply  with  the
      minimum standards for the elimination of trafficking ...  it  did  not
      fully do so and therefore it was placed on the Tier 2 watch list".

  47. HC & RC was promulgated in 2009 which was 11 years ago, and I consider
      more up to date evidence in relation to this issue.

  48. My attention was drawn to the fact that in the US Department of  State
      Report Trafficking in Persons report 2017, China was  downgraded  from
      Tier 2 to Tier 3 of the Watch List. This indicates a  decline  in  the
      authorities commitment to tackle trafficking. The report defines  Tier
      3 to refer to countries whose governments "[did] not  fully  meet  the
      TVPA's minimum standards and were not making significant efforts to do
      so." The current US Department of State Trafficking in Persons  Report
      2020 re-iterates that;

           'The Government of the People's Republic of China does not fully
           meet the minimum standards for the  elimination  of  trafficking
           and is not making significant efforts to do  so;  therefore  the
           PRC remained on Tier 3".

  49. I am satisfied from this that if anything the position has changed for
      the worse since 2009 and there continue to be serious deficiencies  in
      the measures the Chinese authorities have taken to tackle trafficking.
       The reports point to failings in the  identification  of  trafficking
      victims and a lack of reporting statistics in relation to prosecutions
      and assistance. I find that Headnote (1) still applies  and  that  the
      evidence before me does not indicate that the Chinese  authorities  in
      general (apart from at border areas in  respect  of  women  trafficked
      into China  from  other  countries)  have  eliminated  corruption  and
      complicity between criminal trafficking organisations and local police
      and officials. This is also emphasised by Dr Elena  Consiglio  in  her
      very full expert report at pages 74 to 112 of the bundle.  Indeed  the
      respondent's  current  position  is  that   there   continue   to   be
      deficiencies.



  50. I will first consider the risk to the appellant of returning  to  both
      the area where she most recently lived for 26 years and the area where
      she was born and lived until she was 16 years old.

      Risk on return to Fujian and Ghizhou

      Fujian

  51. Miss Pettersen conceded for the respondent that the appellant would be
      at risk of serious harm in Fujian province in the area  in  which  she
      previously lived for 26 years. I am in agreement.  I  have  regard  to
      paragraph 399K of the immigration rules in this respect.  This is  the
      area where the appellant used to live with her husband and  where  she
      was previously the victim of  serious  harm  including  sustained  and
      significant domestic violence over a period of 26  years  as  set  out
      above. Apart from being physically and mentally abused, she was forced
      into prostitution by her husband. I find no reason why she  would  not
      be subject to that treatment  again.   The  appellant  has  only  been
      absent for 7 years and her husband lived  there  for  many  years  and
      there is no reason to believe he would not be there, nor that he would
      not continue to exploit her in the same way with impunity.

  52. This is also the place that the appellant was trafficked to at the age
      of 16 and trafficked from at the age of 42.  The gambling debt has not
      been paid.  I am  satisfied  that  those  people  who  trafficked  her
      initially to the area and the loan  sharks  who  then  trafficked  her
      abroad also have ties with  this  area  and  would  be  aware  if  she
      returned. Since she has been trafficked by them  already  and  escaped
      before she paid off the debt and is highly vulnerable, I find that she
      would be at risk of being trafficked again. I find that  in  her  home
      area there is  no  sufficiency  of  protection  from  the  authorities
      because the appellant was clearly not able to access protection in the
      26 years in which she lived there. The appellant was trafficked to the
      area and sold to her husband. The  authorities  were  aware  that  the
      appellant was being assaulted by her husband and took no  action  even
      when she complained to the police. A police officer assisted to return
      her to her husband when she attempted to escape.  I am satisfied  that
      in her area the traffickers were able to act with impunity  by  virtue
      of the ease with which they trafficked her out of China.

      Guizhou

  53. The appellant was trafficked from her own area Guizhou at the  age  of
      16 and has not had contact with her own parents since then - a  period
      of over 30 years.

  54. Should  the  appellant  return  to  Guizhou,  there  is  a  reasonable
      likelihood that the appellant would not be identified by  the  Chinese
      authorities either on entry or on return to  this  area  as  a  former
      victim of trafficking.  The US Department  of  State  2020  report  on
      Trafficking implies that China lacks procedures for the identification
      of victims and that line officers  are  not  fully  trained  in  their
      implication. This is confirmed in the supporting expert report from Dr
      Elena Consiglio.

  55. I also find that there is a reasonable likelihood that  the  appellant
      would be unwilling to approach the Chinese authorities for  protection
      as a victim of trafficking. Her previous experiences mean that she has
      a profound distrust of the authorities  because  she  had  a  negative
      experience in the  past.  The  police  were  not  able  to  offer  her
      protection against her husband despite reporting incidents of violence
      and even assisted to take her back to her husband when she  ran  away.
      In her asylum interview it is also apparent that the  appellant  views
      the snakeheads and traffickers as being very  powerful  and  connected
      with the authorities.

  56. Further, she is a traumatised and vulnerable  woman  with  significant
      mental health issues and is afraid of people.  She  no  longer  has  a
      supportive family or social network in  this  area.  Her  family  were
      poor. Her father is a miner. The  appellant  states  that  the  mining
      industry in that area has closed  down.   If  her  parents  are  still
      alive, she has no idea if they will be there. And in any event because
      of her shame, the stigma of having been a prostitute, her distrust  of
      other people, her profound mental health problems and  the  stigma  of
      having mental health problems, there is a real risk that she would not
      be able to seek support from her family or  that  they  would  not  be
      willing  to  give  her  support.  Her  family  are  members   of   the
      conservative Bouyei ethnic group.  Indeed, I am satisfied from the  US
      Department of State Report on Trafficking 2020 the appellant is likely
      to face stigmatisation and ostracism because  of  her  involvement  in
      prostitution.

  57. Further Guizhou province  is  one  of  the  poorest  and  economically
      underdeveloped provinces in China and is one of the main provinces for
      trafficking to China according to the UNAIP "The trafficking situation
      in China, 5 March 2011'. This indicates that the authorities  are  not
      able to prevent  trafficking  and  indicates  complicity  between  the
      traffickers and the authorities.  The  US  Department  of  State  2020
      Report on Trafficking notes "an acute lack of protection  services  in
      the south" which indicates that there has not been much improvement in
      the situation since 2011.  On this basis I am not satisfied that there
      is sufficiency of protection for victims of trafficking in this area.

  58. The appellant has already been trafficked from this area and given her
      individual characteristics including her previous history  of  trauma,
      her very poor mental health, her age, her lack of  family  and  social
      support, I am satisfied that there is no good reason  that  she  would
      not be trafficked from her home area again. I find that paragraph 399K
      also applies to Guizhou and that there is a real  risk  of  her  being
      trafficked again in her home area.

      Risk of being re-trafficked in other parts of China

  59. Mr Devlin's first submission is that the appellant would be found  and
      re-trafficked by the same traffickers if she returned to another  part
      of China because her husband still owes money to the loan sharks.  The
      debt has not been re-paid and the police have links all over China and
      it is easy to locate an individual because of the centralised systems.
      In addition, he submits that her husband would attempt to relocate the
      appellant in order to discharge the remainder of the debt and  exploit
      her as he did in the past.  He  submits  that  Mr  WBZ  exploited  the
      appellant for 26 years. He prevented  her  from  escaping.  He  has  a
      relative in the Chinese Police force who was instrumental in capturing
      her when she escaped, and she has not taken her ID card with  her.  He
      pointed to evidence that almost all of the 30,000 police  stations  in
      China have computerised their management of the hukou  and  the  hukou
      records of 650 million people are accessible  via  a  single  national
      computer network. The system is described as  an  all-purpose  control
      system and individual police officers have access to it. The appellant
      made it very clear to the expert that she subjectively  believes  that
      she will be found wherever she goes.

  60. I accept on the lower standard that the appellant was trafficked by  a
      powerful and well organised criminal operation because they were  able
      to operate internationally and were  able  to  traffic  the  appellant
      through various different countries to get her to the UK  using  false
      documentation and also because they  were  also  holding  other  women
      against their will which indicates a significant scale of operation. I
      also agree that were she to return to her husband's area he would have
      a motive for re-trafficking her and that she would be vulnerable to re-
      trafficking in her home area of Guizhou for the reasons I have set out
      above.  Nevertheless, I agree with Ms Pettersen, that it is  difficult
      to see that the appellant's husband or those who trafficked her  would
      be aware of her return to a different area of China after  an  absence
      of 7 years. Although in theory the relative would be  able  to  locate
      her on the system if she were to obtain a hukou or temporary residence
      card, this would pre-suppose that the relative was constantly  looking
      out for  her  return.  China  is  an  enormous  country  with  a  huge
      population. I find that even on the lower standard this risk is remote
      and on that basis, notwithstanding that the appellant  has  a  genuine
      subjective fear  that  she  will  be  tracked  down  by  her  original
      traffickers,  I find that there is no real risk that  the  appellant's
      husband or original traffickers would re-traffic her if  she  were  to
      return elsewhere in China because they would not know she was there.

  61. It is not submitted by Mr Devlin that the appellant would be  at  risk
      in her home area because she would need to  return  to  that  area  to
      obtain a hukou. I find  in  accordance  with  headnote  (4)  that  the
      appellant would  not  need  to  return  to  the  area  where  she  was
      originally registered.

      Prevalence of Trafficking

  62. US Trafficking in Persons report in China 2018 states;

           "As reported over  the  last  five  years,  China  is  a  source
           destination and transit  country  for  men  women  and  children
           subjected to forced labour and sex trafficking"

  63. The respondent's latest information confirms that this  is  still  the
      case. The US report confirms that there  still  exist  well  organised
      criminal syndicates  and  local  gangs  who  play  key  roles  in  the
      trafficking  of  women  and  girls  in  China.  I  am  satisfied  that
      trafficking still takes place in China although in accordance with  HC
      & RC, I find that there is in general no risk of  trafficking  because
      of the sheer size of the population.  However,  it  is  manifest  that
      trafficking still does take place and has not been eradicated.

Risk to the appellant due  to  individual  profile/visible  and  discernible
characteristics

  64. Recent authorities on trafficking make it clear that when  considering
      the risk of an individual being re-trafficking, one must  have  regard
      to the individual's personal visible and discernible  characteristics.
      This is consistent with headnote (2) in HC  &  RC  which  states  that
      "careful consideration" must be given to the background situation  and
      each case must be judged on its own facts.

  65. The appellant has a number of visible and discernible  characteristics
      which make her vulnerable to being re-trafficked in  general  which  I
      set out in more detail below.

  66. I find that the appellant is a highly vulnerable individual. She is  a
      49-year-old woman who has experienced prolonged,  severe  and  intense
      trauma over 28 years or so which has had a very detrimental effect  on
      her mental health. She has severe Complex PTSD and depression. She  is
      also at risk of suicide. I have given  great  weight  to  the  medical
      evidence in respect of her vulnerability, her lack of  self-regulation
      and her inability to protect herself. In the UK, after  the  appellant
      escaped her traffickers, she placed herself in vulnerable situation on
      more than one occasion  and  has  been  reliant  on  the  goodwill  of
      strangers not to continue to abuse  her.  Professor  White  repeatedly
      refers to her vulnerability in this  respect.  His  opinion  which  is
      unchallenged and which I accept is;

           "The risk of [the appellant] being exposed to repeated instances
           of abuse violence and exploitation should not in my  opinion  be
           solely considered in respect of view expressed in respect of the
           capacity of and/or intention of the Chinese  public  authorities
           to ensure the safety protection and care  [the  appellant  ]  so
           clearly  requires.  The  risk  of  repeated  exposure  to  abuse
           degrading treatment and/or exploitation will also be  determined
           by her significantly impaired  ability  to  self  -regulate  her
           emotions, engage in decisions about the risk presented in social
           and interpersonal interactions and take self -protective actions
           particularly  in  respect  of  interactions  with   men   and/or
           confidence in being protected by representations of the  Chinese
           authorities (given her prior reported experiences  of  doing  so
           and being returned to situations in which she  then  experienced
           further emotional sexual and physical abuse)"

  67. On return to China the appellant  would  be  a  single,  49  year  old
      mentally ill  woman  without  any  social  or  family  support  system
      whatsoever. She has had no contact with her children for ten years and
      they last resided in an area which she cannot return to. In  addition,
      she has a lack of education and no vocational or proper skills to gain
      employment. Ms Pettersen did point to the fact that the appellant  has
      some experience of child-minding and cleaning, but these are very  low
      skilled jobs. The expert points  to  the  fact  that  current  age  of
      retirement for females is 50 and discrimination against women  in  the
      labour market on grounds  of sex.  I  also  accept  the  view  of  the
      expert that if she is returned to China the appellant's mental  health
      will deteriorate even further. I  find  that  there  is  a  reasonable
      likelihood that she will not  access  treatment  because  the  medical
      facilities are limited for mental health problems,  her  condition  is
      severe requiring complex multi-disciplinary treatment and she will  be
      reluctant to access treatment due to both the shame of having a mental
      health problem and the shame of being a sex worker.  Viewing  all  the
      characteristics of the appellant holistically, including her age, sex,
      vulnerability and mental health profile,  her  fear  and  distrust  of
      strangers and her shame, I am satisfied that it reasonably likely that
      she would not be able to find work.  It is accepted that the appellant
      is subjectively terrified of being returned. In the UK  in  a  country
      where there is protection, she reports being scared of going  out  and
      being vigilant towards threats. I find that this would  be  even  more
      the case in China. It is said that the Chinese  authorities  will  not
      let their citizens starve, however from the evidence  in  relation  to
      hukous and residence cards I find  that  in  order  to  access  public
      services the appellant would need to be registered and I discuss  this
      below.

  68. I find that the appellant would be vulnerable to  being  re-trafficked
      by virtue of her visible and discernible characteristics which are set
      out at [67] above. I rely on the opinion of Professor Craig White  who
      states;

           "The presence of severe  complex  PTSD  symptoms  and  secondary
           depressive   symptoms   are    associated    with    significant
           dysregulation in her ability to  consider  interpersonal  risks,
           threats to her welfare  and  wellbeing,  to  form  trusting  and
           supportive relationships and reliably assess the  intentions  of
           motives of other people. It is my opinion that there is  a  real
           and significantly heightened risk that she  would  be  extremely
           vulnerable to further exploitation, revictimization and abuse".

      Sufficiency of protection elsewhere in China

  69. I turn to whether if the appellant relocated to another city  or  town
      in China the appellant can mitigate her risk of being re-trafficked by
      seeking protection from the Chinese authorities. I have already  found
      that the Chinese authorities are deficient in identifying  victims  of
      trafficking at [54] above. HC &  RC  refers  to  deficiencies  in  the
      system. The US Trafficking in Persons Report 2020 states;

           "For the third consecutive year the government  did  not  report
           identifying  any  trafficking  victims  of  referring  them   to
           protective services"

  70. The 2018 report also states;

            "The government decreased efforts to protect victims".

  71. The Country  Policy  and  Information  note  2018  relied  on  by  the
      respondent in the refusal letter refers to  maintaining  public  order
      and social stability being the key priorities of the police  in  China
      which outweigh protecting the public from  criminal  activity.  It  is
      said the oversight of the police is limited, localised and ad-hoc.  It
      is also noted that some local authorities have targeted those who make
      complaints against the police  with  punishments  including  arbitrary
      arrest and detention and there is no reliable data to show that police
      and security agents who commit abuses are held accountable  for  those
      abuses or that they generally enjoy impunity. It is also said that  it
      is difficult for ordinary people to pursue  cases  against  officials.
      This suggests that avenues  of  redress  are  limited  and  there  are
      difficulties  in  general  in  obtaining  protection   from   criminal
      activity.

  72. The background evidence is that at local government level there  is  a
      reluctance to tackle trafficking  and  that  there  are  powerful  and
      intertwined interests. There is a large level of corruption at a local
      level. Dr Consiglio points to the abuse and ill treatment  of  victims
      of sexual exploitation at the hands of local police  and  authorities.
      There are laws in place to prosecute traffickers, but  the  government
      did  not  publish  the  number  of  investigations   instigated   into
      trafficking cases.  Dr  Consiglio  concludes  that  victim  protection
      services  are  scarcely  implemented  and  are  overall  deficient  to
      guarantee protection to victims of trafficking  throughout  China  and
      especially in rural areas and especially in the case of female victims
      of human trafficking for the purposes of sexual exploitation. Her view
      is largely based on  the  evidence  from  the  recent  UN  trafficking
      reports and background  evidence  which  is  also  relied  on  by  the
      respondent and does not in my view depart from headnote (1)  of  HC  &
      RC.

  73. The respondent's position is that  the  appellant  will  be  protected
      because there are shelters available for the victims  of  trafficking.
      The respondent pointed to evidence in Refworld in respect of  shelters
      which was taken from the 2018 US Trafficking in Persons report.

  74. The appellant produced the latest US Trafficking in Persons report  in
      China 2020 which states;

           "in prior years the government reported maintaining at least ten
           shelters  specifically  dedicated  to  care   for   victims   of
           trafficking as well as eight shelters  for  foreign  trafficking
           victims and more than 2,300  multi-purpose  shelters  nationwide
           that could accommodate trafficking victims; it did not report on
           these shelters  in  2019.  the  Ministry  of  Civil  Affairs,  a
           nationwide  women's  organisation,  and  grassroots  NGOs  could
           provide victims with shelter, medical care,  counselling,  legal
           aid and social services, as well as rehabilitation  services  in
           some cases.  Access to  specialised  care  depended  heavily  on
           victims' location and gender;  experts  noted  ad  hoc  referral
           procedures and an acute  lack  of  protection  services  in  the
           south, and makes  victims  were  less  likely  to  receive  care
           nationwide. The government  did  not  report  how  many  victims
           benefited from these  services  and  widespread  stigma  against
           victims of sex trafficking likely continued to  discourage  many
           from accessing protection  services.  Implementation  of  a  law
           placing foreign NGOs in the PRC under MPS supervision  continued
           to  impose  burdensome  requirements  and  restrictions  on  the
           activities of civl society organisations including those able to
           provide  services  for  trafficking  victims  and   communicates
           vulnerable to crime"

  75. I find from this that it is in general difficult to access the limited
      assistance and shelters for victims of trafficking.  The  report  also
      states  that  the  efficacy  of  the  victim  assistance  is  unclear.
      Recommendations in the 2020 UN report include;

           "Ensuring that authorities do not subject trafficking victims to
           extended detention punishment or deportation,  expanding  victim
           protection  services  including  comprehensive  counselling  and
           medical reintegration and other  rehabilitative  assistance  for
           male and female victims of sex and labour trafficking".

  76. In 2008, Dr Jackie Sheenan gave evidence to the Tribunal in HC & RC in
      that there was a high demand for shelters and that admission is for  a
      short period only. It was accepted by the panel at [62] that that  the
      capacity of the specialised shelters to take trafficked women amounted
      to about 2000 women out of 10,000 to 20,000 victims of  trafficking  a
      year and that this  is  insufficient  provision.   There  was  nothing
      before me to indicate that anything  has  improved  in  this  respect.
      Having considered all of the evidence before me including the evidence
      in the note of Arguments for the appellant, I find that resources  are
      limited, patchy, inconsistent and unreliable and particularly poor  in
      the south. On the totality of the evidence  before  me,  I  find  that
      these resources are limited.

  77. On this basis I find  that  it  is  not  reasonably  likely  that  the
      appellant will have access to a shelter with specialist  services  for
      the victims of trafficking.

  78. I also find that because of this appellant's individual  profile  that
      there is a real likelihood that she would  not  access  these  support
      services  for  the  reasons  set  out  above  including  her  profound
      vulnerability, her distrust of other people, the shame of having  been
      a prostitute, because of her previous negative experience and  because
      of her perception that the  authorities  are  connected  to  what  she
      refers to as the "snakeheads". Even if  the  appellant  did  access  a
      shelter it would be for a very limited period only.

  79. I am satisfied to the lower standard that there is a real  risk  given
      the appellant's discernible and visible characteristics that she would
      not be able to access shelters or support services.

  80. I am satisfied on the evidence before  me  given  the  particular  and
      individual characteristics of this appellant that  she  would  not  be
      able to access sufficiency of protection either in her home area or in
      other parts of China.

  81. The situation in respect of Victims of Trafficking is confirmed in the
      latest County Information and Policy Note 2021 in relation to  Victims
      of Modern Slavery in China. This states at 2.5.9

           "Overall there remains deficiencies in the government's  efforts
           to combat trafficking with available protection lacking in  some
           cases, particularly for men. Therefore, in general, the state is
           able but not always willing to offer effective protection.  Each
           case however, must be considered on an individual basis"

  82. I find that this appellant would be vulnerable to re-trafficking  even
      in another part of China because of her  specific  characteristics.  I
      accept Professor Craig's opinion that the appellant is very vulnerable
      to exploitation. This is borne out by the appellant's  willingness  to
      trust strangers to assist her in the UK despite knowing  whether  they
      would harm her.  She  has  only  managed  to  survive  in  the  UK  by
      undertaking unpaid work for individuals which arguably is  a  form  of
      exploitation in itself.  In this I distinguish her from the  appellant
      in HC& RC who was found to be streetwise, resourceful, who  had  youth
      on her side and additionally did not suffer from the  profound  mental
      health problems experienced by this appellant.

      Internal relocation

  83. If am wrong that the appellant  is  at  risk  of  being  re-trafficked
      anywhere in China, I turn to the possibilities of internal relocation.
      It has been accepted that the  appellant  is  at  risk  of  being  re-
      trafficked in Fujian Province and I have found that there is a risk of
      her being re-trafficked in her home area of Guizhou.

  84. I turn to the issue of internal relocation in line with the principles
      in Januzi [2006] UKHL 5 and particularly the test set out at [21];

           "The   decision-maker,   taking   account   of   all    relevant
           circumstances pertaining to the  claimant  and  his  country  of
           origin, must decide whether  it  is  reasonable  to  expect  the
           claimant to relocate or whether it  would  be  unduly  harsh  to
           expect him to do so".

  85. The question is whether the appellant could live a  relatively  normal
      life without undue hardship judged by the standards  that  prevail  in
      the country of nationality.

  86. Although the appellant originally asserted  that  she  would  have  to
      return to her home area to obtain a  hukou,  it  is  accepted  by  her
      representative that this is no longer the case and that it is possible
      to obtain one of these  documents  from  a  different  area.  This  is
      consistent with headnote (4) in HC & RC.

  87. Headnote (4) of HC & RC states;

           (4) Due to reforms of the Chinese household registration  system
           known as the "hukou" system  it  is  unlikely  that  a  returned
           trafficked woman would be obliged to return to the  place  where
           she is registered. The reforms have made it relatively easy  for
           ordinary migrant workers to get legal, albeit  temporary,  urban
           registration and there is no reason why this should  not  extend
           to returned trafficked women.

  88. The respondent's position is that there are over 160 cities  in  China
      with a population of over  1  million  but  the  only  city  that  the
      respondent names that the appellant could relocate to  is  Beijing.  I
      take into account that China  is  a  huge  country  with  an  enormous
      population.

  89. The importance of the hukou system (which is  being  replaced  with  a
      residence permit system) is that it is impossible to  obtain  housing,
      employment or public services including medical treatment without this
      document. Mr Devlin's argument is twofold. First, he submits that  the
      appellant falls within the ambit of Headnote (4)  in  the  sense  that
      although it is relatively easy for migrant workers  to  get  temporary
      registration, the appellant is not an ordinary migrant worker  because
      of her individual circumstances.  Secondly, he also submits  that  the
      current  country  background  information   does   not   support   the
      proposition that it is relatively easy to get legal  albeit  temporary
      urban registration in Beijing or other large cities.

  90. The Hukou system is explained in detail in the  respondent's  CPIN  as
      well as examined in the expert report from 36 to 53. I accept that  in
      theory it is possible for an individual to obtain a hukou from another
      regional authority. The appellant  would  have  a  'rural'  designated
      hukou, although reforms have made it possible for such 'rural' holders
      to apply for 'urban' hukous. The process of transferring  a  hukou  to
      another area is complex and costly. There are stringent  requirements,
      and the appellant would importantly need a stable job and housing. The
      higher the level of job and the more it is linked with the  government
      the more likely the success in obtaining a hukou.  As is  pointed  out
      in HC & RC it is now possible to  obtain  temporary  resident  permits
      issued by the local authorities.

  91. The respondent suggests that the appellant could live in a large  city
      such as Beijing but the evidence is that in many  large  cities  there
      are restrictions on the issue of the number of such cards (2.3.4 CPIN)
      and there is fierce competition for  them.  Residence  cards  will  be
      issued to professional workers and public sector workers only.

  92. At 16.1.5 of the CPIN it is stated;

      "The Diplomat noted in February 2017 that;

           "New Hukou rules introduced  by  local  governments  in  China's
           largest cities such as Beijing, Shanghai, Guangzhou and Shenzhen
           as well as Chengdu, Wuhan and Xi'an, make it tough  for  migrant
           workers by grading an application according to a  points  system
           based on an applicant's education level, tax  payment  and  work
           experience...." "

  93. This is also confirmed in the  DFAT  report.  The  appellant  did  not
      complete secondary school, has never worked in Beijing or a  big  city
      has not made tax payments and has no vocational skills. She  would  be
      competing for temporary residence permits against much more  qualified
      individuals. I find that there is a  reasonable  likelihood  that  she
      would not be able to qualify for a temporary permit in Beijing  or  in
      any of the large cities listed above.   Without a  temporary  resident
      permit the appellant would be unable to access public services.



  94. In a large city, she would  be  forced  to  survive  in  the  informal
      economy in a very poor state of health  and  in  these  circumstances,
      there is a real risk of  her  being  vulnerable  to  exploitation  and
      forced into sex work or re-trafficked for the reasons set out above. I
      also find that it would be unduly harsh  for  her  to  live  in  these
      conditions even in comparison with other Chinese nationals because  of
      her specific vulnerabilities including her long history of trauma  and
      mental health difficulties.


  95. It is said by Ms Pettersen that it would be easier for  the  appellant
      to obtain the necessary temporary residence card  in  smaller  cities,
      but I am in agreement with  Mr  Devlin  that  to  obtain  a  temporary
      residence card she would still need to be employed because this is the
      consistent  background  evidence  before  me.  The  respondent's   own
      guidance stresses the difficulties that thousands of individuals  face
      in obtaining temporary residence card even in smaller cities and towns
      and the appellant has her own characteristics which would make it even
      harder for her.


  96. I find that there is a real likelihood given the  appellant's  extreme
      vulnerability, including not least her age, her sex,  her  significant
      mental health problems which would increase  in  China,  her  lack  of
      family and social support, her  lack  of  formal  education  and  work
      experience as  well  as  her  past  as  a  prostitute  and  victim  of
      trafficking that she would not be able to obtain  employment  even  in
      the informal economy and would therefore even in  a  small  city  find
      herself without the documentation  to  obtain  even  basic  levels  of
      support, accommodation or medical treatment. Dr  Consiglio  points  to
      large numbers of migrant workers who migrate to urban areas being left
      without social  assistance  which  is  tied  to  the  place  where  an
      individual has a hukou. She points to  the  migrant  population  being
      particularly vulnerable to criminal networks in these circumstances.


  97. I find that even in a smaller city the appellant would  be  living  in
      circumstances in which she would have no employment,  no  registration
      card which would allow  her  to  access  public  services,  no  family
      support and that she would be vulnerable to exploitation. I find  that
      her mental health  would  deteriorate.  I  do  not  find  that  it  is
      reasonable for her to relocate and that it would be  unduly  harsh  to
      expect her to do so.

  98. For all of these reasons I find that the appellant has shown that  she
      faces a real risk of serious harm on return to China as  a  result  of
      her membership  of  a  social  group  and  that  she  is  entitled  to
      protection in line with the Refugee Convention and Article 3 ECHR.

      Article 8 ECHR

  99. I find firstly that the appellant has established private life in  the
      UK having lived in the UK for 7 years and having been  in  receipt  of
      medical treatment. In this  respect  I  note  that  the  threshold  of
      engagement is low in accordance with AG/Eritrea [2007] EWCA Civ 801.

 100. In terms of Article 8 ECHR it is confirmed in  TZ  (Pakistan)  v  SSHD
      [2018] Imm AR 1301 that if an applicant meets the requirements of  the
      immigration rules, this is dispositive of the human rights appeal.

 101.  In  this  appeal  the  relevant   immigration   rule   is   paragraph
      276ADE(1)(vi). This states;

           (1). The requirements to be met by an applicant for leave to
           remain on the grounds of private life in the UK are that at the
           date of application, the applicant:

           (vi) subject to sub-paragraph (2), is aged 18 years or above,
           has lived continuously in the UK for less than 20 years
           (discounting any period of imprisonment) but there would be very
           significant obstacles to the applicant's integration into the
           country to which he would have to go if required to leave the
           UK.

 102. The appellant must establish that  there  would  be  very  significant
      obstacles to her integration into  China,  were  she  to  be  returned
      there.  In considering these rules my task is to assess the  obstacles
      to  integration  relied  on,  whether characterised as  hardship  or
      difficulty and to decide whether  they  are  'very  significant'  (see
      Parveen v SSHD [2018] EWCA Civ 932).  Parveen is  also  authority  for
      the principle  that  assertions  in  relation  to  obstacles  must  be
      supported by evidence.

 103. I have regard to the following principles. Firstly, in SSHD  v  Kamara
      [2016] EWCA Civ 813 it is said;

           "The idea of "integration" calls for a broad evaluative judgment
           to be made as to whether the individual will  be  enough  of  an
           insider in terms of understanding how life  in  the  society  in
           that other country is carried on and a capacity  to  participate
           in it, so as to have a reasonable  opportunity  to  be  accepted
           there, to be able to operate  on  a  day-to-day  basis  in  that
           society and to build up within a reasonable time  a  variety  of
           human  relationships  to  give  substance  to  the  individual's
           private or family life'

 104. In AS v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 1284 it is said;

           "Consideration as to obstacles to integration requires
           consideration of all relevant factors, including generic ones
           such as intelligence, employability and general robustness of
           character."

 105. The appellant is a citizen of China. She was born, raised and educated
      in China and lived there until she was aged 42. She can  therefore  be
      taken to be an insider in terms of understanding how day to  day  life
      in the country is carried on. She  is  manifestly  familiar  with  the
      language and culture. However, she has now been absent from China  for
      7 years. She spent the previous 26 years  locked  in  an  abusive  and
      claustrophobic relationship where she was subject to  intense  trauma.
      She no longer has contact with her parents,  sibling  or  children.  I
      have found that she has no knowledge of the whereabouts of her  family
      members and I have found above that even if  she  could  locate  them,
      given her history of being trafficked and the shame attached  to  that
      together  with  their  conservative  views  that  they  would  not  be
      supportive to her or willing to accept her into their family unit. The
      appellant is a victim of forced marriage, human trafficking and sexual
      exploitation. From the country background evidence, I find  that  that
      the shame and stigma associated with these  experiences  would  hinder
      her being accepted or building up  new  relationships.  The  appellant
      also has significant mental health problems. I have accepted  and  set
      out the medical evidence which demonstrates that  she  is  fearful  of
      other people and afraid to leave the house and that she is not able to
      protect herself or self-regulate due  to  the  negative  psychological
      effects of the trauma on her. I have also accepted that she is at risk
      of suicide and that if she returns to China  her  mental  health  will
      deteriorate further and that treatment is not available to her for the
      reasons set out above.

 106. The appellant is  an  extremely  vulnerable  individual.  She  is  the
      opposite of a robust and adaptable individual.   I am  satisfied  that
      her vulnerability when combined with her lack of  education,  lack  of
      formal qualifications, lack of vocational skills and  work  experience
      as well as her age and  sex  means  that  she  will  have  significant
      difficulty in accessing employment or  accommodation  and  would  face
      significant difficulties supporting herself. She would also be  likely
      to  experience  a  decline  in  her  mental  health   and   experience
      considerable distress. I find that  these  factors  holistically  when
      combined, would prevent the appellant from participating  in  society,
      to be accepted and  to  build  up  human  relationships.  Taking  into
      account the appellant's individual characteristics, I find that  there
      are very significant obstacles to her integration into China and  that
      she satisfies 276ADE(1)(iv) of the immigration rules.

 107. Since she satisfies the  immigration  rules,  in  accordance  with  TZ
      (Pakistan) v SSHD [2018] Imm AR 1301 I find that this  is  dispositive
      of her human rights appeal and I find that her  removal  from  the  UK
      would constitute a disproportionate interference in her  private  life
      and amount to a breach of Article 8 ECHR.

      Notice of Decision

 108. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal was set aside (see attached)

 109. The appeal is remade and allowed on asylum, Article 3 ECHR and Article
      8 ECHR grounds.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                 R J Owens                         Date 17 March 2021

Upper Tribunal Judge Owens


