
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10749/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 12 March 2018                              |On 30 April 2018              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                    o o a
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Cole, Parker Rhodes Hickmotts Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, OOA, is a citizen of Iraq born in 1986.  By  a  decision
    promulgated on 29 November 2017, I found that the  First-tier  Tribunal
    had erred in law such that its decision  fell  to  be  set  aside.   My
    reasons for reaching that decision were as follows:

         1.   The appellant, OOA, is a male citizen of Iraq who was born  in
         1986.  He arrived in the United Kingdom in April 2016  and  claimed
         asylum.  By a decision dated 22 September 2016,  the  Secretary  of
         State  refused  to  grant  the  appellant  asylum.   The  appellant
         appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Myers)  which,  in  a
         decision promulgated on 7 March 2017, dismissed  the  appeal.   The
         appellant now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

         2.   The appellant is a Kurdish male from Kirkuk.  The judge  found
         that the appellant would be at risk of serious  harm  in  his  home
         area.  The appeal turned on the question of internal flight  within
         Iraq.  At [29], the judge found:

             "In the appellant's case, he gave evidence that he has a  CSID
             which he left at home but it was not possible for  his  family
             to send this to him.  There was no evidence submitted  on  his
             behalf to support this contention and, although the respondent
             has accepted in paragraph 37 of the reasons for  refusal  that
             at present return is not feasible, there is no reason  why  he
             could not provide a copy of  the  CSID  to  enable  the  Iraqi
             Embassy to provide him with a passport or laissez passer."

         3.   Later in the decision [32], the judge addresses  the  question
         of the appellant obtaining a CSID from the consular section of  the
         Iraqi Embassy in London.  She noted that, "if  the  authorities  in
         the IKR [Independent Kurdish Region) considers [the appellant]  for
         return he should be able to provide his family registration details
         by contacting his family who are still in Kirkuk".   At  [33],  the
         judge noted that it may  be  difficult  for  the  appellant  to  be
         returned to the IKR as she  does  not  originate  from  that  area.
         However, she repeated that she had found that it  was  "not  unduly
         harsh for the appellant to be returned to Baghdad and I dismiss the
         appeal on humanitarian protection grounds".

         4.   It would appear to be the case that this  appellant  would  be
         returned to Baghdad given that he is not originally from  the  IKR.
         His ability to live in Baghdad  would,  even  in  the  short  term,
         depend upon his possession of a CSID.  It  would  appear  that  the
         judge's finding at [33] that the appellant  could  be  returned  to
         Baghdad is predicated on the appellant obtaining a CSID  before  he
         travels to Iraq.  I find it was open to the judge to find that  the
         appellant had failed to prove that his family would not assist  him
         in locating and returning to him his CSID which he  left  in  Iraq.
         However, I find [29] unsatisfactory.  It is not clear why the judge
         has not addressed the possibility of the appellant's family finding
         the CSID card where he had left it and then sending the original to
         him in the United Kingdom.  That may indeed  be  impractical  given
         the security difficulties.  The paragraph is puzzling also  because
         the judge seems to believe that, even if he could  not  obtain  the
         original CSID, he would be able to obtain a copy  of  the  document
         which he would use at the Iraqi  Embassy  in  London  to  obtain  a
         passport or laissez passer (or, presumably, a fresh original CSID).
          It is not at all clear from the judge's reasoning how that copy of
         the CSID is to be obtained by the appellant.  It is  possible  that
         the judge considered that, whilst it may be impossible to send  the
         original CSID to the United Kingdom,  a  copy  in  the  form  of  a
         photograph on  a  phone  or  similar  device  might  be  taken  and
         transmitted by email to the appellant.  However, if  that  is  what
         the judge meant to say, then it is not clear why she has  not  said
         it.  It is not for the Tribunal to fill in the gaps in a First-tier
         Judge's reasoning.  I find the judge's handling of the question  of
         internal flight and, in particular, the likelihood of the appellant
         obtaining a CSID before he travels to Iraq to be  problematic;  the
         reasoning is not as clear as it should be.

         5.   In the circumstances, I set aside the  decision.   I  preserve
         all the judge's findings in respect of the appellant's asylum claim
         which are contained in the decision at [19-26].   The  appeal  will
         remain for determination in the Upper Tribunal following a  resumed
         hearing.  The only issue remaining  is  that  of  internal  flight.
         Both parties may adduce evidence on that issue provided  they  send
         copies of the evidence to the other party at least ten  days  prior
         to the resumed hearing.  Copies of any documents exchanged in  this
         way should also be  filed  at  the  Upper  Tribunal.   I  will,  in
         particular, be seeking to determine whether or  not  the  appellant
         can obtain a CSID before travelling to Iraq.  In that regard, I see
         no reason to revisit the judge's finding that no evidence has  been
         submitted to support the appellant's  contention  that  his  family
         cannot send the CSID to him.  Whether the family is prevented  from
         so doing because there is no postal service operating out of Kirkuk
         remains to be determined.  I shall also seek to clarify whether, if
         an original document cannot be sent in the  post,  a  copy  may  be
         taken of the CSID in the manner which I have described  above.   If
         that is the case then I would also expect to receive evidence which
         might indicate whether the Iraqi Embassy in London  would,  on  the
         strength of a copy CSID, issue a new document or laissez passer  to
         the appellant.

         Notice of Decision

         6.   The decision of the First-tier Tribunal which was  promulgated
         on 7 March 2017 is set aside.  The findings of fact at [19-26]  are
         preserved.  The appeal will be heard in the Upper  Tribunal  before
         Upper Tribunal Judge Lane which will remake the decision  following
         a resumed hearing in Bradford on a date to be fixed.

         Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure
         (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008

         Unless and  until  a  Tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
         appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
         shall directly or indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their
         family.  This direction applies both to the appellant  and  to  the
         respondent.  Failure to comply with this direction  could  lead  to
         contempt of court proceedings.

 2. At the resumed hearing at Bradford on  12  March  2018,  the  appellant
    adopted a supplementary statement.  There was no  cross-examination  of
    the appellant.  After I heard the submissions of both  representatives,
    I reserved my decision.

 3. I find that the appeal should be allowed.  The unchallenged evidence of
    the appellant in his supplementary statement is that he has no CSID  in
    his possession, the agent having returned it to Iraq.  The  appellant's
    family in Iraq now claim that the passport  and  the  CSID  were  never
    returned to them by the agent.  Mr Diwnycz, for the Secretary of State,
    did not dispute that claim.   The appellant will be returned to Baghdad
    where, as a Kurdish male, he will find conditions unduly harsh  in  the
    short or longer term.  He cannot fly directly into the IKR.  I have  no
    evidence before me to show that he could gain access to the IKR even if
    such a flight were available.  He could apply  for  a  CSID  whilst  in
    Iraq, but whilst he applies for such a card, he  would  be  exposed  to
    risks.  He cannot travel overland from Baghdad to  the  IKR  without  a
    CSID as he will be unable to pass through numerous checkpoints.

 4.  The  appellant's  evidence  and  that  of  his  family  regarding  the
    disappearance of the CSID has changed the circumstances of this appeal.
     I stress that  the  new  evidence  has  not  been  challenged  by  the
    Secretary  of  State.   In  the  circumstances,  I  accept  Mr   Cole's
    submission that this appellant will be exposed  to  risk  and  that  he
    cannot exercise the option of internal flight to  Baghdad  nor  can  he
    rule out real risk to himself remain in Iraq whilst he either obtains a
    card or seeks to gain access to the IKR.  It follows that,  whilst  his
    continued residence in the United Kingdom may prove  to  be  relatively
    brief should circumstances in Iraq change, his appeal must be allowed.

Notice of Decision

The appellant's appeal is allowed on humanitarian protection grounds.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 20 APRIL 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane



No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date 20 APRIL 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane
