
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/10015/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 28 February 2018                  |On 23 March 2018                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between

                                    [M E]
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                      v

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms. S. Caseley, counsel instructed by Migrant Legal
Project
For the Respondent:    Mr. K. Hibbs, Home Office Presenting Officer


                      ERROR OF LAW DECISION AND REASONS

    1.     The Appellant is a national of  Iran,  born  on  [  ]  1971.  He
    arrived in the United Kingdom on 5.3.16 and  claimed  asylum  the  same
    day, on the basis that he has a well-founded  fear  of  persecution  in
    Iran as a Christian convert.

    2.     His asylum application was refused in a  decision  dated  2.9.16
    and he appealed against that decision. His  appeal  came  before  First
    tier Tribunal Judge Solly for hearing on 20.3.17.  In  a  decision  and
    reasons promulgated on 3.4.17 the Judge dismissed the appeal.

    3.     An application for permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    was made, one  day  out  of  time  and  refused.  The  application  for
    permission to appeal was renewed to the Upper Tribunal,  in  time.  The
    grounds in support of the application asserted that the Judge had erred
    materially in law:

         (i)      in failing to apply the decision in Tanveer  Ahmed  [2002]
         UKIAT 00439 (IAC) to the letters and statements form the  witnesses
         contained in the Appellant's bundle;

         (ii)     in relying on an absence of corroborative evidence;

         (iii)    in failing to apply anxious scrutiny to  the  evidence  of
         Pastor Higham;

         (iv)      in  making  multiple  errors  in  her  approach  to   the
         assessment of credibility;

         (v)      in failing to properly consider  the  Appellant's  refugee
         sur place claim in respect of his attendance at Church in the UK;

         (vi)     in her approach to the issue of evangelism;

         (vii)    in her approach to the risk to the Appellant on return  to
         Iran in light of YouTube posts.

    4.     Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Perkins
    in a decision dated 23.10.17 in the following terms:

         "1.      The grounds are well drawn and I give permission  on  each
         ground.

         2. I am particularly concerned that the Judge had not given  proper
         weight to the opinion of Pastor Higham (ground 3) and the  risk  on
         return because of a YouTube posting showing the  appellant  denying
         Islam (ground 7).

         3. The evidential value of the  circular  letter  of  support  from
         diverse Church members (page A16-A26) is probably modest and is  to
         be read with the detailed support of Pastor Higham but the decision
         to afford it no weight is, subject to argument, startling."

    5.     The Respondent lodged a rule 24 response  on  13.11.17  opposing
    the appeal.




    Hearing

    6.     At the hearing before the Upper Tribunal, despite  the  rule  24
    response but in light of the very robust grant of permission to appeal,
    Mr Hibbs very  fairly  accepted  that  the  grounds  of  appeal  raised
    material errors of law in the decision of  First  tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Solly. I agree. In these circumstances it was  not  necessary  to  hear
    from Ms Caseley.




    Decision

    7.     In light of the express acceptance by the  Respondent  that  the
    decision of the First tier Tribunal contains material errors of law and
    bearing in mind the robust terms of the grant of permission to  appeal,
    I find the decision is vitiated by material error of law. The  decision
    of First tier Tribunal Judge Solly is  set  aside  and  the  appeal  is
    remitted for a hearing de novo before the First tier Tribunal.




    Rebecca Chapman
    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman


    22 March 2018


