
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10163/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 20 January 2020                            |On 10 March 2020              |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT


                                   Between

                                     MI
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr L Rahman, Counsel, instructed on Direct Access
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) the Upper Tribunal makes an anonymity order.  Unless
    the Upper Tribunal or a Court directs otherwise,  no  report  of  these
    proceedings or any  form  of  publication  thereof  shall  directly  or
    indirectly identify the original appellant. This direction applies  to,
    amongst others, all parties. Any failure to comply with this  direction
    could give rise to contempt of court proceedings.

 2. This is an appeal against the decision issued  on  1  October  2019  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Devittie refusing the appellant's  protection
    claim and her claim under Article 8 ECHR.

 3. The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh born in 1969.  She came to the
    UK in 2005 on a visit visa and overstayed  that  leave.  She  has  been
    living with an aunt since then and has two brothers who are settled  in
    the UK.  The appellant claimed asylum on 5 February 2018.   Her  asylum
    claim was made on the basis of having been in an abusive marriage.

 4. The appellant's asylum claim was refused by the respondent on 6  August
    2018. She appealed that refusal to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  the
    appeal came before First-tier Tribunal Devittie on 16  September  2019.
    The First-tier Tribunal refused her asylum claim and also  refused  her
    Article 8 ECHR claim.

 5. The appellant's grounds challenge the findings made on her  history  in
    Bangladesh in so far as they were relevant to her claim under paragraph
    276ADE(vi)  of  the  Immigration  Rules,  that  she  would  face   very
    significant obstacles to reintegration in Bangladesh as a single  woman
    with mental health issues and no family support in Bangladesh.

 6. The First-tier Tribunal records the appellant's evidence regarding  her
    relationship with her brother  in  Bangladesh  and  her  stepmother  in
    paragraph 4(ii) as follows:

         "It was her stepmother and her middle brother, who were sharing the
         house with her.  Her  stepmother  had  never  liked  her  from  the
         outset.   Her  brother  ran  into  a  dispute  with  her  over  her
         inheritance of property from their father.  It was then,  that  her
         brother in the United Kingdom, sponsored her on a family  visit  to
         the United Kingdom.  She arrived in the United Kingdom  on  9  July
         2005.  She has had no further contact with her stepmother  and  her
         brother.  She has learned that her brother has sold their  father's
         property and retained all the proceeds  contrary  to  her  father's
         wishes that the property be distributed equally amongst the four of
         them".

 7. In paragraph 5 of the decision the judge set out the  evidence  of  the
    appellant's younger brother, [T] who lives in the UK.  He  is  recorded
    as having stated:

         "When his father died his brother in Bangladesh  was  very  abusive
         towards the appellant.  He moved to the United Kingdom in September
         2005.  He works at a  restaurant  and  is  settled  here.   He  has
         witnessed his sister's condition  deteriorate  since  her  arrival.
         She spends much time crying.  She has OCD.  It is not safe for  her
         to go out alone.  Since claiming asylum, she is now able to  access
         medical help  and  is  now  undergoing  therapy.   His  brother  in
         Bangladesh has sold all the land that they inherited".

 8. In paragraph 6 the First-tier Tribunal Judge records  the  evidence  of
    the appellant's aunt, [A], confirming the appellant's diagnosis of OCD,
    her  anxiety  and  her  vulnerability  which  makes  life   in   public
    particularly difficult for her.

 9. In paragraph  8,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  accepted  that  the
    appellant  was  a  vulnerable  witness  and  that  her   evidence   and
    credibility had to be assessed in  that  context.   Nothing  before  me
    suggested that the  appellant  should  not  be  treated  as  vulnerable
    witness in these proceedings.

10. The First-tier Tribunal Judge went on in paragraph 9 to find  that  the
    appellant's asylum  claim  arising  from  having  been  in  an  abusive
    marriage was not made out.  There is no challenge  to  that  conclusion
    before me.

11. The judge also found that a claim to be in need of  protection  on  the
    basis of treatment she would face from her brother  and  stepmother  in
    Bangladesh was also not made  out;  see  paragraph  9(ii).   The  judge
    reached this conclusion, in part, because this aspect of the claim  was
    not put forward at the outset of her claim in her  screening  interview
    and despite being asked at the end of her Asylum  Interview  Record  to
    identify any other basis of claim. Also, in paragraph 9(iv)  the  judge
    refers to the evidence of the appellant's brother concerning  a  recent
    visit to Bangladesh, stating:

         "In relation to fearing her brother,  evidence  was  given  by  her
         brother who resided in the United Kingdom,  that  he  had  recently
         travelled to Bangladesh for a three week period.  He did not  state
         that he had in any  way  been  under  threat  of  harm  from  their
         brother.  In my  opinion  he  was  not  able  to  give  a  credible
         explanation as to why, if the inheritance dispute was  between  his
         brother in Bangladesh and their  siblings  in  the  United  Kingdom
         including himself, he was able to travel to Bangladesh without  any
         harm or even the threat of harm being levelled at  him.   The  only
         explanation he provided which I find  entirely  unsatisfactory,  is
         that his brother would not have caused him  any  harm,  because  he
         would have been aware that he was visiting for a short period.   He
         would be minded to harm the appellant because he  would  know  that
         she was there  for  a  permanent  stay.   I  did  not  accept  this
         explanation.  If he had grievances and an  intention  to  harm  his
         siblings, I did not see what difference it would make to  him  that
         the one was staying for a short period and the other was there  for
         a longer period.  In any event, he  would  have  more  apprehension
         about his brother, and not the appellant, who  is  a  single  woman
         with no male protection".

12. The judge went on to find in paragraph 9(v):

         "It  is  uncontested  that  the  land  that  was  subject  to   the
         inheritance dispute has been disposed of by their brother  and  the
         proceeds have been realised.  This was  more  than  fourteen  years
         ago.  It is difficult in these circumstances  to  accept  that  the
         brother will still have a reason to perceive either  the  appellant
         or her siblings as posing a threat of harm to him.  I do not accept
         the suggestion that the brother would think that they would reclaim
         the land after fourteen years".

13. The judge went on to state in paragraph 10:

         "In the light of these unsatisfactory features I make the following
         findings of fact:

         I do not accept that the appellant  has  established  that  she  is
         estranged  in  any  way  from  any  of  her  immediate  family   in
         Bangladesh, including  her  brother  and  her  stepmother.   In  my
         opinion her evidence in this regard is entirely contrived".

14. In paragraph 12 the judge  turned  to  an  assessment  of  whether  the
    appellant would face "very significant obstacles" to  reintegration  in
    Bangladesh.  He found as follows:

         "(i) I have found that the appellant does have  a  family  who  are
             close to her and upon whom she could rely  for  support.   Her
             evidence that she fears harm from  them  I  found  to  be  not
             credible.  In addition, the appellant does have  two  brothers
             settled in the United Kingdom who are in full-time  employment
             and an aunt with whom she lives, who runs a business and is  a
             qualified accountant.  The appellant's brother  says  that  he
             would not have the resources to provide any financial  support
             to the appellant.  The appellant's aunt  also  says  that  she
             would not be able to provide any support in financial terms to
             the  appellant  in  Bangladesh.   I  accept  that  there   are
             financial limits a family member's capacity to provide support
             to those living outside the United Kingdom.  I do not  however
             accept that her  three  immediate  relatives  that  have  been
             mentioned in these proceedings, who are in full-time  economic
             activity, would not be able to provide even  modest  financial
             support  to  the  appellant  in  Bangladesh.   Such  financial
             support would provide  significant  means  to  facilitate  her
             integration in Bangladesh.  She has lived in that country  for
             most of her life and she has family members to  whom  she  can
             return.

         (ii) I accept that the appellant does suffer from ill health and in
             particular that she suffers  from  depression.   There  is  no
             suggestion that she could not get treatment for depression  in
             Bangladesh.  The evidence of the appellant's aunt and brother,
             is that the appellant is a person who  needs  daily  care  and
             that she cannot perform even  basic  tasks,  like  walking  in
             traffic or attending  appointments.   I  do  not  accept  this
             evidence as credible.  The witnesses who  gave  this  evidence
             are in full-time employment and there was no indication in the
             evidence as to who was this appellant's full-time  carer.   In
             my opinion she has none because she does not need  one.   They
             stated she has poor memory, needs personal  care  on  a  daily
             basis, is unable to negotiate her  way  through  traffic  when
             walking and is unable to socialise.  I would simply point  out
             that there is no medical evidence to  support  the  conclusion
             that this is a person who is in need of daily care.  I have no
             doubt whatsoever that if this was the case,  the  close  bonds
             between this appellant and her brother and  aunt,  would  have
             meant that such evidence  would  have  been  obtained  from  a
             medical expert."

15. The judge indicated in paragraph 14 of the decision that:

         "I have also found that she  is  not  estranged  at  all  from  her
         immediate family members including her stepmother and  her  brother
         in Pakistan and that these are people who would  be  supportive  of
         her if she returned".

16. The judge therefore  concluded  regarding  the  appellant's  Article  8
    claim, in paragraph 15:

         "I accept that she would suffer a measure of social stigma  because
         she is a divorced woman but I do not accept that with  the  support
         of family members in  Pakistan,  this  situation  would  create  an
         intolerable situation for her.  I accept that she  has  resided  in
         the United Kingdom for fifteen years and is reluctant to return  as
         she has become accustomed to life here and has  established  strong
         bonds with her family members in the UK".

17. The grounds of appeal challenge the decision of the First-tier Tribunal
    not as regards the findings on her protection claim but as regards  the
    assessment of "very significant obstacles to reintegration"  assessment
    under paragraph 276ADE(vi).  The grounds of appeal  maintain  that  the
    finding that the appellant will have the support from  her  brother  in
    Bangladesh and be able to live with him and her stepmother is perverse.
     This is because it was accepted that the brother  in  Bangladesh  took
    the inheritance of all of the siblings and sold it  keeping  the  funds
    for himself.  The grounds maintain in paragraph 1(a):

         "In essence, the  Judge  accepts  that  the  brother  swindled  his
         siblings, including the appellant, out of  their  inheritance.   To
         then find in  paragraph  10  that  that  (sic)  appellant  has  not
         established 'in any way' that she is  estranged  from  her  brother
         must be irrational".

18. The grounds go on to argue even if the difficulties the appellant faced
    when living with her brother and stepmother did not show a real risk of
    serious harm on return, the judge was  still  required  to  assess  the
    evidence of the appellant and her brother as to the brother  no  longer
    being willing to have her in the family home and  bullying  her  whilst
    she was still living there. It was accepted in paragraphs 9(iv) and (v)
     that the brother in Bangladesh took the inheritance of the siblings in
    the UK. This was evidence that supported the appellant's claim  not  to
    be welcome in family home.  The  evidence  of  the  appellant  and  her
    brother on her mistreatment by her brother and her  stepmother  because
    they could not tolerate her OCD  and  the  appellant  being  unable  to
    return to live with them now was not questioned at the hearing  by  the
    respondent or the judge. The grounds also refer to the appellant giving
    details of the verbal abuse she suffered from her brother in her asylum
    interview.

19. It is my conclusion that the grounds of appeal show a material error of
    law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal in the assessment of the
    evidence  concerning  very  significant  obstacles  to  the   appellant
    reintegrating in Bangladesh.

20. There was evidence before the First-tier Tribunal on  the  difficulties
    the appellant faced in the past from  her  brother  and  stepmother  in
    Bangladesh. The appellant provided  evidence  on  this  in  her  asylum
    interview. In response to questions 35, 36 and 37, the appellant stated
    that after her father died her brother in Bangladesh was "a bit  funny,
    different" and then she was brought to the UK by a UK based brother. In
    response to  question  36  she  stated  that  she  did  not  return  to
    Bangladesh having been granted a visit visa because "all of the  family
    here and everyone looking after me I enjoyed  it  and  wanted  to  stay
    here.  There was no one to return back to and with all the problems".

21. In response  to  question  38  she  stated  that  "my  brother  started
    torturing me" after her father died and then she was brought to the UK.
     In response to questions 53 to 58 the appellant stated that after  her
    father passed away her relationship with  her  brother  and  stepmother
    "got bad" as "they didn't understand I was not well".   She  refers  in
    the response to question  55  to  the  brother  and  stepmother  making
    comments about how she washes her hands all the time as a result of her
    OCD.  In question 56 she was asked "Was there any other incidents after
    your father died?"  She replied "no not any other incidents.  My father
    took me to  the  doctors  to  get  depression  medications,  my  father
    understood but they didn't understand what I was going  through".   She
    confirmed in paragraph 57 that she remained living with her brother and
    stepmother after  her  father's  death.   She  stated  in  response  to
    question 58 that "life was not good because they  were  always  arguing
    quarrelling calling me mad.  I was going through  a  bad  time  and  my
    brother brought me over here so I can freshen up and clear my mind".

22. At question 59 of the Asylum Interview Record the appellant  was  asked
    when she had last had contact with her  brother  and  stepmother.   Her
    response was as follows:

         "Not much occasionally when I go to my brother's  house  they  ring
         but he doesn't really want to speak to me.  They think that I might
         return to Bangladesh, they don't really like me".

23. The appellant was asked in question 60 whether she feared  her  brother
    and stepmother or they just did not like  her.   Her  response  was  as
    follows:

         "I fear them when I go to the bathroom and wash my hands they  tell
         me off.  I scream sometimes when I am asleep.   They  call  me  mad
         that I am screaming and shouting in my sleep,  I  am  mentally  not
         well".

24. In response  to  question  72  of  the  Asylum  Interview  Record,  the
    appellant stated:

         "I don't want to return back because I have got depression, I don't
         get along with my brother and stepmother,  everyone  calls  me  mad
         there.  I have no one to go to there.  I have stayed here for  such
         a long time where I have family and support".

25. In question 73 the appellant was asked whether she could not go to stay
    with other family members in Bangladesh.  Her response was as follows:

         "My own brother is not giving me a place to stay, whereas they  are
         cousins and aunties - how would they let me stay there?"

    The appellant went on to state that her family in Bangladesh would  not
    give her a place to live, would not check on her as her family  in  the
    UK did.  In response to question 74 she confirmed that her brother  and
    aunt in the UK have been supporting her financially.

26. At the end of the interview the appellant was asked if  she  wished  to
    add anything.  She stated:

         "Yes I have been in the country for thirteen years, I would like to
         remain.  I have two brothers an auntie and uncle who look after me.
          I don't want to return back to my stepmother and if I do they will
         call me made (sic) and send me to Pabana Mental Institute".

    The appellant also stated that:

         "I don't want to return to Bangladesh where I am not welcome  I  am
         depressed that will increase if I do".

27. The evidence before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was  contained  in  the
    witness statements of the appellant, her  brother  and  her  aunt.   In
    paragraph 11 of her witness  statement  dated  17  September  2018  the
    appellant stated:

         "11. I found myself alone and in a hostile environment  again.   My
             eldest brother, [M], was  settled  in  the  UK.   My  youngest
             brother, [T], was away in Sylhet town studying at  university.
             They both had always been very  loving  towards  me  like  our
             father.  But neither of them were there to help me.

         12.  Instead, my stepmother and middle  brother,  [X],  shared  the
             house with me.  My stepmother never  liked  me  but  while  my
             father lived she controlled her feelings towards me.  When  he
             died, she  mocked  and  verbally  abused  me.   [X]  was  more
             interested in swindling me out of my share of  the  house  and
             made me aware that he didn't want anything to do with me.  [M]
             heard about how I was being  treated  and  suggested  that  he
             sponsor me for a visit to the  UK  to  stay  with  him  for  a
             holiday.  My stepmother and [X] were pleased with the idea.

         13.  I arrived in the UK on  a  visit  visa  on  9  July  2005  and
             overstayed.  I stayed with my immediate family here.  I had no
             further contact with my  stepmother  or  [X]  but  have  heard
             through my brothers here that [X] has sold our  land  and  has
             kept all the money he  received  instead  of  dividing  it  up
             between the four siblings".

28. The appellant's brother, [T], stated in his witness statement dated  17
    September 2018 in paragraph 2:

         "I moved away for my studies around 2000.  I  used  to  visit  from
         time and time and as my father became very ill, my  stepmother  and
         my brother [X] used to threaten  her  that  if  she  didn't  behave
         normally, she would be thrown out of the  house.   When  my  father
         died, they increased their bad behaviour towards her.   They  would
         taunt [MI] by calling her mad and that she was evil for not staying
         with her husband and that she was an unwanted  burden.   My  sister
         became very withdrawn and very depressed.  My  brother  who  is  in
         England and I thought that she needed to be with loving members  of
         her family otherwise she was  going  to  deteriorate  further.   We
         applied for her to visit the UK".

29. The appellant's brother also stated  in  paragraph  4  of  his  witness
    statement concerning the brother in Bangladesh:

         "My brother in  Bangladesh  has  now  sold  all  the  land  we  all
         inherited from our father and he has kept all the money.   We  have
         no contact with him as he has misbehaved with our sister  and  with
         our finances.  We have some distant relatives who live elsewhere in
         Bangladesh and they have told  us  that  he  now  lives  in  rented
         accommodation in Sylhet town".

30. The evidence given on this matter by the appellant, her brother and her
    aunt, as recorded in the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal,  is  set
    out above.

31. Having made adverse credibility findings on the appellant's claim  that
    she would be seriously mistreated by her husband or his  family  or  by
    her brother and stepmother to the extent that  she  could  make  out  a
    protection claim, it was open to the First-tier Tribunal to  find  that
    the evidence concerning her ability to return to live with her  brother
    in Bangladesh and receive support from him was not credible but that is
    not what the judge did here.  He did not address the  evidence  of  the
    appellant and her brother on this issue, that evidence being consistent
    and the appellant's evidence on this  issue  in  the  asylum  interview
    being quite detailed. Also, the judge  accepted  that  the  brother  in
    Bangladesh had taken all of the inheritance which was at least  capable
    of being consistent with the appellant's evidence  on  difficulties  in
    relations with the brother in Bangladesh. It is difficult to  reconcile
    the finding that all of the inheritance had been taken by  the  brother
    in Bangladesh and the evidence of the appellant and her brother on  how
    she was and would be  treated  by  her  brother  with  the  finding  in
    paragraph 10 that there was no evidence at all of any estrangement.

32. There was also no issue here of the appellant having some mental health
    problems that could form the basis of  dislike  from  the  brother  and
    stepmother and their not wanting her to live with them.  As  above,  in
    paragraph 8 the judge accepted  that  the  appellant  is  a  vulnerable
    witness. The First-tier Tribunal accepted in paragraph 12(ii) that  the
    appellant suffers from depression.

33. This assessment of whether the appellant could return to live with  her
    brother in Bangladesh or in  some  other  way  be   offered  sufficient
    support and protection by him  was  critical  here  where  the  country
    information before the First-tier Tribunal  included  material  showing
    that life in Bangladesh as a single woman is  difficult,  even  without
    the individual having mental health problems. The  Country  Policy  and
    Information  Note  (CPIN)  "Bangladesh:  Women  fearing  gender   based
    violence" dated  January  2018  was  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    Paragraph 4.7.1 of this document states :

         "Several sources, consulted during  the  Home  Office  Fact-Finding
         Mission (FFM)  to  Bangladesh  in  May  2017,  noted  that  it  was
         difficult for single women to relocate, rent a  property  alone  or
         find employment.  ASK stated

             'There are big problems with the social acceptance  of  single
             women, even for educated women who  are  working.   There  are
             also financial constraints.  To live without male  support  is
             almost impossible.  Bangladesh  is  a  very  family-orientated
             society.  Even  educated  women  are  afraid  to  leave  their
             families.'

         The sources indicated that there may  be  exceptions  in  terms  of
         access to employment for wealthy professional women, or those  with
         family support, but that that renting a  property  alone  would  be
         difficult".

34. It was my conclusion that the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  on
    whether  the  appellant  would  face  very  significant  obstacles   to
    reintegration in Bangladesh disclosed a material error on  a  point  of
    law for the reasons set out above. I therefore found that the Article 8
    ECHR decision had to be set aside to be re-made.

35. The parties before me agreed that in the event of an error of law being
    found I could proceed to  re-make  the  appeal  on  the  basis  of  the
    evidence before me.

36. Firstly, I must assess whether the evidence of the  appellant  and  her
    brother of her being unable to return to  live  with  her  brother  and
    stepmother in Bangladesh is  credible.   I  begin  that  assessment  by
    taking full account of the  fact  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  made
    unchallenged findings that her  claim  of  a  threat  from  her  former
    husband and his family or a threat of  serious  mistreatment  from  her
    brother and stepmother such that a protection claim was made out lacked
    credibility.  I considered the appellant's evidence on being unable  to
    return to live with her brother and the bullying treatment she received
    in the past when she did live with him carefully and in the context  of
    the adverse credibility findings on her protection claim.

37. Having done so, it is my conclusion that the  appellant's  evidence  on
    having difficulties with her brother and  stepmother  before  she  left
    Bangladesh and their being unprepared to have her return to  live  with
    them now was credible. Her evidence on the inability of her brother and
    stepmother to  be  able  to  tolerate  and  her  OCD  and  anxiety  was
    consistent and detailed. Her mental health problems  were  accepted  by
    the First-tier Tribunal even if the level of care she requires was not.
    Her evidence was   supported by that of her brother. As before, it  was
    accepted that the brother in Bangladesh has also acted unfairly towards
    the other siblings regarding their inheritance.

38. Certainly, her relatives in the UK can be expected  to  send  money  to
    support the appellant in Bangladesh but the extract from the  CPIN  set
    out above indicates that financial independence is  not  sufficient  to
    allow a single woman to live alone  in  Bangladesh.  That  is  so  even
    before the appellant's mental health issue are taken into account.  The
    appellant's depression has  been  accepted  and  the  evidence  on  her
    traits of OCD shown by repeated handwashing, needing to use tissues  in
    order to touch appliances such as light switches and high  anxiety  was
    set out consistently in the evidence of the appellant, her brother  and
    her aunt.

39. It is therefore my conclusion that  the  appellant's  circumstances  on
    return meet the high  threshold  for  a  finding  of  very  significant
    obstacles to reintegration and that she meets paragraph 276ADE(vi). Her
    claim under Article 8 ECHR is allowed.

Notice of Decision

40. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal discloses an error  of  law  in
    the assessment under paragraph 276ADE(vi) of the Immigration Rules.

41. The Article 8 EHCR appeal is re-made as allowed.


Signed: [pic]                                         Date: 5 March 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt
