
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10172/2016 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House by remote means          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 8 December 2020                            |On 2 February 2021            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES

                                   Between

                                    j j m

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M. Bovey QC, instructed by Drummond Miller
(Glasgow)
For the Respondent:    Mr D. Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REMITTAL


 1. The appellant, a national  of  Pakistan,  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal against the decision of the Respondent on  29  September  2016
    refusing his protection claim.  The First-tier Tribunal  dismissed  his
    appeal.  He now appeals,  with  permission  granted  by  this  Tribunal
    following the reduction of an earlier refusal by  Interlocutor  of  the
    Court of Session, against that decision.

 2. The appellant's last entry to the United Kingdom was as a spouse on  21
    December 2009.  (He has since claimed that the  relationship  on  which
    that application, and an appeal against its refusal, was  based,  meant
    nothing to him).  The leave he was granted was  due  to  expire  on  21
    March 2012.  On 16 March 2012 he applied for its extension on the  same
    basis.

 3. In the mean time he had  become  in  August  2011  the  subject  of  an
    extradition request by the United States of America with a view to  him
    standing trial on an indictment alleging various offences of fraud.  He
    was also under investigation for an offence of a  completely  different
    nature in the United Kingdom.  In late 2014 he was convicted at Glasgow
    Sheriff Court of the offence of assault with intent to  rape.   He  was
    sentenced to three years' imprisonment.

 4. At the end of 2014 the  appellant  was  served  with  notice  that  the
    Secretary of State proposed to make a deportation order against him  as
    a foreign criminal.  In February  2016  his  extradition  was  ordered.
    Following his release from custody he lodged an asylum  claim  in  July
    2016.  The basis of his claim is that he has converted  from  Islam  to
    Judaism and would be at risk of persecution in Pakistan, the country of
    his nationality; and that if extradited to the USA he would be at  risk
    of being returned from there to Pakistan.  The  appellant's  conversion
    is said to have been accomplished on-line while he was in custody, with
    the assistance of a Rabbi in California.  He was unable to  discover  a
    Rabbi at the Reform Synagogue he said he had been  attending  for  many
    years.

 5. The Secretary of State's response was to reject his asylum application.
     The claim was certified under s 72.   In relation to  the  appellant's
    assertions apart from his  claim  under  the  Refugee  Convention,  the
    Secretary of State observed that "in this case removal is  to  the  USA
    and not to Pakistan", and gave her reasons  for  considering  that  the
    appellant would not be at risk of ill-treatment in the USA,  nor  would
    he be at risk of return by the USA to Pakistan if he were  at  risk  of
    ill-treatment in Pakistan.

 6. On appeal, the First-tier Tribunal, sitting  as  a  panel,  upheld  the
    certification.  It disbelieved the appellant's claim to conversion.  It
    concluded that the USA has a functioning judicial and protection system
    and that if removed there the appellant would not be at risk  of  being
    treated  contrary  to  articles  2  or  3,  would   not   be   detained
    indefinitely, and would not be removed to Pakistan if he established  a
    well-founded fear of ill-treatment there.   Permission  to  appeal  was
    refused by the First-tier Tribunal, and by this Tribunal on 6 September
    2019.

 7. The appellant challenged the latter decision by Petition to  the  Court
    of Session.  Those proceedings were compromised on the basis of a Joint
    Minute agreeing (only) four points upon which it was arguable that  the
    First-tier  Tribunal  had  erred  in  its  approach  to  the  evidence.
    Permission to appeal to this Tribunal was granted on 29 July 2020.

 8. There had, however, been an important  development  in  the  USA.   The
    indictment against the appellant  was  dismissed  on  2  October  2019.
    Accordingly, on 10 October 2019 the Edinburgh Sheriff Court  discharged
    the appellant's extradition.  These events wholly changed the focus  of
    the appellant's  case,  because  there  was  now  no  prospect  of  the
    appellant's removal to the USA.  The Petition stated  at  paragraph  11
    that:

             "The deportation order is  still  extant  and  appears  to  be
             operative to remove the  petitioner  to  Pakistan...  [I}t  is
             believed that the respondent still [sic]  proposes  to  remove
             the petitioner to Pakistan."

 9. In parallel, the appellant issued a pre-action protocol letter  seeking
    withdrawal of the deportation order.  The Secretary of State's response
    was that deportation to Pakistan would not breach the United  Kingdom's
    obligations, and the deportation order was not withdrawn.

10. The assertion made in paragraph 11 of the Petition was somewhat side of
    the  mark.   The  deportation  order  does   not   constitute   removal
    directions, and it does not specify any destination.  Rather, it simply
    requires the addressee to leave the United Kingdom and not return: (see
    s 5(1) of the Immigration Act 1971).  It may specify a place  to  which
    the individual may be removed if he does not comply.  Any such  removal
    would require a separate decision, under paragraph 5 of Schedule  3  to
    the 1971 Act.  The reason for specifying a possible destination  is  so
    that any claim or appeal  can  be  focussed.   There  is  no  longer  a
    requirement under the Immigration  (Notices)  Regulations  2003  for  a
    prospective destination to be specified;  but  in  practical  terms  an
    appellant cannot review his position or formulate any objection to what
    is proposed, unless he knows  what  he  faces.   Even  an  acknowledged
    refugee may under certain circumstances lawfully be removed to a  place
    where he will  not  be  persecuted  (see  32  and  33  of  the  Refugee
    Convention); and many human rights claims have to be based on  evidence
    about how the individual would be treated in a particular country.

11. In the present case, the appeal has been based on the proposed  removal
    to the USA by way of extradition.  The posibility of  ill-treatment  in
    Pakistan therefore only fell to be considered as befalling a person who
    had failed to make or had failed to establish a claim in the USA.  That
    such a person ought nevertheless to be regarded  as  at  risk  of  ill-
    treatment upon removal from the USA in accordance with some speculation
    that that might happen is little more than fanciful.  Now that  removal
    is not to be to the USA, however, the present challenge, to removal  to
    Pakistan, is the one that needs to be faced, both by the  Secretary  of
    State and, if necessary, by the Tribunals.

12. The material dealing with this aspect of the case consists of part only
    of the eighth (sic) Inventory of Productions, which was accompanied  by
    an  application  under  rule   15(2A)   and   singularly   ill-focussed
    submissions.  We admit items 1, 2 and 3 of that Inventory.   They  show
    an error of law of the type identified in E & R v  Secretary  of  State
    for the Home Department [2004] EWCA Civ 49: there is no doubt about the
    facts they demonstrate;  their  non-production  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal is  not  the  appellant's  fault  because  they  were  not  in
    existence; but they demonstrate that, as it turns out,  the  First-tier
    Tribunal erred in considering that the appellant would  be  removed  to
    the USA.

13. The Secretary of State now  needs  to  consider  the  validity  of  the
    appellant's claim on the basis of his removal directly to Pakistan, and
    if so advised indicate to the appellant that removal to that country is
    now envisaged.  None of this affects the deportation order  itself:  it
    is a question of re-stating to the appellant what consequence he  faces
    if he does not himself comply with that  order.   When  that  has  been
    done, the appellant's appeal will need to be re-determined on the basis
    that removal will not be to the USA.

14. At the hearing we directed the  Secretary  of  State  to  consider  her
    position and if so advised issue a supplementary  Reasons  for  Refusal
    Letter within three months, taking into account any further submissions
    made by or on behalf of the appellant within two weeks.

15. We set aside the First-tier Tribunal's decision for error of  law.   We
    remit the appellant's appeal for a fresh determination by a differently
    constituted First-tier Tribunal no earlier than three months after  the
    date of this decision, but as promptly as may be thereafter.





                                                          C.M.G. Ockelton


                                                           C. M. G. OCKELTON
                                        VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                       Date: 11 January 2021

