

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Number:
PA/10298/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                       |    Decision & Reasons           |
|                                       |Promulgated                      |
|On 14 March 2018                       |    On 09 April 2018             |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DEANS

                                   Between

                                     A S
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Winter, Advocate, instructed by Katani & Co,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. Judge of the First-tier Tribunal S Gillespie dismissed this appeal on
      protection and human rights grounds.


   2. The appellant is a national of Sudan.  He claims to be of the Berti
      tribe and to have been detained and tortured in Sudan.  He came to the
      attention of the authorities because he was sending money from
      Khartoum to help his tribe.  The judge was not satisfied the
      appellant's evidence was credible and found the appellant would not be
      at risk on return to Sudan.

   3. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that the judge's
      credibility findings were arguably flawed.  In addition it was
      arguable that under current country guideline cases the judge erred in
      not allowing the appeal on the grounds that as a member of the Berti
      tribe the appellant was a non-Arab Darfuri.

Submissions
   4. Before me Mr Winter argued that the judge erred by failing to have
      regard to the country guideline cases of AA(non-Arab Darfuris -
      relocation) Sudan CG [2009] UKAIT 00056 and MM (Darfuris) Sudan CG
      [2015] UKUT 00010.  Instead the judge relied on IM & AI (risks -
      membership of Beja Tribe, Beja Congress & JEM) Sudan CG [2016] UKUT
      00188.  In IM & AI, at paragraphs 216 and 217, it was made clear that
      the country guidance in respect of Darfuris was unchanged.  The case
      of MM was in the appellant's bundle before the First-tier Tribunal.
      It was pointed out that the respondent had accepted and recorded in
      the reasons for refusal letter that the appellant was of the Awlad
      Almin sub-tribe of the Berti, and therefore a non-Arab Darfuri.


   5. Mrs O'Brien nevertheless contended on behalf of the respondent that
      not all non-Arab Darfuris should be considered at risk.  The country
      guideline case of IM & AI showed that the position in Sudan had
      altered and a more differentiated approach should be taken.  She
      acknowledged, however, that there were concerns about the judge's
      credibility findings.

   6. Mr Winter contended that if I were satisfied there was an error of law
      in the decision of the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal then I should
      allow the appeal on the basis that the appellant was at risk as a non-
      Arab Darfuri.  Part of the difficulty that has arisen in this appeal,
      however, originates from the way the appeal was argued before the
      First-tier Tribunal.  There the emphasis seems to have been on the
      appellant's alleged detention and torture rather than on his
      ethnicity, which was undisputed.  It may have been this emphasis which
      led the judge to focus on the allegations of detention and torture and
      to disregard the question of risk arising from ethnicity.


Discussion
   7. While Mr Winter pointed out that if the country guideline case of MM
      were to be followed then the appellant would succeed, the respondent's
      position is that even though the appellant is by ethnicity a non-Arab
      Darfuri not everyone in this category is now at risk.  Because the
      issues arising from the appellant's ethnicity were not properly
      considered before the First-tier Tribunal, the respondent has not had
      the opportunity of arguing that there are exceptions to the
      categorisation of risk set out in MM.  In my view before the Upper
      Tribunal makes a decision on the risk to the appellant as a non-Arab
      Darfuri, the respondent should have an opportunity to explain why the
      appellant is not at risk and, whether or not the respondent succeeds
      in this before the First-tier Tribunal, the losing party will have the
      opportunity of making an application for permission to appeal.  The
      parties were agreed that on this basis the appeal should be remitted
      to the First-tier Tribunal.


   8. I am satisfied that the judge erred in law when considering the risk
      on return by not having regard to the country guideline case of MM,
      given that it is not disputed that the appellant is a non-Arab
      Darfuri.  The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a
      hearing before a different judge with none of the contested findings
      by the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal preserved.


Conclusions
   9. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the
      making of an error on a point of law.


  10. The decision is set aside.

  11. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for hearing before a
      different judge.


Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make a direction for anonymity.  As the
appeal is to be reheard I consider that such a direction should be made to
preserve the positions of the parties until the appeal is finally
determined.  Unless or until a court or tribunal directs otherwise no
report of these proceedings shall identify the appellant or any member of
his family.  This direction applies to the appellant and to the respondent.
 Failure to comply with this direction may lead to contempt of court
proceedings.




Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Deans
              4th April 2018

















