
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:  PA/10466/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 20 March 2019                           |On 30 April 2019                |
|                                           |                                |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CONWAY


                                   Between

                                     A K
                           (Anonymity Order Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Akinbolu of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Kandola, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born in 1987.   He  is  a  Sunni
    Muslim.  He appeals against a decision of the  respondent  made  on  17
    August 2018 to refuse his claim for asylum.

 2. The basis of his claim is that he is at  risk  on  return  to  Pakistan
    because he is homosexual.  Whilst aware of his feelings as a young  man
    in Pakistan he was  scared  because  he  knew  they  were  against  his
    religion.  As a result he suffered mental health problems.  He came  to
    the UK in 2011 with leave as a Tier 4 student but ceased to study.   He
    started living openly as a gay person.  His family called him  back  so
    they could arrange a marriage for him at which point he  disclosed  his
    sexuality to them.  His father's response was hostile.  If returned  he
    fears his family and that he will be at risk more widely for being gay.

 3. The  respondent  in  refusing  the  application  did  not  believe  the
    appellant's claim  as  to  his  sexuality.   His  responses  about  his
    awareness of such in Pakistan  were  inconsistent  and  lacked  detail.
    Delay in claiming asylum, and only after  his  leave  to  remain  as  a
    student was curtailed, did not assist his credibility.  Evidence  about
    his activities in the LGBT community in the UK was non-specific.

 4. He appealed.

    First tier hearing

 5. Following a hearing at Birmingham on 21  December  2018  Judge  of  the
    First-Tier Tribunal Obhi dismissed the appeal.

 6. She heard oral evidence from the appellant and from two witnesses Mr UR
    and Mr MW.

 7. Her findings are at paragraph [33]ff of her decision.  In summary,  she
    found against his credibility that there was no evidence  that  despite
    being in the UK since 2011 he had had a relationship with any person at
    any time; there were no photographs of him prior  to  claiming  asylum;
    the evidence of his involvement with witness UR, who has refugee status
    on the basis of his homosexuality and who met the appellant in an  LGBT
    club, was unsatisfactory,  in  particular  that  they  would  not  have
    discussed how they came to be where they were  or  that  the  appellant
    would not have said he was from Pakistan and was  afraid  of  returning
    there. Also, that the evidence of witness MW that the  appellant,  when
    with other young men at nightclubs did not seek to pick  up  girls  and
    that in 2014 he found out that  the  appellant  was  gay  and  that  he
    encouraged him to join gay clubs, merited (at [36]) "limited weight ...
    as he is clearly someone who is close  to  the  appellant  and  has  an
    interest in him being successful in this appeal."

 8. In further adverse  findings  the  judge  found  that  the  appellant's
    reference to his sexuality to his doctor was designed to embellish  his
    claim. Also, delay in claiming asylum did not assist him.

 9. The appellant sought permission  to  appeal  which  was  granted  on  6
    February 2019.

    Error of law hearing

10. At the error of law hearing  before  me,  Mr  Kandola  agreed  with  Ms
    Akinbolu that the decision showed material error of law.

11. In the circumstances it suffices to deal with two of the issues  raised
    by Ms Akinbolu with  which  there  was  agreement  by  the  respondent.
    First, in respect of the statement and oral evidence of witness MW, the
    judge did not  make  a  finding  that  he  was  a  witness  who  lacked
    credibility on the basis of what  he  had  to  say  but,  rather,  that
    because he and the appellant are close he has an interest in seeing the
    appellant successful in his appeal. That is the wrong approach  (see  R
    (on the application of SS) v SSHD  ("self-serving"  statements)  [2017]
    UKUT 164 (IAC). That case  highlights  the  requirement  for  the  most
    "anxious scrutiny" to be applied to  all  cases,  in  relation  to  all
    evidence, whatever the source and for full and proper reasoning.

12. Further, the judge made no reference to the evidence in the form  of  a
    statement of the appellant's brother, KK (dated 19  December  2018)  in
    which he confirms the appellant's sexuality, of which he disapproves.

13. It was agreed that  the  failure  to  make  adequate  findings  on  the
    evidence of material witnesses amounted to a material error of law such
    that the case must be reheard.

Decision

14. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shows material  error  of  law.
    It is set aside.  The nature of the case is such that it is appropriate
    under section 12(2) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement  Act  2007
    and Practice Statement 7.2 to remit to the First-tier  Tribunal  for  a
    fresh hearing on all issues.  No findings stand.  The member(s) of  the
    First-tier Tribunal chosen to consider the  case  are  not  to  include
    Judge Obhi.



An anonymity order is made.  Unless and until a tribunal  or  court  directs
otherwise the appellant is granted anonymity.  Failure to comply  with  this
order could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                             Date 25th April 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Conway

