
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10149/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 14 November 2018                           |On 29 November 2018           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT


                                   Between

                                    m j i
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Symes, Counsel, instructed by Clyde Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms N Willocks-Briscoe, Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Sullivan dated 14 September 2018 which refused the protection and human
    rights claim of the appellant.


 2. Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  appellant
    is granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
    indirectly identify him or any member of their family.  This  direction
    applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.  Failure to comply
    with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

 3. The background to this  matter  is  that  the  appellant  was  born  in
    Pakistan in 1986.  He came to the UK on 1 February 2010  as  a  Tier  4
    Student and had leave in that category  until  11  November  2014.   An
    Article 8 ECHR claim was refused with only an out of country appeal  on
    27 July 2016.  On 28 May 2018 the appellant was arrested and on 30  May
    2018 made a refugee claim.  That was refused by  the  respondent  in  a
    decision dated 3 August  2018.   The  appellant's  appeal  against  the
    refusal was heard in the First-tier Tribunal on 11 September 2018  and,
    as above, refused by First-tier Tribunal Judge Sullivan in  a  decision
    dated 14 September 2018.  Permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    was granted by the First-tier Tribunal in a decision  dated  3  October
    2018.

 4. The appellant's grounds of appeal are succinct and can be  set  out  in
    full:

         "1.  The Judge  fell  into  error  in  adopting  a  legally  flawed
             approach to expert medical evidence.

         2.   At [26] the Judge expressly 'give[s] less weight than I  might
             otherwise have done in part because [Dr  Stein's]  conclusions
             appear to have been  based  largely  on  the  Appellant's  own
             account of his symptoms'.

         3.   That precise approach to  attaching  less  weight  to  medical
             evidence was admonished by the Court of Appeal in AM  (Angola)
             v SSHD [2012] EWCA Civ 521:

                  '16. It is plain that Ms Kralj believed AM, and the  judge
                      so found: see his para 24 cited above, where he  said
                      - 'It is clear, not only from the scarring report but
                      also from the narrative part of Ms Kralj's assessment
                      report,  that  she  believed  the  claimant,   taking
                      everything she said at face value'.

                  17.  However, I would not agree that Ms Kralj  was  merely
                      taking everything AM said 'at face value'.   She  was
                      reporting as an experienced assessor in such matters,
                      and she was conducting a 'health assessment'.

         4.   That flawed approach to the expert medical report infected and
             had a  material  bearing  on  any  factual  findings  he  made
             [thereafter] where the assessment of credibility  requires  to
             be undertaken  symbiotically  having  regard  to  the  medical
             evidence: Mibanga v Secretary of State for the Home Department
             [2005] EWCA Civ 367, [2005] INLR 377, [24] - [25]."

 5. The medical evidence referred to here was a report of Dr  G  Stein  set
    out on pages 40 to 53 of the appellant's bundle, stated  to  have  been
    prepared following an examination of the  appellant  on  6  June  2018.
    There was also an addendum report dated 10 September 2018 from Dr Stein
    which is at pages 54 to 55 of the appellant's bundle.

 6. The First-tier Tribunal said this about its approach to  the  evidence,
    including the medical report:

         "25. I have considered all of  the  evidence  before  reaching  any
             conclusion in this matter.  The order in which I  set  out  my
             findings is not an indication that I have considered  any  one
             aspect of this matter  in  priority  to,  or  isolation  from,
             another.  I also acknowledge that the Appellant's account must
             be assessed in the context of country conditions  in  Pakistan
             and that neither gaps nor discrepancies in  the  evidence  are
             necessarily indicative of an account that has been  fabricated
             or embellished.  Where I find gaps  or  discrepancies  in  the
             evidence I have assessed them in the context of  the  evidence
             as a whole and in light of the  explanations  offered  by  the
             Appellant.  I have assessed the documentary evidence  in  line
             with the guidance in Ahmed (Documents unreliable  and  forged)
             Pakistan* [2002] UKIAT 00439,  again  considering  it  in  the
             context of the evidence as a whole before deciding what weight
             to give it.

         26.  I am satisfied that the  Appellant  has  been  suffering  from
             difficulty  sleeping  and  from  depression.   There   is   an
             indication of a family history of  depression.   He  has  been
             prescribed  medication  for  those   conditions.    They   are
             confirmed in Dr Stein's report but I  give  that  report  less
             weight  than  I  might  otherwise  have   done   because   his
             conclusions  appear  to  have  been  based  largely   on   the
             Appellant's own account of his symptoms.  I also note that  Dr
             Stein's addendum report  says  that  he  had  spent  the  'the
             greater part of [the interview] exploring why [the  Appellant]
             had been beaten  by  these  political  unions  and  trying  to
             understand the justice system and its corruption in Pakistan'.
             In relation to the diagnosis of  PTSD  Dr  Stein  specifically
             writes 'The self-report provided by Mr [I] shows that he  does
             fully meet the criteria for post-traumatic  stress  disorder'.
             I understand that a doctor must take  a  patient  history  and
             that an experienced doctor will bring his experience  to  bear
             in his assessment of the symptoms described.  However what  is
             missing from this report is  note  of  the  doctor's  personal
             observations.  As an example, one paragraphs begins  'I  asked
             him whether he was depressed and he said that he  was'.   Much
             of the report is on the form 'I asked; he  said',  leading  to
             the conclusion 'It seemed to me that he did  have  depression,
             panic and post-traumatic disorder ... I thought  his  symptoms
             were genuine'.  The basis  for  that  last  statement  is  not
             explained; it is an unfortunate gap in the report."

 7. It is not my view that the First-tier Tribunal erred in concluding that
    "less weight" attracted to the evidence of Dr Stein. The approach  that
    the FTTJ took to the evidence, including the medical evidence, set  out
    in paragraph 25 and the reasons given for reducing  the  weight  to  be
    placed on the medical reports complied fully with the ratio in Mibanga.
    Adverse  credibility  findings  were  not  used  as  justification  for
    dismissing the medical evidence.  The  evidence  was  assessed  in  the
    round, in form and in substance.

 8. Further, the judge  sets  out  the  correct  approach  to  the  medical
    evidence in line with AM (Angola) in  paragraph  26,  when  stating  "I
    understand that a doctor must  take  a  patient  history  and  that  an
    experienced doctor will bring his experience to bear in his  assessment
    of the symptoms described". The judge goes on  to  highlight  how  this
    particular medical report did not have the  requisite  observations  of
    the appellant's symptoms so as to  be  able  to  place  weight  on  the
    conclusion. The finding that the reports were based  "largely"  on  the
    appellant's own account was correct and supported by specific  examples
    from the report.  I was taken to only one comment at paragraph 30.7  of
    Dr Stein's main report where he referred to his own observation of  the
    appellant's symptoms. This states:

         "... today at interview he was pretty glum, he was able to talk but
         I thought he was moderately depressed".

    It was not argued that there was anything beyond this  in  the  reports
    referring to Dr Stein making his  own  observations  of  the  appellant
    rather than merely reporting what the appellant told him.

 9. The First-tier Tribunal Judge was therefore entitled to find  that  the
    medical report did not attract  weigh  where  it  contained  almost  no
    objective assessment of what the appellant reported.

10. For these reasons, therefore, it is my  judgment  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal took a proper legal  approach  to  the  medical  evidence  and
    identified proper reasons for placing little weight on it.  It  follows
    that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not disclose an error
    on a point of law.

Notice of Decision

11. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not disclose an error on a
    point of law and shall stand.


Signed [pic]                        Date: 23 November 2018
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt






