
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10793/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 20 March 2020                     |On 9 July 2020                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between

                                K M A (Iraq)
                           (anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Marian Cleghorn of Counsel, instructed by Iris
                    Law Firm solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Miroslav Diwnycz, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Anonymity order
Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) The Tribunal has ORDERED that no one shall publish  or  reveal
the name or address of [initials] who is the subject  of  these  proceedings
or publish or reveal any information which would be likely to  lead  to  the
identification of him or of any member of  his  family  in  connection  with
these proceedings.

Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise  to  contempt  of
court proceedings.

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Judge O'Neill following a hearing at Bradford on  2  October  2019
    dismissing his appeal against the respondent's decision  on  29  August
    2018 to refuse him international protection or leave to remain on human
    rights grounds.

 2. The Article 8 ECHR appeal was withdrawn  and  the  hearing  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal  sounded  only  in  international  protection.   No
    anonymity order was made by the First-tier Judge but given that this is
    an asylum appeal the Upper Tribunal hereby makes an anonymity order  in
    this appeal.

 3. The appellant has been in the United Kingdom since  2008.   The  First-
    tier Judge found in relation to his CSID documents that:

         "45.  Although  there  may  be  international  flights  to   Erbil,
             according  to  the  Country  Guidance   cases,   the   British
             government only makes returns to Baghdad.  Therefore,  I  find
             that the appellant will be returned to Baghdad and  thereafter
             will be obliged to make his way to the IKR.  He cannot  do  so
             without a CSSID card.

         46.  The Appellant claims to have no passport and no CSID.  He  had
             a nationality card which she says he left with his  family  in
             Iraq.  Despite having a  considerable  amount  of  information
             relating to his family ID records he has made  no  attempt  at
             all to replace is documents.

         47.  Judge Holmes found that  the  appellant  had  a  large  family
             comprising seven brothers and four sisters remaining somewhere
             in Iraq.  The appellant has led no evidence to suggest they do
             not remain in Iraq.  He claims not to be in contact  with  his
             family but I do not believe him.  I note that when his  father
             died steps  were  taken  to  ensure  that  the  appellant  was
             notified in the manner  conventional  to  Kurds  and  that  Mr
             Othman  and  another  Kurd  were  designated  to  notify   the
             appellant.  I find it  simply  incredible  that  despite  this
             there  is  no  contact  between  those  in  the  UK  and   the
             appellant's family in Iraq.

         48.  The appellant has produced the death certificate of his father
             dated November 2013 and the ID of his mother dated  7  January
             2014.  These documents were supplied to him by family  members
             in Iraq.  I  find  it  incredible  that  having  secured  this
             documentation  he  is  not  able  to  secure  his  own  CS  ID
             documents.  I do not believe him.

         49.  His mother's ID documents bears the  registration  number  366
             and the page number 73014.   His  father's  death  certificate
             also contains the details of the relevant registry  (366)  and
             page number 73014.  Given that the appellant is in  possession
             of the registry number and page numbers relating to his family
             records I do not accept that he would be unable  to  secure  a
             copy of his own CS ID either through the central machinery  in
             Baghdad or through his family contacts.

         50.  In the circumstances I find that even if the Appellant has  no
             CSID card he has a reasonable prospect of obtaining one."

 4. The First-tier Judge found that the appellant was an  ordinary  citizen
    of Kurdish ethnicity and that although he could not return to his  home
    village and was in need of humanitarian  protection  because  he  comes
    from Tuz Khurmatu, he could relocate to the  IKR.   At  [47]-[49],  the
    Judge found that the appellant remained in contact  with  his  extended
    family, comprising his mother, his seven brothers and four sisters, who
    are still in Iraq and that they at least knew where to find him in 2013
    and 2014 and probably still do.

 5. The First-tier Judge held that the  appellant  could  not  exercise  an
    internal relocation option to Baghdad or elsewhere  in  Arab-controlled
    Iraq because he  was  without  support  there  and  did  not  have  the
    wherewithal to survive alone away from his home area or the  IKR.   The
    appeal was dismissed on asylum and humanitarian grounds and by  way  of
    precaution also under Article 8 ECHR.

 6. The appellant appealed to the Upper Tribunal.

Grounds of appeal

 7. The appellant contended that the First-tier Judge  failed  properly  to
    apply the Upper Tribunal's Iraq country guidance in [AAH (Iraqi Kurds -
    internal relocation) (CG) [2018] UKUT 212 (IAC)].   The  grounds  limit
    themselves to a bare joinder of issue on this point.

 8. The main thrust of the grounds of appeal is a challenge to  the  First-
    tier Judge's findings of fact and credibility, with which  the Tribunal
    can interfere only if the test in R (Iran) & Ors v Secretary  of  State
    for the Home Department [2005] EWCA Civ 982 is met. At  paragraphs  [6]
    and [7] of the grounds,  the  appellant  asserts  that  he  would  have
    difficulty in securing employment in the IKR and indeed the grounds  of
    appeal read as though that was his principal concern.

 9. At [9], the grounds assert that the  appellant  if  returned  would  be
    unable to earn a sufficient and regular income to enable him to lead  a
    'relatively normal life', relying on AAH at [131]  since  he  has  been
    absent from Iraq for  eleven  years,  has  no  recent  work  experience
    (presumably in either country), and no family connections in the IKR to
    assist him in securing employment or to vouch for him.

10. The grounds submit that internal  relocation  would  be  unduly  harsh,
    because the appellant has a western appearance, increasing suspicion if
    he tries to secure employment in the  IKR,  and  that  he  will  be  an
    internally displaced person (IDP) and destitute.

Permission to appeal

11. Permission to appeal was granted on the following basis:

         "It is arguable that the judge's findings in relation  to  relation
         to the IKR are speculative and fail to take into account the  lapse
         of time since the appellant was able to obtain documents  from  his
         family in Iraq.

         The judge found the appellant  credible  in  some  aspects  of  his
         appeal where he had previously been  found  incredible  and  having
         done so failed to consider how that  impacted  on  the  appellant's
         claim that he is not in contact with his family  members  and  does
         not know where they are.

         There  was  no  evidence  before  the  judge  in  relation  to  the
         whereabouts of the appellant's family members and the finding  that
         they may be in the IKR is therefore entirely speculative."

Analysis

12. Having regard to the First-tier Tribunal Judge's decision at [45]-[52],
    I considered first whether AAH availed the appellant, as at the date of
    hearing.  The passage relied upon by this appellant in AAH is at [131]-
    [132]:

         "131. Whilst a meagre income may not  be  sufficient  to  radically
         improve an individual's living conditions, the  connection  between
         food and dignity is an obvious  one.  Decision-makers  must  assess
         whether an individual is likely to have any kind of income at  all,
         and if so whether that income would  be  sufficient  to  provide  a
         'relatively normal life' in the context of Iraq, and having  regard
         to that individual's personal history.

         132. For those with no realistic prospect  of  securing  a  regular
         income, or support by other means, internal relocation to  the  IKR
         is likely to be unduly harsh. Although we were shown no evidence of
         IDPs starving, it is clear that food security  would  be  extremely
         poor, with such an individual entirely reliant upon charity and  ad
         hoc humanitarian intervention. Whilst organisations such as WHO and
         the UNHCR are active in providing food within the  camps,  we  were
         not directed to any evidence to show that  such  organisations  are
         regularly providing  food  'on  the  street'.  Rather  the  support
         offered would appear to be the provision of 'emergency' items  such
         as blankets and jerry cans."

13. Unless the appellant could show that  the  First-tier  Judge's  finding
    that he does have contact with at least some of his family  members  is
    perverse, Wednesbury unreasonable, or incomprehensible at an  R  (Iran)
    level, that finding is fatal to his assertion that he become an IDP  in
    circumstances which  would be unduly harsh as contemplated in AAH.

14. The appellant has not shown that he cannot replace  his  missing  CSID.
    AAH has now been replaced by SMO, KSP and IM  (Article  15(c)  identity
    documents) Iraq CG [2019] UKUT 00400 (IAC)  which  finds  that  persons
    with the sort of documentation that the appellant  possesses  would  be
    able to obtain a replacement CSID from the Iraqi Embassy in London.  At
    the date of the hearing before the First-tier  Tribunal  the  appellant
    had not tried to do so.

15. Ms Cleghorn's instructions were that  the  appellant  had  subsequently
    made some effort to replace his CSID, but there was no evidence  before
    the Tribunal to that effect and no evidence from the Iraqi Embassies in
    Manchester and London which he claimed to have approached.

16. The grounds of appeal do not identify any evidence which the  judge  is
    said to have  overlooked  in  reaching  his  conclusions  of  fact  and
    credibility, nor any matter which was  not  taken  into  consideration,
    which  would entitle the Upper Tribunal to interfere with  findings  of
    fact, having regard to the guidance of the Court of Appeal in  R (Iran)
    at [90] in the judgment of Lord Justice Brooke (with whom Lord  Justice
    Chadwick and Lord Justice Maurice Kay agreed).

17. There is nothing  in  these  grounds  of  appeal  which  identifies  an
    arguable error of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge.
     This appeal is accordingly dismissed.


Signed:  Judith AJC Gleeson                  Dated:   2 July 2020
         Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson
