
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10334/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 31st January 2019                 |On 6th March 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                                   mr s h
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss A Nizami of Counsel, Duncan Lewis & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Iran  born  on  1st  January  1998.   The
    Appellant made application for asylum claiming to have  a  well-founded
    fear of persecution on the  basis  of  his  imputed  political  opinion
    namely that he is in fear  of  the  authorities  in  Iran  due  to  his
    believed support of the PDKI Party.  The  Appellant's  application  was
    refused by Notice of Refusal dated 29th September 2017.

 2. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Henderson sitting at Taylor House on  30th  August  2018.
    In a decision and  reasons  promulgated  on  14th  September  2018  the
    Appellant's appeal was dismissed on all grounds.

 3. On 28th September 2018 Grounds of  Appeal  were  lodged  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  On 11th  October  2018  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Davidge
    refused permission to appeal noting quite properly that the grounds did
    not contain any errors of law but simply recited extracts from R (Iran)
    and others [2005] EWCA Civ  982  as  to  what  sort  of  matters  might
    constitute an error.

 4. On 25th October renewed Grounds of Appeal were submitted to  the  Upper
    Tribunal  contending  that  there  had  been  a  procedural  or   other
    irregularity capable of making a material difference to the outcome  of
    the proceedings by failing to take  into  account  that  the  Appellant
    suffered from PTSD when considering whether the Appellant's  return  to
    Iran would breach his rights under Articles 2 and 3.

 5. On 10th December 2018 Upper Tribunal Judge Grubb granted permission  to
    appeal concluding that in assessing the Appellant's evidence, the judge
    had  failed  to  take  into  account  the  letter  from  a   consultant
    psychiatrist and also  the  medical  record  which  recorded  that  the
    Appellant suffered from PTSD although he accepted that the  latter,  in
    the absence of a report may not carry great weight  and  that  in  such
    circumstances there may have been a material error of law.

 6. It is on that basis that  the  appeal  comes  before  me  to  determine
    whether or not there is a material error of law in the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.  The Appellant  appears  by  his  instructed
    Counsel Miss Nizami.  The Secretary of State appears by his Home Office
    Presenting Officer Mr Tufan.

Preliminary Issue

 7. As a preliminary issue there is a request made to amend and expand  the
    Notice of Appeal.  The ground contends  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge erred in its approach to credibility, firstly in respect  to  the
    relevance of the Appellant's vulnerability and secondly in its approach
    to plausibility.  After hearing submissions from both parties I  agreed
    to allow it in solely on the basis the ground is an  extension  of  the
    grant of permission previously granted by the First-tier Tribunal Judge
    and did not constitute a new ground in its entirety.

Submission/Discussion

 8. Miss Nizami submits that the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  erred  in  her
    assessment of credibility regarding the vulnerability of the  Appellant
    and his medical condition and refers me to two documents to be found at
    page 467 of the Appellant's bundle from the consultant psychiatrist and
    pages 31 to 36 with regard to the Appellant's PTSD.  She contends  that
    there had been no reference  made  to  the  Appellant's  mental  health
    condition save for paragraph 16 of the  judge's  decision  which  notes
    that the Appellant's medical notes are in front of her.   She  contends
    there has been no assessment of the  PTSD/anxiety/depression  and  that
    the judge's approach has been flawed.  She further  submits  there  has
    been a lack of anxious scrutiny and that the judge  should  have  taken
    into account the  Appellant's  condition  and  ability  to  give  extra
    evidence when making findings on plausibility.  So far  as  the  second
    additional ground is concerned, her contention is that  the  judge  has
    therefore failed to comply with the vulnerable witness  guidance  which
    constitutes an error of law and that the judge has not  carried  out  a
    proper analysis.  It is her submission that the finding at paragraph 31
    is contrary to the vulnerable witness guidance and that it  would  have
    been relevant for the judge to consider his mental health.

 9. She further considers that there are fundamental errors with regard  to
    the judge's approach to plausibility and that  the  judge  has  ignored
    that it is not unusual for  agents  to  control  those  that  they  are
    trafficking, something that was recognised by the Court of Appeal in  Q
    v SSHD [2003] EWCA Civ 364.  She asked me to find  there  are  material
    errors of law and to remit the matter back to the  First-tier  Tribunal
    for rehearing.

10. In response Mr Tufan comments that the judge has made  a  reference  to
    the medical evidence at paragraph 16, in particular the notes and  that
    the document at page 467 of the Appellant's bundle merely  regurgitates
    what the Appellant has said.  The other document is very short  and  he
    reminds me that Upper Tribunal Judge Grubb has indicated  that  it  may
    not carry great weight.  He submits that  there  are  no  full  medical
    reports.  Further, he contends that it has  been  accepted  and  agreed
    that Articles 2 and 3 rise and fall on the  Appellant's  asylum  claim.
    He submits that there is nothing to show that vulnerability was  raised
    before the First-tier Tribunal Judge  and  that  the  judge  considered
    vulnerability based on all documents that were before her.  He  submits
    judge's findings are properly made and asked me to dismiss the appeal.

The Law

11.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

12. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings on Error of Law

13. I restrict my consideration in this matter to the grounds set  out  for
    which permission was granted and so far as they  are  extended  in  the
    submissions made on the amendment to the grounds.   The  question  very
    much arises within this decision as to whether the submissions made  by
    Counsel amount merely to disagreement with the findings of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge makes reference  to
    the medical records.  She has considered the document in the round  and
    heard the evidence.  She has made findings that she  was  entitled  to.
    It is not incumbent upon a judge to  make  reference  to  every  single
    document that is before her and I note, as is  set  out  to  me  by  Mr
    Tufan, that the letter from the psychiatrist does no more than  reflect
    what the Appellant has said and that the documents  do  not  constitute
    full and proper medical reports.

14. I find that the judge has given consideration to the  medical  evidence
    albeit that I acknowledge that the specific  reference  to  the  letter
    from the psychiatrist is not referred to.  My finding is that  even  if
    that constitutes an error of law it is not material.

15. It is further contended that  the  judge  failed  in  her  approach  to
    plausibility.  I do not accept that.  This is a  judge  who  has  given
    full reasons for her findings  and  set  out  those  findings  and  the
    evidence upon which they are  based  clearly.   A  proper  approach  to
    credibility will require an assessment of the evidence in  the  general
    claim and the relevant factors would be the internal consistency of the
    claim  and  its  inherent  plausibility  along  with  external  factors
    typically found in country guidance.  I am satisfied that the judge has
    within this matter carried out a full and detailed  analysis  and  made
    findings relating to credibility and plausibility which she  was  fully
    entitled to and which are factually based.  In such circumstances I  am
    satisfied that this decision contains no material error of law and  the
    Appellant's appeal is dismissed and  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge is maintained.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge discloses  no  material  error
of law and the Appellant's appeal is  dismissed  and  the  decision  of  the
First-tier Tribunal Judge is maintained.

The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  granted  the  Appellant   anonymity.    No
application is made to vary that order and that  order  is  maintained.   No
application is made to vary that order and that order is maintained.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 6 March 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris
