
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10252/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 10th January 2019                          |On 29th January 2019          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES


                                   Between

                                     SS
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms G Kiai instructed by Duncan Lewis & Co Solicitors

For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This  is  an  appeal  and  cross-appeal,  both  parties  are  therefore
    Appellants in this Tribunal, however I refer to  the  parties  as  they
    were in the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The Appellant, a national of Afghanistan, appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal against a decision made by the  Secretary  of  State  on  21st
    September 2017 refusing his  application  for  asylum  or  humanitarian
    protection in the UK.  First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Loke  dismissed  the
    appeal on asylum grounds but allowed the appeal on human rights grounds
    under Articles 3 and 8 of the ECHR in a  decision  dated  17th  October
    2018.  The Secretary of State appealed against the  decision  to  allow
    the appeal on human rights grounds and was granted permission to appeal
    by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Doyle  on  13th  November  2018.   The
    Appellant appealed against the decision to dismiss the appeal on asylum
    grounds and was granted permission to  appeal  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Andrew on 27th November 2018.

 3. At the hearing I heard submissions from Mr Whitwell in relation to  the
    appeal on human rights grounds, and from Ms Kiai  in  relation  to  the
    appeal  on  asylum  grounds,  and   I   heard   responses   from   both
    representatives.  I reserved my decision which I now give  in  relation
    to both appeals.

Asylum

 4. The Appellant put forward five grounds.  The first ground contends that
    the judge failed to take into account medical evidence of scarring  and
    mental health issues which it is  contended  are  consistent  with  the
    Appellant's evidence.  It is contended in the second  ground  that  the
    judge failed to resolve material issues or make relevant findings.   It
    is contended in the third ground that the judge failed to take  account
    of material evidence, in particular the  country  expert  report.   The
    fourth ground contends that the  judge  failed  to  take  into  account
    material evidence when making core credibility findings, in  particular
    the medical evidence in  relation  to  the  Appellant's  mental  health
    issues.  It is contended in the fifth ground that the judge  failed  to
    take into  account  material  evidence  when  considering  humanitarian
    protection.  At the outset of the hearing Ms Kiai contended that  there
    were material errors in relation to the asylum issue but that these did
    not affect the key findings made at paragraphs 29, 44  and  46  of  the
    decision which, in her submission, should be maintained.

 5. I have considered all of the grounds and in my view I am satisfied that
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge erred in her assessment of credibility in
    this case.  The Appellant's claim, as set out at  paragraph  7  of  the
    decision, is that there was a feud between the Appellant's  family  and
    that of his uncle, a member of the Taliban and cousins over marriage to
    his cousin. He claims that, as a result of this feud,  his  father  was
    killed by his cousins when the Appellant was 11.  He  claims  that  the
    family moved to Doshi and he was subsequently beaten by his cousins and
    they killed his brother. At paragraph 29  of  the  decision  the  judge
    accepted to the lower standard that the  Appellant's  immediate  family
    "may have been involved in a feud with his extended  family"  and  that
    "this feud may have been due to a dispute regarding his  brother  being
    promised to his cousin".   The  judge  accepted  that  the  Appellant's
    family moved to Doshi as a result.  At paragraph  30  the  judge  found
    that it was not established that the Appellant's cousin  had  died  nor
    did the judge find it credible that the Appellant's  cousin  wished  to
    marry him in the aftermath  of  the  events  claimed.   The  judge  was
    further not satisfied at paragraph 33 that the  Appellant's  uncle  and
    cousins are connected with the Taliban as claimed.

 6. Whilst it is clear what the judge did not accept, it is not  adequately
    clear what the judge did in fact accept in relation to the core aspects
    of the  Appellant's  claim.   The  findings  at  paragraph  29  do  not
    adequately express what was accepted. This is important because it goes
    to the core of the assessment of risk on return.

 7. I cannot accept Ms Kiai's submission that the findings at paragraph  29
    can be preserved.  On reviewing the decision as a whole,  in  light  of
    the fact that it is not clear what  findings  the  judge  has  made,  I
    cannot be satisfied that the risk on return can be adequately  assessed
    in light of these unclear findings of fact.  Accordingly, I accept that
    the second Ground of Appeal put forward on behalf of the Appellant  has
    been made out.

 8. I also accept that the first ground has been made  out  as  it  is  not
    clear that the judge has taken  account  of  the  medical  evidence  in
    assessing the Appellant's claim that he was beaten by his cousins.

 9. Ground 3, which contends that the judge failed  to  take  into  account
    evidence in  relation  to  the  blood  feud  and  evidence  as  to  the
    relationship between the Taliban and the government,  also  flows  from
    the lack of clear findings on material facts.

10. In my view the failure to make clear findings as to what  was  accepted
    is a material error going to the heart of the Appellant's asylum claim.
     For this reason I consider it necessary to set aside the  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal.  In light of  my  doubts  as  to  the  precise
    nature of the findings made at  paragraph  29  I  cannot  preserve  any
    findings of fact in relation to the asylum claim and set  the  entirety
    of the decision aside.

11. In light of the Presidential Practice Statements the nature  or  extent
    of the judicial fact finding which is necessary for the decision in the
    appeal to be re-made is such that,  having  regard  to  the  overriding
    objective in rule 2 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008, it is appropriate to remit the asylum appeal  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

Human Rights

12. In the Secretary of State's Grounds of Appeal it is contended that  the
    judge made a material misdirection on law in relation to the assessment
    of Article 3 and Article 8.  It is contended that the judge  failed  to
    properly apply the guidance of the Court of Appeal in AM  (Zimbabwe)  &
    Anor v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2018] EWCA  Civ  64.
    It is contended that the Appellant's medical conditions fall far  short
    of meeting the level of exceptionality outlined in  the  case  law  and
    that the Appellant has failed to establish that there would be  such  a
    serious and rapid decline in his health and intense suffering should he
    be returned to Afghanistan.  It is further  contended  that  the  judge
    erred in allowing the appeal on Article 8 grounds solely on  the  basis
    of his medical conditions contrary to the  findings  of  the  Court  of
    Appeal in GS (India)  [2015]  EWCA  Civ  40.   Reliance  is  placed  on
    paragraph 111 of that decision which states  that  the  fact  that  the
    claimant is receiving medical treatment in this country which  may  not
    be available  in  the  country  of  return  may  be  a  factor  in  the
    proportionality exercise but that factor cannot be treated as by itself
    giving rise to a breach since that would contravene the  no  obligation
    to treat principle.

13. At the hearing Ms Kiai contended that the judge set out the test in  AM
    (Zimbabwe) and was aware of that test  and  took  it  into  account  in
    considering Article 3.  She contended that the judge did not allow  the
    Article 8 appeal solely in relation to  medical  grounds  but  set  out
    factors at  paragraph  46  which  went  to  the  proportionality.   She
    contended that any failure in the assessment of Article 3 was not fatal
    to Article 8 because the judge did  consider  other  factors.   In  her
    submission at the very least the Article 8 conclusions could stand.

14. In my view the judge made a material error in  relation  to  the  human
    rights assessment.  The judge set out the medical evidence in  relation
    to Article 3 and set out the threshold as clarified in the decision  in
    AM (Zimbabwe).  However, in my view the judge gave  inadequate  reasons
    for concluding that returning the Appellant  is  reasonably  likely  to
    lead to him suffering difficulties which would breach Article 3.

15. At paragraph 46 the  judge  considered  matters  relevant  to  internal
    relocation in the context of the  decision  in  AS  (Safety  of  Kabul)
    Afghanistan CG [2018] UKUT 00118 (IAC).  These do not go  to  the  test
    under Article 3.  The judge failed to  highlight  evidence  capable  of
    demonstrating that the Appellant comes within the test in Paposhvili  v
    Belgium [2017] Imm AR 867 as set  out  by  Lord  Justice  Sales  in  AM
    (Zimbabwe) [38]:

         "So far  as  the  ECtHR  and  the  Convention  are  concerned,  the
         protection of Article 3 against removal in medical cases is now not
         confined to deathbed cases where death is already imminent when the
         applicant is in the removing country. It  extends  to  cases  where
         "substantial grounds  have  been  shown  for  believing  that  [the
         applicant], although not at imminent risk of dying,  would  face  a
         real risk, on account of the absence of  appropriate  treatment  in
         the receiving country or lack of access to such treatment, of being
         exposed to a serious, rapid and irreversible decline in his or  her
         state of health resulting in intense suffering or to a  significant
         reduction in life expectancy" (para. [183]). This means cases where
         the applicant faces a real risk  of  rapidly  experiencing  intense
         suffering (i.e. to the Article 3 standard) in the  receiving  state
         because  of  their  illness  and  the  non-availability  there   of
         treatment which is available to them in the removing state or faces
         a real risk of death within a short time in the receiving state for
         the same  reason.  In  other  words,  the  boundary  of  Article  3
         protection has been shifted from  being  defined  by  imminence  of
         death in the removing state  (even  with  the  treatment  available
         there) to being defined  by  the  imminence  (i.e.  likely  "rapid"
         experience) of intense suffering or death in the  receiving  state,
         which may only occur because of the non-availability in that  state
         of the  treatment  which  had  previously  been  available  in  the
         removing state."


16. The judge set out this test at paragraph 45 of the decision but  failed
    to say how the evidence shows that this Appellant is at  imminent  risk
    of serious, rapid and irreversible  decline  in  his  state  of  health
    resulting in intense suffering or to a significant  reduction  in  life
    expectancy in Afghanistan due  to  the  non-availability  of  treatment
    there which had been available here.

17. In relation to Article 8 the judge stated at paragraph 48 that  it  was
    unnecessary for her to consider the stand-alone Article 8  claim.   The
    judge set out factors at paragraph 46 relating to internal  relocation.
    However, the judge did not engage in any Article 8 assessment under the
    steps set out in R v SSHD ex parte Razgar [2004] UKHL  27.   The  judge
    did not consider paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) which had been  considered  by
    the Secretary of State in the reasons for refusal  letter  and  was  of
    potential relevance to the determination  of  the  Appellant's  private
    life under the Immigration Rules.  I agree with Judge Doyle who said in
    the permission to appeal that it appears that the judge  conflated  the
    test for engagement of Article 3 in  medical  cases  with  the  factors
    relating to risk on return and internal relocation.  I think  that  the
    judge  also  conflated  these  issues  with  the  issues   around   the
    applicability of paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi).  Accordingly, it is not clear
    what  findings  have  been  made   relevant   to   an   assessment   of
    proportionality under Article 8.  For these reasons I consider that the
    limited findings in relation to Article 8 which  were  not  part  of  a
    stand-alone Article 8 assessment are insufficient and inadequate.

18. For these reasons I consider that the human rights assessment is flawed
    and I set it aside.  In my view the assessment of Article 3 and Article
    8 require a fresh assessment.  For this reason I remit it to the First-
    tier Tribunal to be made afresh.

    Direction Regarding Anonymity -  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008

    Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  Appellant
    is granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
    indirectly identify him or any member of his  family.   This  direction
    applies both to the Appellant and to the Respondent.  Failure to comply
    with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date: 21st January 2019

Anne Grimes
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is payable, therefore is no fee award.


Signed                              Date: 21st January 2019

Anne Grimes
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes
