
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10766/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 14th December 2018                        |On 24th January 2019          |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ZUCKER


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  Master FS
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr P Bonavero of Counsel, instructed by South West
                    London Law Centre


                            DECISION AND REASONS

FS is a citizen of Afghanistan.  He sought international protection as a
refugee.  A decision was made by the Secretary of State to refuse that
application and he appealed.

His appeal was heard in the First-tier Tribunal by Judge Blake on 30th
August 2018.  He found FS credible in every material particular, his case
being based on a fear of the Taliban consequent upon his uncle having acted
as an interpreter for US forces.  Significantly in this case, FS had only
been 15 years of age when he arrived in the United Kingdom and there was
medical evidence before the judge that FS suffered from psychiatric
problems such that symptoms were "in keeping with the diagnosis of PTSD and
depression".

Judge Blake then went on to consider whether it would be possible for FS to
relocate to Kabul.  He dealt with that at paragraph 56.  Judge Blake did
not accept some of the expert evidence but gave reasons for it in that
there was background material upon which he relied, justifying departure to
from country guidance.  I say that because that eventually was to be the
basis upon which the Secretary of State was to bring this matter before the
Upper Tribunal.  In the event, the appeal was allowed by the First-tier
Tribunal and FS was recognised as a refugee.

However, the Secretary of State was not content with that decision and by
notice dated 19th September 2018 made application for permission to appeal
to this Tribunal, relying on the headnote in the case of AS (Safety of
Kabul) Afghanistan CG [2018] UKUT 00118, which at its headnote says:

"A person who is of lower level interest for the Taliban (i.e. not a senior
government or security services official, or a spy) is not at a real risk
of persecution from the Taliban in Kabul".

The Secretary of State also relied on the case of SG (Iraq) -v- SSHD [2012]
EWCA Civ 940, which is authority for the proposition that Tribunals should
not depart from country guidance cases.

On 3rd October 2018 Judge Lambert granted permission to appeal and thus the
matter comes here.

The Secretary of State was right to point to the headnote in the case of AS
but was wrong not to go further in his consideration of the guidance.
There is not only one paragraph in the headnote of AS.  There are in fact
eight.  The country guidance in AA (unattended children) Afghanistan CG
[2012] UKUT was affirmed and the Upper Tribunal made a number of
observations which are relevant to this particular appeal.  Firstly, that
there is no bright line with respect to when somebody becomes an adult.
There is not some magical change that occurs on a person's 18th birthday.
It follows that cases turn on their own particular facts and the country
guidance is guidance pointing judges in a particular direction but inviting
them to have regard to certain factors of which one is age.

Another factor to which regard is to be had is the age at which the person
left Afghanistan.  That is relevant because if they are younger they are
less likely, so the guidance says, to be able to navigate the employment
market on return and in relocation.

There is an additional factor in this case, which, Mr Walker rightly
concedes, was significant, and that is the health issue of this particular
Respondent (Appellant in the First-tier Tribunal), which was by itself, in
my judgment, sufficient reason for the judge to find that it would be
unduly harsh for FS internally to relocate once it had been accepted that
he had lost contact with his family and that he had taken all reasonable
steps including the good offices of the Red Cross in an attempt to
reconnect with them.

Mr Walker properly did not push his appeal very hard but did not concede
it.  Nevertheless, in my judgment, the fact that he did not push too hard
reflects a realistic approach to the appeal that has been brought.  I have
no hesitation whatsoever in finding that there is no material error of law
in this appeal and it is dismissed.

Decision

I dismiss the appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  The decision of the First-tier
Tribunal is affirmed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 14 January 2019

[pic]

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Zucker
















