
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10825/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 8 January 2019                           |On 23 January 2019             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between

                                     NKA
                           [ANONYMITY ORDER MADE]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr Osman Noor, Counsel appearing by Direct Access
For the respondent:    Mr Nigel Bramble, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Anonymity order
The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to Rule 13  of  the  Tribunal
Procedure (First-tier  Tribunal)  (Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber)  Rules
2014.  I continue that order pursuant to Rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008: unless the Upper Tribunal or  a  Court  directs
otherwise, no report  of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of  publication
thereof  shall  identify  the  original  appellant,  whether   directly   or
indirectly. This order applies to, amongst others, all parties. Any  failure
to comply with this order could give rise to contempt of court proceedings.



Decision and reasons

1. The appellant appeals with permission against the decision of the  First-
   tier Tribunal dismissing his claim for international protection under the
   Refugee Convention, humanitarian protection, or leave to  remain  in  the
   United Kingdom on human rights grounds.  The appellant is  a  citizen  of
   Ghana.

First-tier Tribunal decision

2. The appeal was dismissed by  the  First-tier  Judge  in  the  appellant's
   absence, following  his  failure  to  attend  a  case  management  review
   hearing.  The substantive hearing had been converted to a case management
   review because the appellant was acting in person  and  had  produced  at
   least some evidence of health problems.

3. According to the First-tier Tribunal's computerised  records,  notice  to
   that effect was sent out to the appellant on Friday 5 October  2018.   On
   Tuesday 9 October 2018 it is the appellant's unchallenged  evidence  that
   he called the hearing centre to say that he had only  just  received  the
   new notice of hearing (it was by then 11:30 a.m.) and that  he  would  be
   unable to attend.

4. That information did  not  reach  the  Judge  before  he  determined  the
   appeal.  He proceeded to determine it in the appellant's absence  and  to
   dismiss the appeal. The appellant appealed to the Upper Tribunal.

Permission to appeal

5. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Judge Baker, on the  basis
   that 'there [was] some  evidence  of  the  clerk  receiving  a  telephone
   explanation and request from the appellant on 9th [October 2018] that the
   case be adjourned and reassurance given as to that'.

Rule 24 Reply

6. The respondent did not file a Rule 24 Reply.

7. That is the basis on which this appeal came before the Upper Tribunal.

Upper Tribunal hearing

8. At the hearing today, Mr Bramble indicated that he  was  not  challenging
   the appellant's assertion that he did not receive the revised  notice  of
   hearing until the morning of the hearing.  He accepted that the appellant
   had not had a fair hearing and that the appeal would have to be  remitted
   to the First-tier Tribunal for a proper hearing.

9. Mr Noor confirmed that he would advise the appellant to  seek  legal  aid
   to enable him to be represented for the First-tier Tribunal hearing and I
   emphasised strongly to the appellant the importance of appearing for  his
   hearings.

10. I therefore set aside the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   This
   appeal will be reheard in the First-tier Tribunal  with  no  findings  of
   fact or credibility preserved.


DECISION

11. For the foregoing reasons, my decision is as follows:


   The making of the previous decision involved the making of an error on  a
   point of law.
   I set aside the previous decision.  The decision in this appeal  will  be
   remade in the First-tier Tribunal on a date to be fixed.


Date:         11 January 2019                    Signed   Judith AJC
Gleeson                                                   Upper Tribunal
Judge Gleeson





