
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/10914/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 25th October 2018               |On 27th November 2018              |
|                                   |                                   |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DEANS


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                              MR OMOBOLAJI [A]
                        (No anonymity direction made)

                                                            Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr G Robertson, Advocate, instructed by First Law
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A Govan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This appeal is brought by the Secretary of State against a decision of
      Judge of the First-Tier Tribunal McManus allowing an appeal on human
      rights grounds.  The appellant before the First-tier Tribunal is
      hereinafter referred to as the "claimant".

   2. The claimant, who is a Nigerian national, appealed to the First-tier
      Tribunal against a refusal of leave on the basis of his family life.
      The claimant is married to a British citizen.  The judge considered
      whether the appellant satisfied the requirements of paragraph EX.1 of
      Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules.  A number of factors were taken
      into account.  The appellant's wife has an Indian background.  It was
      claimed it would be difficult for her to obtain employment in Nigeria
      and she would be at risk from kidnappers.  She was receiving IVF
      treatment in the UK and it was claimed that treatment of the same
      standard would not be available in Nigeria.  Nevertheless in the
      absence of country information to support the appellant's claims the
      judge was not satisfied that there were insurmountable obstacles to
      the to the appellant continuing family life with his partner outside
      the UK.

   3. The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal then considered the application
      of Article 8 outside the Immigration Rules.  The judge stated there
      were "no public interest factors weighing against the Appellant in
      this case".  The judge took into account that the appellant helps to
      care for his wife's parents, as well as having regard to the IVF
      treatment and other factors.  The judge concluded that it would be
      unduly harsh and therefore disproportionate to return the appellant to
      Nigeria.

   4. Permission to appeal was granted on the grounds that the judge
      arguably did not give adequate reasons and did not follow the guidance
      in Agyarko [2017] UKSC 11.

   5. In his submission for the respondent Mr Govan relied on the grounds
      set out in the application for permission to appeal.  He submitted
      that the appellant had a poor immigration history.  There were no
      insurmountable obstacles in terms of paragraph EX.1 of Appendix FM to
      family life being carried on elsewhere, and no compelling
      circumstances.  There was a strong public interest in refusing the
      appeal unless there were strong factors in favour of the appellant.
      Mr Govan drew attention to the seeming omission from the judge's
      reasoning, at paragraph 24 of he decision, of the weight to be given
      to the public interest in maintaining effective immigration control.
      The judge looked at s 117B but did not mention effective immigration
      control.  There were no findings amounting to compelling
      circumstances.  The judge referred to the potential effect if the
      couple had a child but there was no legal presence of a child.  There
      was a lack of reasoning and the decision was out of keeping with the
      authorities of the Supreme Court.

   6. For the appellant, Mr Robertson referred to the compassionate factors
      relied upon by the judge.  The evidence before her allowed her to form
      the view she did.  If there was a difficulty it was only with some of
      the language she used, such as referring to removal as unduly harsh
      rather than referring to exceptional circumstances.  The judge
      referred specifically at paragraph 10 to the decision in Agyarko.  Mr
      Robertson referred me to the definition of exceptional circumstances
      given by Lord Reed at paragraph 19.  This was related to the concept
      of what was unjustifiably harsh, the consequences of which would
      render a decision disproportionate.  In the present appeal harshness
      was at the forefront of the judge's reasoning.

   7. Mr Robertson drew to my attention an application dated 3rd September
      2018 to admit new evidence under rule 15(2A).  This evidence showed
      that the appellant's wife is happily now 3 months pregnant.  Sadly
      there was also medical evidence showing the appellant's wife's mother
      is seriously ill.  Mr Robertson emphasised that the appellant relied
      on exceptional circumstances to succeed under Article 8.

Discussion
   8. The Secretary of State's appeal will succeed only if it can be shown
      that the Judge of the First-Tier Tribunal made an error of law.  At
      first sight there does appear to be such an error, at paragraph 24,
      where the judge wrote that there "are no public interest factors
      weighing against the Appellant in this case."  This statement appears
      to disregard the important requirement of s 117B to have regard to the
      public interest in the maintenance of effective immigration control.
      It cannot be maintained, however, that the judge did not have regard
      to this.  The requirement is stated two paragraphs earlier at
      paragraph 16 (the paragraph numbering in the decision is badly
      adrift).  At paragraph 24 what the judge seems to be referring to is
      the absence of adverse factors specific to the appellant, such as a
      history of offending or deception, dependence on public funds, etc.
      This view is supported by subsequent sentences in paragraph 24, which
      refer to the appellant having no criminal record, not being dependent
      upon public funds, speaking English and being fully integrated into
      British society.


   9. The judge was clearly aware, as stated at paragraph 9 of the decision,
      that in accordance with sub-sections 117B(2) and (3) fluency in
      English and strength of financial resources would confer no positive
      benefit on the appellant.  Although the absence of other adverse
      factors would not outweigh the public interest, their absence might be
      relevant when weighing any exceptional or compelling circumstances in
      the appellant's private or family life against the public interest.
      This approach is consistent with the decision of the Inner House in
      Mendirez [2018] CSIH 65.

  10. A further point of contention arises from the judge's reference to IVF
      treatment.  The judge appears to have thought that were it not for the
      couple's fertility problem they would have had a child and would have
      met the requirements of paragraph EX.1(a) of Appendix FM.  As the
      judge had already found that paragraph EX.1 did not apply, this
      observation seems no more than a somewhat speculative digression.  It
      doe not necessarily amount to an error of law such that the decision
      should be set aside.  This depends upon the judge's reasoning in
      relation to the balancing exercise under Article 8.

  11. In this regard the judge has made findings on the personal
      circumstances of the appellant and his wife and their relationship,
      and on the appellant's immigration history.  The judge has had regard
      to the relevant case law, including Agyarko [2017] UKSC 11, referred
      to specifically at paragraph 10.  Crucially the judge has had regard
      to the requirements of s 117B of the 2002 Act and taken into account
      the relevant provisions.  The outcome of the judge's balancing
      exercise may very well be close to the tipping point where the balance
      would fall against the appellant, but I am not persuaded that the
      judge erred in law.

Conclusions

  12. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve
      the making of an error on a point of law.

  13. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal allowing the appeal shall
      stand.

Anonymity
The First-tier Tribunal did not make a direction for anonymity.  I have not
been asked to make such a direction and there is no need for one.




M E Deans
                     20th November 2018
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
