
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10068/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Heard at Glasgow  Decision & Reasons Promulgated
On 26th April 2019     On 30th May 2019


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY JUDGE UPPER TRIBUNAL FARRELLY


                                   Between

                                   MR A N
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                            Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                 Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Ms Loughran of Loughran and Co, Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr. M Mathews, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS
Introduction

   1. The appellant is a national of Algeria who, in February 2018 made a
      claim for protection. He said he realised he was Gay in his mid-teens
      and had 2 relationships. His father learnt of his sexuality and beat
      him. A number of years later his father disowned him because he no
      longer practised Islam. Later his father assaulted him and he
      complained to the police about this . There was a court hearing in
      2010 and his father was convicted. He claimed to fear his family on
      return and Algerian society because of how Gays are treated and also
      because he no longer follows Islam.

   2.  His claim was rejected by the respondent in August 2018. His account
      was not accepted. He had produced documents about the court hearing
      but the respondent attached little weight to these, referring to
      inconsistencies. Overall, his account of his sexuality had been
      considered inconsistent and unclear and his claim to be Gay was
      rejected.

   3. It was not accepted he would face any difficulties on account of his
      religion. In making his claim he had not indicated any problems
      because of religion and the Algerian Constitution provides for freedom
      of choice.

   4. In considering his credibility reliance was placed upon section 8 of
      the 2004 Act. He had given different dates as to when he arrived in
      the United Kingdom, being either 2004 or 2010. He also travelled
      through various safe countries and when stopped in London had forged
      French identity documents. He also had been working illegally in the
      United Kingdom.

   5. If the claim were true, the respondent referring to the country
      guidance case of OO (Gay Men) (CG) [2016] UKUT 65. If  a Gay person
      did not reveal their sexuality because it might attract upsetting
      comments or result in discrimination but not persecution. Regarding
      the fear of his family, the respondent took the view it was reasonable
      to expect him to relocate as he had done before.

   6. He did not have a partner and had not been here the necessary time to
      satisfy paragraph 276 ADE. The respondent saw no reason why he could
      not reintegrate into his home country. No exceptional circumstances
      were identified. He referred to having an abscess on the back of his
      neck but the respondent concluded he could obtain medical treatment in
      Algeria.

The First tier Tribunal.

   7. His appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge C McManus at Glasgow
      on 27 November 2018.In a decision promulgated on 11 October 2018 the
      appeal was dismissed. The appellant was represented by Ms Loughran, as
      he is now.

   8.  The judge heard from the appellant. The decision records the
      appellant's evidence as being that he had no long-term homosexual
      relationships since arriving in the United Kingdom. He regularly would
      visit Gay saunas in Glasgow and Edinburgh. A medical report indicated
      he had been diagnosed with syphilis. He was on a waiting list for the
      removal of the cyst from his neck.

   9. Paragraph 15 records the Presenting Officer's submissions about the
      treatment of Gays in Algeria. There was reference to the respondent's
      country policy and the country guidance decision of OO. It was
      submitted that although there was discrimination this was below the
      persecution threshold. It was accepted that homosexuality was a
      criminal offence in Algeria. Paragraph 16 recorded that some members
      of the LGBT community in Algeria lived openly and there was no
      evidence of a policy of harassment. It was also argued that the fact
      the appellant complained to the authorities about his father and who
      was convicted supported the view that there was sufficiency of
      protection.

  10. The submissions made on behalf of the appellant were recorded at
      paragraph 21 onwards. There was reference to extreme stigma. The judge
      was asked to consider the Upper Tribunal decision in OO with the
      Supreme Court decision in HJ Iran on the significance of how a person
      would live. It was submitted that the appellant should not be expected
      to live `discreetly'. His circumstances were distinct from that in OO
      in that the appellant would not choose to live discreetly.

  11. The judge accepted the appellant's account about his sexuality and
      placed emphasis upon the court documents. Whilst First tier Judge
      McManus found he was Gay his general credibility was not established.
      The judge did not accept he would live as an openly Gay man if
      returned. The judge referred to his account of limited sexual activity
      in Algeria and whilst in the United Kingdom. The judge concluded that
      his lifestyle in the United Kingdom was consistent with the conclusion
      that he would not live openly as a Gay man in Algeria and this was not
      by reason of any fear.

  12. The judge concluded that there was not at risk of persecution save
      from his immediate family members. The judge referred to the
      background information and concluded there was sufficiency of
      protection. The risk from his family could be avoided by relocation.
      The judge concluded the appellant could reasonably live elsewhere in
      Algeria where it was not publicly known he was Gay.

The Upper Tribunal

  13. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted on the basis it
      was arguable the judge did not give clear and sufficient reasons for
      concluding the appellant would not live openly as a Gay man if he
      relocated within Algeria. It was also arguable that the judge erred in
      concluding living discreetly would not be because of fear of
      persecution.

  14. Ms Loughran referred me to the 3 grounds upon which are application
      for permission was made. The 1st of these related to the judge's
      comments at paragraph 34 that the appellant could relocate where he
      would not be known as being Gay. She submitted the appellant would be
      known as being Gay throughout Algeria. She submitted the court
      judgement was a public document and that his father would want it to
      be distributed to cause further difficulties for his son.

  15. Her second-ground was that the judge at paragraph 34 found it likely
      that on return to Algeria the appellant would choose not to live as an
      openly Gay man and this would be for reasons other than a fear of
      persecution. She contends that the judge did not provide reasons for
      this. She referred to what the appellant at question 104 said, namely,
      he would not keep his sexuality a secret.

  16. The final argument was that the judge erred in linking the appellant's
      lack of general credibility with the rejection of his claim that he
      would live as an openly Gay man. Because he may have been untruthful
      about certain aspects of his claim the not mean necessarily other
      aspects were untrue. She said the appellant's evidence was that he had
      been going to Gay clubs and saunas whilst here and therefore was
      leading openly Gay life.

  17. In response, Mr Mathews said it was necessary to consider the reason
      why a person would live in a certain way. He submitted that the judge
      concluded the appellant would live a lifestyle which would not bring
      him into conflict. This is based upon his account of how he had lived
      in Algeria before and also how he had been living in the United
      Kingdom where there were no restrictions. The judge also had regard to
      the country guidance decision in relation to the objective risk. He
      submitted that the 1st ground advanced did not demonstrate any error
      of law. He described it as a merits ground. The 2nd ground he read as
      a reasons challenge. He submitted the judge gave adequate reasons for
      this conclusion at paragraph 33. Again, he submitted the third ground
      advanced was on the merits rather than any error of law. He submitted
      the grounds advanced did not engage with the country guidance
      decision.

  18. In reply, Ms Loughran referred to the appellant's evidence at question
      90 of the interview where he said he attended nightclubs and
      discotheques and Gay saunas where he would meet partners. She
      submitted there was a tension between what was said in HJ Iran and the
      country guidance decision of OO. She acknowledged that if the
      appellant would modify his behaviour due to social pressure this would
      be insufficient. However, she contended that the appellant had already
      been attacked because of his sexuality and this was a reason for self-
      imposed restrictions.

Consideration

  19. The country guidance decision of OO (Gay Men) (CG) [2016] UKUT 65 is
      on all fours with the appellant's main claim. The First-tier Judge
      followed this decision. The country guidance indicates a very limited
      risk and so presented the appellant with an uphill struggle to
      establish his claim. Whilst homosexual behaviour is criminalised the
      country guidance decision found that in Algeria there was no real risk
      of prosecution. In the few instances where this has occurred there has
      been some other aggravating factor. The decision also points out that
      the criminal law is entirely secular and Sharia law is not applied.
      Case also found that there was a likelihood that a Gay who conceal his
      sexual orientation in so because of the social mores and that the
      situation fell below the threshold of persecution. The Upper Tribunal
      found that an individual would not face a real risk of persecution if
      he were suspected of being Gay.

  20. The main real risk identified in OO (Gay Men) (CG) was from an
      individual's family. I note the court documents in the appellant's
      claim clearly record the account that his father assaulted him for
      being Gay. This is significant evidence of sufficiency of protection.
      In any event, localised difficulties can be avoided by relocation. The
      country guidance case sets out that such an individual will attract no
      real risk of persecution. The position is different if he can
      demonstrate that due to his personal circumstances it would be
      unreasonable and unduly harsh to relocate. Particular characteristics
      might give rise to higher level of disapproval. The country guidance
      counters the 1st point made by Ms Loughran that publication of the
      court hearing would place him at risk on relocation.

  21. I do not find a conflict between OO (Gay Men) (CG) [2016]UKUT 65 and
      HJ (Iran) [2010] UKSC 31.The Upper Tribunal at paragraph 11 set out
      the guidance given by Lord Rodger at paragraph 82.The 1st question to
      ask was whether the individual was in fact Gay as claimed or perceived
      to be Gay. In the instant case the judge did find the appellant was
      Gay.

  22. The next question was whether Gay's who lived openly in the particular
      country involved would be liable to persecution. In OO (Gay Men) (CG)
      the Upper Tribunal at paragraph 12 pointed out that whilst homosexual
      behaviour is criminalised in Algeria the jurisprudence establishes
      that this alone would not constitute persecution. If the offence
      carries imprisonment there will still need to be evidence that it is
      actually applied. The Upper Tribunal had the benefit of expert
      evidence about the criminal sanctions and recorded that prosecutions
      were extremely rare. The Upper Tribunal concluded that that the
      evidence indicated the Algerian authorities chose not to prosecute
      even when there was cogent evidence of behaviour covered by the
      criminal code. Consequently the country information is not supportive
      of the 2nd question raised in HJ Iran.

  23. The 3rd question posed in HJ Iran was what the applicant would do if
      returned. If the situation was they would live openly as a Gay man and
      as a consequence be exposed to real risk of persecution then the claim
      succeeded. This was so even if this can be avoided by hiding their
      sexuality. In the case of someone who does hide their sexuality then
      is necessary to consider why. If this is because of fear then they
      have a well-founded fear of persecution. However, if there are other
      reasons, such as societal, which had nothing to do with the fear of
      persecution they would not. OO (Gay Men) (CG) addresses this at
      paragraph 54 onwards.

  24. The Upper Tribunal at paragraph 57 observed that there was evidence of
      Gay Algerians who had moved to France still did not live openly even
      though there was no obstacle to doing so. This led the Upper Tribunal
      to conclude that they had not lived openly in Algeria for reasons such
      as self-perception rather than fear of persecution.

  25. In summary I find no conflict between the decisions as Ms Loughrey has
      suggested. I find that the Upper Tribunal is applying HJ Iran in the
      context of Algeria.

  26. The findings in the appellant's case mirror OO (Gay Men) (CG) in
      relation to why the appellant might not live openly. This is
      encapsulated at paragraph 30 of the decision. I find the comments
      there are entirely compatible with HJ Iran and OO (Gay Men) (CG).

  27. In conclusion, I find the decision indicates a careful analysis of the
      evidence and case law. The judge made the significant and fundamental
      finding for the claim that the appellant was Gay as he claimed. The
      suggestion by the appellant that if returned he would behave in a
      manner which might increase the risk was rejected by the judge. This
      was based primarily upon the case law and the content of paragraph 30.
      In addition, the judge was entitled in assessing this claim to take
      into account the appellant's overall credibility. I appreciate that a
      person may tell lies about one aspect but it does not follow the
      entire claim is untrue. However, the judge did not base the conclusion
      on this premise. The judge has set out clearly the reasons behind the
      decision and these are entirely sustainable. I find no material error
      of law established.

Decision.

No material error of law has been established in the decision of First-tier
Tribunal Judge McManus. Consequently, that decision dismissing the
appellant's appeal shall stand.


Francis J Farrelly
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge.
25th May 2019

