
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10859/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 26 February 2019                           |On 22 March 2019              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                     AA

                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Hussain
For the Respondent:    Mrs Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. By a decision promulgated on 16 August 2018, I found  that  the  First-
    tier Tribunal had erred in law such that its decision fail  to  be  set
    aside. My reasons were as follows:

         1.   The appellant, AA, was born  in  1986  and  is  a  citizen  of
         Eritrea but was born in and has lived in Saudi Arabia all his  life
         before he came to the  United  Kingdom  in  May  2017  and  claimed
         asylum.  By a decision of the respondent dated 12 October 2017, the
         appellant was refused international protection.  He appealed to the
         First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Kempton)   which,   in   a   decision
         promulgated  on  7  December  2017,  dismissed  the  appeal.    The
         appellant now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

         2.   Judge Kempton recorded [23] that the appellant's returning  to
         Eritrea "is not an issue"; the respondent proposes  to  return  the
         appellant to Saudi Arabia.  Granting permission, Judge Robertson on
         8 January 2018 wrote:

             There was some arguable merit in the grounds  in  that,  given
             that it is accepted  that  the  appellant  is  a  national  of
             Eritrea, the judge has not considered what risk  there  is  to
             the appellant if he is returned to Saudi Arabia in view of the
             background evidence as to the crackdown on illegal working  in
             Saudi Arabia, even if he was not deported to Eritrea  when  he
             lived there.  The risk of refoulement has not been  considered
             by the judge, particularly as there was no evidence before him
             that the appellant had any qualifications which  would  enable
             him to apply for a residency permit.

         3.   The appellant argues that he could not  obtain  Saudi  Arabian
         nationality.  He would,  therefore,  require  an  entry  visa.   He
         claims that there was no likelihood that,  as  a  grocery  delivery
         driver having no higher level skills, he would be able to obtain  a
         visa.  The appellant argues that there is no visa category in which
         he could apply for entry to Saudi Arabia.

         4.   Mr Diwnycz, who appeared for the Secretary of State before the
         Upper Tribunal, acknowledged that the decision  of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal Judge was flawed.  The judge correctly noted [47] that the
         burden of proof rested on the appellant.  He went on to say:

             [The appellant] has not met that burden [of proof] as  he  has
             not proved that he has taken steps in that regard or that  the
             Saudi authorities are unwilling to grant  his  residence.   He
             has not shown that he cannot obtain residence by applying  for
             employment with a sponsoring employer in Saudi Arabia.  He has
             not shown that he has taken any steps in that regard since  he
             has been in the UK.  He has to be seen to have  exhausted  all
             possibilities before claiming asylum.

         5.   The circumstances of the appellant differ from those of asylum
         seekers who may be expected, whilst within the United  Kingdom,  to
         take steps through the London Embassy of the country of which he or
         she may be a citizen in order to obtain a passport or  other  entry
         document so that return to the  country  of  nationality  might  be
         facilitated.  It is agreed that the appellant has no entitlement to
         Saudi  nationality  notwithstanding  his  long  residence  in   the
         country.  I accept, therefore, that he would require an entry  visa
         which will only be issued to him if,  as  the  background  material
         indicates, he has an employer or sponsor in Saudi Arabia.  It would
         seem, therefore, that the Secretary of State is  arguing  that  the
         appellant is not simply concerned with obtaining an entry  document
         from an embassy but, before he approaches the embassy,  identifying
         a potential employer, obtaining  employment  to  commence  at  some
         future date in Saudi Arabia and then successfully  applying  for  a
         visa whilst still in the United Kingdom.  On the face of it,  those
         are steps which the appellant may be  able  to  undertake  but  the
         First-tier Tribunal has not examined the likelihood of each or  all
         of those steps proving feasible in practical terms.   Moreover,  as
         Judge Robertson observed, there was no discussion  in  the  judge's
         decision of the possibility  of  refoulement  to  Eritrea  given  a
         recent crackdown on illegal working in Saudi Arabia.  I  find  that
         the judge's analysis is incomplete and I set aside his decision.

         6.   Mr Hussain urged  me  to  remake  the  decision  allowing  the
         appeal.  I am not satisfied that I should do so.   Before  remaking
         the decision  in  the  Upper  Tribunal,  I  wish  to  hear  further
         submissions and, should the parties wish to adduce  it,  additional
         evidence addressing  the  matters  which  I  have  set  out  above,
         including refoulement.  It may be necessary for  the  appellant  to
         obtain an expert report dealing with Saudi Arabian visa  conditions
         and also with  the  likelihood  of  refoulement  to  Eritrea.   The
         parties may, therefore, adduce further evidence provided that  they
         send that evidence to the Upper Tribunal and serve it on the  other
         party no less than 10 days before the resumed hearing.

         Notice of Decision

         7.   The decision of the First-tier Tribunal which was  promulgated
         on 7 December 2017 is set aside.  None  of  the  findings  of  fact
         shall stand.  The decision will be remade  in  the  Upper  Tribunal
         (Upper Tribunal Judge Lane) following a resumed hearing on  a  date
         to be fixed in Bradford (3 hours allowed).

 2. At the resumed hearing Bradford on 26 February 2019, the appellant gave
    evidence in Arabic with the assistance of an interpreter. He was cross-
    examined by Mrs Pettersen, who appeared for the Secretary of State.  He
    was asked why a document which he had produced  in  evidence  which  he
    claims shows that  his  leave  to  remain  in  Saudi  Arabia  had  been
    cancelled shows an expiry date of 2020.  I  found  his  answers  to  be
    unsatisfactory. What he said in an attempt to explain the existence  or
    absence of current residence permit  continued  to  conflict  with  the
    contents of the document itself.

 3. However, the appellant  relies  upon  the  expert  report  of  Mr  John
    Campbell of the University of London (SOAS) which is dated 11  February
    2019. Mrs Pettersen did not seek to challenge the contents that  report
    or the credentials of the author. Mr Campbell's evidence indicates that
    there has been a crackdown on foreign workers in  Saudi  Arabia;  their
    treatment by the government there has been criticised by  international
    agencies for its harshness. It is also clear from the report that there
    is no question that the appellant, an Eritrean citizen, would  be  able
    to obtain the right to reside in Saudi Arabia by gaining naturalisation
    as a citizen. Most significantly, the  report  indicates  clearly  that
    possession of leave to remain or enter Saudi Arabia is, for  a  foreign
    worker, not sufficient  if  it  is  not  also  accompanied  by  written
    evidence of sponsorship by a Saudi employer. Such sponsorship has to be
    approved  by  both  the  Foreigners  Control  Office  and  the   Labour
    Department. It is apparent that the appellant, even though  it  appears
    on the face of the  documents  continues  to  have  a  valid  residence
    permit, does not possess sponsorship provided by a Saudi  employer  and
    that he would be unable to arrange such sponsorship before  seeking  to
    enter the country. In such circumstances, Mr Campbell's  conclusion  is
    categorical; the appellant would  be  arrested  upon  return  to  Saudi
    Arabia and he would be first imprisoned, then refouled to Eritrea where
    both parties accept he would face a real risk of  persecution.  In  the
    circumstances, I find that his appeal should be allowed on  asylum  and
    Article 3 ECHR grounds.



Notice of Decision

 4. The appellant's appeal against the decision of the Secretary  of  State
    dated 12 October 2017 is allowed on asylum  grounds  and  human  rights
    grounds (Article 3 ECHR)


Signed                              Date 26 February 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


