
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/10912/2019 (v)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House via Skype       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 15 April 2021                     |On 8 June 2021                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON


                                   Between

                                   Mr k k
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Sanders instructed by Blackstones Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Ms Cuhna, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Thomas promulgated on 2 March 2020  dismissing  the
    appellant's appeal.  The  background  history  is  that  the  appellant
    claimed asylum on 15 August 2017 which was refused.   He  then  applied
    for leave on human rights grounds on 30 January  2018  which  was  also
    refused.  His further submissions were refused on 23 October  2019  and
    formed the basis of the appeal under Section  82  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

 2. The appellant came to the UK in 1997 and has lived in the  UK  for  the
    past 23 years.  He  feared  a  return  to  Bangladesh  because  of  his
    political opinion as a member of the Bangladeshi National Party,  ("the
    BNP").   Prior  to  leaving  Bangladesh  he  was  an  activist  in  the
    Jatiotabadi Johbodal Youth Wing of the BNP and  attended  meetings  and
    demonstrations.  He maintained his problems  started  in  1996  when  a
    local thug Mustafa and his criminal friends who  were  associated  with
    the Awami  League  demanded  monetary  subscriptions  from  the  family
    clothing shop.  As a result the appellant was attacked by  Mustafa  and
    two associates, was hospitalised and the appellant's  brother  filed  a
    complaint against the attackers, but no action was taken.  The  threats
    continued and the appellant and his brother fled the country  believing
    the police would not take action.  The brother went to  Nicaragua,  but
    the  appellant  came  to  the  UK   and   subsequently   attended   BNP
    demonstrations the last one being a meeting in Luton in December  2019.
    The appellant believed he was of adverse  interest  to  the  Bangladesh
    authorities who fabricated two cases against him.

 3. The grounds for permission to appeal maintained (i) that  at  paragraph
    19 the judge started the determination by considering Section 8 of  the
    Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of Claimants, etc.)  Act  2004  which
    was a direct failure to apply case law such  that  Section  8  findings
    should not be a starting point but part of the holistic  assessment  of
    credibility.  The judge fell foul of the practice warned against in  JT
    (Cameroon) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2008] Civ  878
    and SM (Section 8: Judge's process) Iran [2005] UKAIT  00116.   It  was
    clear that the judge's starting point was Section 8 rather than part of
    the holistic assessment required and there  was  no  reference  to  the
    relevant case law.  That undermined the credibility findings.

 4. In terms of ground (ii) at paragraph 20 the judge referred  to  finding
    at "paragraph 21 above" that the  appellant's  oral  evidence  and  the
    evidence of his family members was insufficient to discharge the burden
    of proof but it was not clear to what she was referring.

 5. At paragraph 21 the Tribunal made a positive finding in the  favour  of
    the appellant  that  the  documents  provided  did  evidence  that  the
    appellant was attacked.  At paragraph 21 the judge also stated that she
    did not find the attackers were terrorists or  politically  linked  but
    there is no reasoning to support that finding.

 6. At ground (iii) it was advanced that there was a  failure  to  properly
    assess the evidence.  At paragraph 22  the  judge  found  that  if  the
    appellant was wanted by the authorities, he through his  lawyers  could
    simply challenge the false reports made against him  legally  but  this
    failed to consider or engage with any of the  evidence  provided  about
    the situation in Bangladesh or the Home Office policy  in  relation  to
    Bangladesh included in  the  appellant's  bundle  was.   There  was  no
    reference to any of the country evidence within the determination.

 7. The  Country Policy Information Note ("the CPIN")  stated that the  law
    enforcement agents at a senior level tended  to  be  aligned  with  the
    ruling the party  and  the  police  and  criminal  justice  system  are
    functioning,  but  their   effectiveness   was   undermined   by   poor
    infrastructure  and  endemic  corruption  (paragraph   2.33   of   CPIN
    Bangladesh: Opposition to Government January 2018).   Clearly  even  on
    the respondent's case the appellant would  not  be  able  to  challenge
    those reports through the court.   If  the  appellant  was  wanted  for
    political reasons the court in Bangladesh would not take action in  his
    favour.

 8. At the hearing before me Ms Sanders submitted  the  skeleton  argument.
    That was composed by Ms Praisoody of Counsel dated 14 August 2020 and a
    copy was also forwarded to Ms Cunha.  This  outlined  the  grounds  for
    permission to appeal save for a further  challenge  in  relation  to  a
    failure by the judge to consider Article 2 and Article 3 but Ms Sanders
    confirmed she would not be pursing that avenue of challenge during  the
    hearing.

 9. Ms Sanders briefly expanded upon her grounds for permission  to  appeal
    making clear that SM identified that making a finding on Section 8  was
    not the starting point and the  findings  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    which were considered in JT (Cameroon) were strikingly similar to those
    made by the judge here.  The remainder of the decision showed that  the
    judge had distorted the  analysis  following  the  initial  finding  in
    relation to Section 8.  Under ground (ii) it  was  not  clear  on  what
    reasoning the judge reached the conclusions and paragraphs  20  and  21
    displayed an inadequacy  of  reasoning.   At  paragraph  24  the  first
    sentence showed no reasoning at all and no assessment of the evidence.

10. Ms Cunha agreed  and  conceded  that  there  were  in  fact  inadequate
    findings in relation to the appellant on risk of return and as  to  the
    sufficiency of protection available to him.

Analysis

11. JT (Cameroon) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2008]  EWCA
    Civ 878 confirms that it is the duty of the judicial decision maker  in
    every instance to reach his own conclusion upon the credibility of  the
    claimant.  In particular Section 8 was analysed at paragraph 21:

         "21.     Section 8 can thus be construed as not  offending  against
             constitutional principles. It is no more than  a  reminder  to
             fact-finding  tribunals  that  conduct   coming   within   the
             categories stated in section 8 shall be taken into account  in
             assessing credibility. If there was a tendency  for  tribunals
             simply to ignore these  matters  when  assessing  credibility,
             they were in error. It is necessary to take account  of  them.
             However, at one end of the spectrum, there may, unusually,  be
             cases in which conduct of the kind identified in section 8  is
             held to carry no weight at all in the  overall  assessment  of
             credibility on the particular facts. I  do  not  consider  the
             section prevents that finding in an appropriate case.  Subject
             to  that,  I  respectfully  agree  with  Baroness   Scotland's
             assessment, when  introducing  the  Bill,  of  the  effect  of
             section 8. Where section 8 matters are held to be entitled  to
             some weight, the weight to be given  to  them  is  entirely  a
             matter for the fact-finder."

12. Section 8 of the Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of Claimants,  etc.)
    Act 2004,  however,  should  be  taken  only  as  part  of  the  global
    assessment of credibility and it is not the starting point as  set  out
    by SM (Section 8: Judge's process) Iran

         "Even where section 8 applies, an Immigration Judge should look  at
         the evidence as a whole and decide which parts are  more  important
         and which less.  Section 8 does not require the behaviour to  which
         it applies to be treated as the starting-point of the assessment of
         credibility."


      The Tribunal at paragraph 10 clearly set out the process to be adopted
      when of making findings of fact

         "10. In our judgment, although section 8 of the 2004  Act  has  the
         undeniably novel feature of requiring  the  deciding  authority  to
         treat certain aspects of the evidence in a particular  way,  it  is
         not intended to, and does not, otherwise affect the general process
         of deriving facts from evidence. It is the task of the fact-finder,
         whether official or judge, to look  at  all  the  evidence  in  the
         round, to try and grasp it as a  whole  and  to  see  how  it  fits
         together and whether it is sufficient to discharge  the  burden  of
         proof. Some aspects of the  evidence  may  themselves  contain  the
         seeds of doubt. Some aspects of the evidence may cause doubt to  be
         cast on other parts of the evidence. Some aspects of  the  evidence
         may be matters to which  section  8  applies.  Some  parts  of  the
         evidence may shine with the light of credibility.  The  fact-finder
         must consider all these points together; and,  despite  section  8,
         and although some matters may go against and some matters count  in
         favour of credibility, it is for the fact-finder  to  decide  which
         are the important, and which are the less important features of the
         evidence, and to reach his view as a whole on  the  evidence  as  a
         whole".

13. At paragraph 19 the judge opened  her  findings  with  a  reference  to
    Section 8, but made no reference to SM nor to JT (Cameroon).  She found
    that because the appellant entered the UK in  1997  and  did  not  seek
    asylum until 2017, when he was  arrested  in  illegal  employment  this
    "adversely affected his overall credibility in this appeal".

14. She found his behaviour was not that of a person  who  had  left  their
    home and country in need  of  international  protection  and  that  his
    explanation that it was ignorant of the  law  and  procedures  was  not
    reasonable.  The judge found, "In these circumstances  the  appellant's
    failure claim (sic) asylum on arrival, is behaviour that under  Section
    8 of the 2004 Act, adversely affects his overall  credibility  in  this
    appeal".  She made this finding on the appellant's general  credibility
    in the first paragraph of her findings.

15. The judge was entitled to be concerned about the delay in the appellant
    claiming asylum but failed to approach the evidence in  line  with  the
    guidance in SM.  It is correct that the finding "affects"  credibility,
    but the early finding and the use of the word "overall"  suggests  that
    further credibility findings would be adverse and further reasoning was
    distorted by this initial finding.  For example, at paragraph  20,  the
    judge stated, "Given my findings in paragraph 21 above, the appellant's
    oral evidence and the evidence of his family members largely  dependent
    on information he gave them is not sufficient to  discharge  the  lower
    burden of proof on this issue (sic)".

16. It is not clear the judge was aware of the relevant authorities and the
    approach was an error of law.

17. As asserted in ground (ii), the judge  also  failed  to  give  adequate
    reasoning.  At paragraphs 20 and 21  when  making  adverse  credibility
    findings, the judge made no attempt  to  engage  with  or  analyse  the
    appellant's oral evidence or that  of  his  family  members;  and  when
    rejecting the evidence with reference to "paragraph 21   above"  either
    obfuscated the meaning because paragraph 21 was clearly below or overly
    relied on the paragraph above with relation  to  Section  8  which  was
    flawed.

18. Turning to paragraph 21 the judge accepted that the appellant had  been
    attacked, injured and hospitalised but at the close of  that  paragraph
    merely stated in relation to the alleged attackers

         "On the totality of the evidence, I find to the lower  standard  of
         proof, the appellant was attacked in February 1996, by Mustafa  and
         associates and suffered serious harm.  I do not find the  attackers
         were terrorists or politically linked to  the  AL  Party  or  their
         actions were state sponsored".

19. There was no explanation of why she rejected the  assertion  they  were
    politically linked.  That was also an error.

20. At paragraph 24 of the decision, the judge merely stated,  "Taking  the
    evidence in the round, I find  the  appellant  was  not  persecuted  in
    Bangladesh for political reasons and is not subjected to false  charges
    on an arrest warrant" but as can be seen from the previous ground,  the
    findings in relation to the appellant in Bangladesh,  were  flawed  and
    not sustainable because of the legal approach.

21. As the headnote of MK (duty to give reasons) Pakistan [2013] UKUT 00641
    (IAC) explains

         "(1) It is axiomatic that a  determination  discloses  clearly  the
         reasons for a tribunal's decision.

         (2) If a tribunal finds oral evidence to be implausible, incredible
         or unreliable or a document to be worth no weight whatsoever, it is
         necessary to say so in the determination and for such  findings  to
         be supported by reasons. A bare statement that a  witness  was  not
         believed or that a document was afforded no weight is  unlikely  to
         satisfy the requirement to give reasons".

22. Without a proper legal approach to credibility, the assessment  of  the
    facts, particularly in relation to Bangladesh was flawed and  thus  the
    judge was not in a position to assess the risk on return.  I shall  not
    delve deeper in the grounds  and  the  lack  of  reference  to  country
    guidance, but note that at the close of the hearing Ms Cuhna agreed and
    conceded that there was a material error of law  in  the  decision  and
    that the matter should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

I set aside the decision and preserve  no  findings.   The  matter  will  be
remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a hearing de novo.

Directions

The appellant should provide a skeleton  argument  at  least  fourteen  days
prior to the hearing and there should  be  a  Bengali  interpreter  for  the
appellant and his witnesses.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could  lead  to  contempt  of  court  proceedings.   The
matter relates to asylum.


Signed      Helen Rimington  Date 26th April 2021

Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington
