
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/10985/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On: 13th December 2018                   |On: 04th January 2019             |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                                     TD
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Ms Mellon, Counsel instructed by Wilsons LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Vietnam born in 1973.   She  appeals  on
    protection and human rights grounds against the  Respondent's  decision
    of the 12th October 2017  to  refuse  to  revoke  a  deportation  order
    against her and to grant her leave to remain.


 2. The appeal comes before  me  pursuant  to  a  transfer  order  made  by
    Principal Resident Judge O'Connor on the 18th October 2018. The  matter
    already had a long and complex  history  to  that  point  but  for  the
    purpose of this decision the key events are as follows:

        i) The Respondent signed a deportation order against the  Appellant
           on the 7th January 2014 on the  grounds  that  her  removal  was
           conducive to  the  public  good  following  her  conviction  for
           production of a controlled drug (cannabis - class B) on the  1st
           October 2013.


       ii) On the 18th May  2016  the  Appellant  received  a  second  such
           conviction and was sentenced at  Liverpool  Crown  Court  to  12
           months' imprisonment with a recommendation for deportation.


      iii)  The  Appellant  claimed  asylum  in  December   2016   and   in
           representations made on her behalf in February  2017  asked  the
           Respondent to  revoke  the  deportation  order  against  her  on
           protection and human rights grounds.


       iv) The  Respondent  refused  to  grant  leave  and  to  revoke  the
           deportation order on the 12th October 2017.


        v) The First-tier Tribunal (Judge Shiner) dismissed the Appellant's
           appeal on the 3rd April 2018.  Although  the  Tribunal  accepted
           various important aspects of the Appellant's evidence  (findings
           to which I return below) it was not satisfied that she  faced  a
           real risk of harm if returned to  Vietnam  today.  Nor  was  the
           Tribunal satisfied that the Appellant had shown her  deportation
           to be a disproportionate  interference  with  her  Article  8(1)
           rights.


       vi) The Appellant successfully  applied  for  permission  to  appeal
           against the protection decision, but by its decision of the 14th
           May 2018  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  ID  Boyes)  refused
           permission to appeal against the Article 8 findings.

      vii) On the 31st July 2018 the  matter  came  before  Upper  Tribunal
           Judge Rimington.    At  that  hearing  the  Secretary  of  State
           conceded that there  were  material  errors  in  the  First-tier
           Tribunal's approach and  invited  Judge  Rimington  to  set  the
           decision of Judge Shiner aside. The particulars of those  errors
           are set out in Judge  Rimington's  decision  (appended)  but  in
           summary  they  were  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  failed  to
           consider or  make  findings  on  an  important  element  of  the
           Appellant's account, namely her claim  that  her  convictions  -
           particularly  the  latter  one  in  Liverpool  -  arose  from  a
           trafficking situation.  This error had infected  the  Tribunal's
           overall assessment of the risk that the  Appellant  may  be  re-
           trafficked should she return to her home area of Vietnam  where,
           it was accepted, she owed a considerable amount of money to loan
           sharks who were connected to an international trafficking  gang.
           Judge Rimington accepted the Respondent's concession and set the
           decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  aside,  whilst  expressly
           preserving many of its findings as to past events.

 3. My task was to remake the decision in the appeal. That  task  was  made
    immeasurably easier by the thorough case preparation of the Appellant's
    legal representatives and the considered and measured submissions of Mr
    Bramble. I am grateful to all concerned.  The  parties  invited  me  to
    proceed to remake the decision on the basis of the  preserved  findings
    of the First-tier Tribunal. In headline  terms  the  Tribunal  accepted
    that the Appellant had been trafficked into the United Kingdom and  had
    suffered serious harm as a result: I set out the  particulars  of  that
    evidence below. In respect  of  the  'Liverpool  incident'  Mr  Bramble
    accepted, on the lower standard of proof, that this had occurred in the
    manner described by the Appellant and that her latter conviction had in
    fact arisen from a situation in which  the  Appellant  had  been  taken
    against her will to a house where cannabis was being grown  and  forced
    to work there. In light of the largely  positive  credibility  findings
    made by the First-tier Tribunal I consider that this was  a  concession
    properly made on behalf of the Secretary of State.




    The Factual Matrix


 4. The agreed facts are:


        . The Appellant is a 45 year old woman from Quang Binh province  in
          central Vietnam


        . She was previously married. Her and her husband had  a  vegetable
          stall in the local market but they fell  into  debt  because  her
          husband was addicted to heroin. By 2004/5 the Appellant  had  had
          enough of her husband's addiction and violence  towards  her  and
          left him. She continued to live in their home area, struggling to
          bring up her son on her own and burdened by the debts incurred by
          her ex-husband

        . In 2011 the Appellant met two men who offered to consolidate  her
          debt by lending her  600,000,000  dong  (by  today's  rates  that
          equates to approximately �20,000). She could use  that  money  to
          repay her other  creditors,  and  she  could  repay  the  men  by
          agreeing to travel to Sweden where she  would  pick  strawberries
          until she had paid them back

        . The Appellant agreed to the proposal and in  2011  the  Appellant
          sent her son to live with her sister, and left Vietnam  with  the
          men

        . Soon after her arrival in Sweden the  Appellant  understood  that
          she had been lied to. There were no fields and  no  strawberries.
          She was taken, along with hundreds of  other  captives,  to  some
          buildings in a forest. They were kept in appalling conditions and
          threatened

        . After approximately six weeks the Appellant was taken, along with
          7 other women, on a long journey by road. When they  got  out  of
          the van they were in they found themselves in Germany. They  were
          arrested, fingerprinted and released by German  police  officers.
          The women were then  picked  up  by  the  traffickers  again  and
          continued their journey. They were taken  to  France  where  they
          were forced into the boots of cars. The cars were then placed  in
          a container and they were transported to the United Kingdom.  The
          Appellant suffered direct violence  and  sexual  assault  by  the
          traffickers during this journey

        . Once in the United Kingdom the Appellant was forced to work as  a
          prostitute. In May 2013 she tried to escape  along  with  another
          captive with whom she had formed a relationship. She was  injured
          during her escape attempt and was recaptured.  She  was  punished
          and then transferred  to  a  house  where  the  traffickers  were
          cultivating cannabis. She was forced to work  looking  after  and
          harvesting the plants

        . On the  29th  September  2013  the  Appellant  was  arrested  for
          cultivation of cannabis. She was sentenced to 6 months' in prison
          and recommended for deportation

        . On the 13th January 2014 the Appellant gave birth to a baby  girl
          (A).  the Appellant subsequently absconded with her daughter

        . In April 2016  the  Appellant  was  captured  by  traffickers  in
          Liverpool who took her and her baby to a house where she was once
          again forced to work  cultivating  cannabis.  She  was  soon  re-
          arrested and once again convicted of cultivating a Class B  drug.
          She was sentenced to 12 months in prison. Her daughter was  taken
          away from her and placed with foster  carers  by  Liverpool  City
          Council

        . The Appellant has been assessed by Dr Kim Joliffe,  a  Consultant
          Clinical Psychologist, as suffering from PTSD,  major  depressive
          disorder and severe anxiety.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  accepted
          that these conditions are the sequelae of the successive  traumas
          summarised above

        . The Appellant has been examined by  Dr  Ruth  Wilson  of  Medical
          Justice who found her body to bear 25 areas  of  scarring.  These
          included scars consistent or highly consistent with  her  account
          of being variously assaulted with a heated metal stick, a scythe,
          a knife and razor blades.  The  Appellant  further  has  injuries
          consistent or highly consistent with her claim to have lost front
          teeth after she was punched in the face, and to have sustained  a
          cut to her chin when her  head  was  violently  pulled  down  and
          smashed against the edge of a metal table.  Dr  Wilson  concluded
          that the overall distribution and pattern  of  the  scarring  was
          such that it was highly consistent with the Appellant's  account.
          On the basis of her evidence  the  First-tier  Tribunal  accepted
          that these injuries arose in the manner claimed,  i.e.  that  the
          Appellant was subject to extreme violence by her traffickers as a
          means of controlling her

        . It is reasonably likely that the men who loaned the Appellant 600
          million dong in 2011 are directly connected to the men in  Europe
          who trafficked the Appellant


 5. I further note the unchallenged evidence in the Appellant's most recent
    bundle to the  effect  that  the  Appellant's  sister  in  Vietnam  has
    recently been involved in a road traffic accident and as  of  the  28th
    November 2018 was under the care of Dr Hoang Bach Thao at  Hue  General
    Hospital where she is in a coma, having suffered severe brain and skull
    trauma.




    Legal Framework


 6. The Deportation Order signed on the 7th January 2014 was taken pursuant
    to s3(5)(a) of the Immigration Act 1971:


         (5) A person who is not a British citizen is liable to deportation
         from the United Kingdom if-
         (a) the Secretary of State deems his deportation to be conducive to
         the public good; or
         (b) another person to whose family he belongs is or has been
         ordered to be deported


    (emphasis added).


 7. The Appellant was subsequently  convicted  of  a  further  offence  and
    sentenced to 12 months in prison. In considering  her  application  for
    the deportation order to be revoked I must,  the  parties  agree,  take
    that  into  account  under  the  'automatic   deportation'   provisions
    contained s32 of the Borders Act 2007:




         32 Automatic deportation


         (1) In this section "foreign criminal" means a person-
           (a) who is not a British citizen,
           (b) who is convicted in the United Kingdom of an offence, and
           (c) to whom Condition 1 or 2 applies.
         (2) Condition 1 is that the person is sentenced to a period of
         imprisonment of at least 12 months.
         (3) ....
         (4) For the purpose of section 3(5)(a) of the Immigration Act 1971
         (c. 77), the deportation of a foreign criminal is conducive to the
         public good.
         (5) The Secretary of State must make a deportation order in respect
         of a foreign criminal (subject to section 33).
         (6) The Secretary of State may not revoke a deportation order made
         in accordance with subsection (5) unless-
           (a) he thinks that an exception under section 33 applies,
           (b) the application for revocation is made while the foreign
           criminal is outside the United Kingdom, or
           (c) section 34(4) applies.


 8. For the purpose of this appeal the relevant 'exception' in the 2007 Act
    is found at s33(2)(b):


         (2) Exception 1 is where removal of the foreign criminal in
         pursuance of the deportation order would breach-
         (a) a person's Convention rights, or
         (b) the United Kingdom's obligations under the Refugee Convention.


 9. If the Appellant can show that her removal would  be  contrary  to  the
    United  Kingdom's  obligations  under  the  Refugee   Convention,   the
    Secretary of State must revoke the deportation order and  grant  her  a
    period of leave to remain. The standard by  which  the  Appellant  must
    discharge that burden is not the normal civil standard. Because of  the
    matters at stake she is only required to prove her case  to  the  lower
    standard of 'reasonable likelihood'.   This standard  applies  both  to
    past events and to the risk of harm that the Appellant  might  face  in
    the future.


10. In assessing future risk I am bound to have  regard  to  the  Demirkaya
    principle enshrined in the Immigration Rules at paragraph 339K:


         339K.  The  fact  that  a  person  has  already  been  subject   to
         persecution  or  serious  harm,  or  to  direct  threats  of   such
         persecution or such harm, will be regarded as a serious  indication
         of the person's well-founded fear of persecution or  real  risk  of
         suffering serious harm, unless there are good reasons  to  consider
         that such persecution or serious harm will not be repeated.




    Discussion and Findings


11. The burden lies on the Appellant to show that she faces a real risk  of
    persecution for one of the five reasons set out in Article 1A(2) of the
    Refugee Convention. Although  the  First-tier  Tribunal  found  to  the
    contrary, the Secretary of State now accepts that the facts  do  engage
    the Refugee Convention, in that the Appellant can show herself to be  a
    member of a 'particular social group',  namely  'women  who  have  been
    trafficked' in Vietnam.


12. The Secretary of State further accepted that  the  Appellant  has  been
    subjected to persecution/ serious harm in the past. That harm  includes
    a) physical assault b) sexual  assault  c)  being  trafficked  for  the
    purpose of sexual exploitation and d) being trafficked for the  purpose
    of forced labour.   The fact that the Appellant  has  been  subject  to
    such harm in the past must be taken as a serious  indication  that  her
    fears about the future  are  well-founded.    My  starting  point  must
    therefore be to ask whether there are good  reasons  to  consider  that
    such harm would not be repeated?

13. In relation to the position in the Appellant's home area of Quang  Binh
    the Respondent conceded that  he  could  not  identify  any  such  good
    reasons. The Appellant owes a considerable amount  of  money  to  money
    lenders there who, it is  now  accepted,  are  connected  to  the  very
    organisation that trafficked the Appellant from Vietnam to  Sweden  and
    Germany and then into the  United  Kingdom.   There  is  no  reason  to
    suppose that the Appellant would today be safe  from  that  trafficking
    gang: she still owes them money, has escaped their control and moreover
    has supplied the United Kingdom authorities with  details  about  their
    operation.   Mr Bramble accepted that the gang would  be  motivated  to
    either re-traffick or otherwise seriously harm the Appellant.

14. There remained the question of whether the Vietnamese authorities would
    be able to  provide  the  Appellant  with  a  Horvath  'sufficiency  of
    protection'. At the hearing I  noted  that  this  had  been  a  central
    feature  of  the  Respondent's  case  in  the  original  decision.  The
    Appellant relied on  a  report  by  Christoph  Bluth,  a  Professor  of
    International Relations and Security at the University of Bradford.  Mr
    Bramble took no issue with Professor's Bluth's expertise: he  has  been
    studying and researching Vietnam for over twenty years.   Much of  what
    Professor Bluth says is  entirely  uncontentious.  It  is  agreed,  for
    instance, that Vietnam is a source  country  for  trafficking  for  the
    purpose of sexual and labour exploitation.  The features of  this  case
    are consistent with the  wider  patterns  of  trafficking  observed  by
    researchers and international organisations, namely that the  Appellant
    was lured abroad by false promises  of  work,  a  substantial  debt  is
    involved, and that individuals  such  as  she  are  often  forced  into
    trafficking situations because of the violent threats of loan sharks in
    Vietnam who charge exorbitant  rates  of  interest  and  thus  maintain
    control over their debtors for many years.   There  is  an  established
    connection between the loan sharks and the traffickers.


15. Professor Bluth does however have specific evidence to give  about  the
    ability or willingness of the state to deal with these  issues.  First,
    there is the  problem  of  corruption.   There  is,  he  reports,  some
    evidence to suggest that criminal activity including gambling, vice and
    loan-sharking has penetrated senior levels  of  the  police  force  and
    government. However the real problem is  that  lower  ranking  officers
    often collude with criminals in order to profit from  their  activities
    themselves: there is not therefore a willingness to provide  protection
    to potential victims. Second, there are questions about the ability  of
    the authorities to tackle these "endemic"  challenges:  the  number  of
    reports of police action against such gangs are relatively small in the
    context of the scale of the phenomenon.  Mr Bramble  accepted  that  on
    the particular facts of this case it was  reasonably  likely  that  the
    Appellant would not be able to access the protection of the  Vietnamese
    state. That is because she would remain at risk in her home  area,  and
    because the men involved are part of  an  established  operation  there
    who, in light of the evidence of Professor Bluth, very  likely  operate
    with the connivance of the local police.


16. The final matter to be considered  is  whether  it  would  in  all  the
    circumstances be reasonable to expect the Appellant to relocate  within
    Vietnam in order to avoid the traffickers.  The clear import of all  of
    the evidence before me is that it would not.  Whilst the  Appellant  is
    physically fit and able to work, and may even  be  able  to  call  upon
    members of her family for some support, there are  a  number  of  other
    factors which mean that her  existence  is  likely  to  fall  below  an
    acceptable standard. These are:

              i) There remains some risk from the large  and  multi-national
                 gang who have already trafficked her. Professor Bluth notes
                 that in order to resettle anywhere in Vietnam the Appellant
                 would  need  to  register  her  household  with  the  local
                 authorities. It is known that criminal gangs  are  able  to
                 bribe  the  police  in  order  to  locate  potential/former
                 victims;


             ii) Even if that risk were not  established  to  the  requisite
                 standard the Appellant remains at risk of being subject  to
                 exploitation again in the future. Her  consistent  evidence
                 has been that she and her  family  were  already  extremely
                 poor,  and  as  a  result  heavily  indebted.   These   are
                 precisely  the  characteristics  which  would  render   her
                 vulnerable to being trafficked again. That this  is  so  is
                 recognised by the Respondent's own guidance  on  the  issue
                 Victims of Modern Slavery - frontline staff guidance;

            iii) The Appellant has particular characteristics which increase
                 that vulnerability yet further. In her most recent  report,
                 dated the 9th December 2018, Dr Joliffe concludes that  the
                 Appellant is still  suffering  from  PTSD,  depression  and
                 anxiety disorder. She believes that if returned to  Vietnam
                 these conditions would worsen, rendering the Appellant less
                 able to  function,  "including  making  safe  and  reasoned
                 decisions".   As the 'Liverpool incident' illustrates,  her
                 mental health issues - and the fear of  violence  that  has
                 already been visited upon her - means that the Appellant is
                 more likely to comply with attempts to coerce her;

             iv) Even absent a risk  of  re-trafficking  the  aforementioned
                 mental health conditions will make it less likely that  the
                 Appellant will be able to work and provide for herself in a
                 safe and sustainable way.

17. There is, unfortunately, one other factor in this case which  satisfies
    me in itself that it would not be reasonable to expect her to  relocate
    within Vietnam.  The Appellant's daughter A  remains  in  the  care  of
    Liverpool City Council. At present it would appear  extremely  unlikely
    that this child, currently subject to an order  by  the  family  court,
    could or would be deported with the Appellant (see  below).     On  the
    facts before me child A was removed from the Appellant's  care  because
    she was being sent to prison. She was being sent to prison because  she
    committed a crime whilst under the control  of  her  traffickers.   The
    Appellant's current  legal  representatives  are,  I  am  told,  making
    efforts to secure further visitation rights to enable her  to  see  her
    daughter regularly or even one day for the child to be returned to  her
    care. In circumstances where mother and child have been separated as  a
    direct result of mother being trafficked, it would  in  my  view  be  a
    flagrant interference with her  Article  8  rights  to  remove  her  to
    Vietnam without her daughter, and where any  chance  of  maintaining  a
    relationship with her would be severed.  I am satisfied that to  do  so
    would be contrary to the United Kingdom's obligations  under  ECHR  but
    would also constitute "unduly harsh" circumstances in  the  context  of
    the Refugee Convention.  It is reasonably foreseeable, and likely, that
    such final separation from her daughter would have a devastating impact
    on the Appellant's already fragile mental health.


18. It follows that the appeal must be allowed.


19. I would add this. The papers before me indicate that on the  10th  June
    2016 the Secretary of State took a decision to deport  the  Appellant's
    daughter 'A' as the family member of a person subject to a  deportation
    order. The order itself was signed on the 31st August 2016. I  have  no
    information about whether that order has been challenged  by  Liverpool
    City Council, who are currently responsible for this child.  Since  the
    child is subject to an order of the family court she cannot be  removed
    from  the  jurisdiction:  in  light  that,  and  of  my  decision,  the
    Respondent will no doubt review the position  of  A  and  withdraw  the
    decision to deport her.




    Anonymity


20. This is a protection claim that involves evidence of sexual  abuse  and
    the wellbeing of a minor. Having had regard to Rule 14 of the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008  and  the  Presidential  Guidance
    Note No 1 of 2013: Anonymity Orders I therefore consider it appropriate
    to make an order in the following terms:


         "Unless and until a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
        Appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
        shall directly or indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her
        family.  This  direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  both  the
        Appellant  and  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply  with   this
        direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings"



    Decisions

21. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error of  law  such
    that the decision has been set aside (See attached).


22. The appeal is allowed on protection grounds.


23. There is an order for anonymity.








                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                    Dated 14th December 2018


