
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10471/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 15th February 2019                        |On 21st March 2019            |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES


                                   Between

                                     S A
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Ahmed, instructed by 12 Bridge Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Lindsay, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born in June  1990.  He  appeals
    against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Boyes,  dated  4
    October  2018,  dismissing  his  appeal  against  the  refusal  of  his
    protection claim on asylum, humanitarian protection  and  human  rights
    grounds.

2.    The  Appellant  appealed  on  the  grounds  that  the   decision   was
    procedurally unfair in that the judge cross-examined the Appellant  and
    asked for information which the Respondent did not seek  to  challenge,
    the judge failed  to  take  into  account  material  evidence  and  his
    findings were not open to him on the evidence before him. Further,  the
    judge  failed  to  make  a  finding   on   the   Appellant's   marriage
    notwithstanding the marriage certificate and photographs.

3.   Permission was granted by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Lambert  on  24
    October 2018 on the ground that it was arguable the judge's conduct  of
    the proceedings and recording of the evidence  were  capable  of  being
    perceived as unfair treatment amounting to an arguable error of law.


Submissions

4.   Mr Ahmed submitted that  there  was  a  lack  of  engagement  with  the
    evidence and the judge's failure to  make  a  finding  on  whether  the
    Appellant was married was crucial  to  the  assessment  of  credibility
    because it was an important aspect of the Appellant's realisation  that
    he was gay and it supported his account  of  entry  into  the  UK.  The
    judge's conclusions on other aspects  of  the  Appellant's  claim  were
    contaminated by this error. The only finding open to the judge  on  the
    evidence was that the Appellant was married.

5.   Mr Ahmed submitted that the judge wrongly  required  corroboration  and
    his criticism that the Appellant's evidence was lacking in  detail  was
    not open to him because the judge failed to put these  matters  to  the
    Appellant.  The  Appellant  had  given  a  full  explanation   in   his
    substantive interview about his visit to a gay club in Portugal and the
    judge had misunderstood the Appellant's claim.

6.   The judge had incorrectly recorded the Appellant's evidence  about  his
    wife leaving him in the UK and none of the points upon which the  judge
    relied were put to the Appellant. The  judge  failed  to  consider  the
    evidence in the round and give a  balanced  judgment.  The  Appellant's
    witness, Mr A, gave oral evidence that he had spoken  to  A's  parents.
    The judge found that the Appellant was not homosexual and then rejected
    Mr A's evidence. The judge's approach to the evidence was fundamentally
    flawed.

7.   Mr Ahmed concluded his submissions without dealing with  allegation  of
    procedural unfairness made in the grounds and upon which permission was
    granted. I asked if he was relying on this point and he stated that  he
    would submit a witness statement in due course if he did not succeed on
    the points he had just made, set out above.

8.   Mr Lindsay submitted that the Appellant had failed to substantiate  his
    allegation of bias. There was no note of the record of proceedings from
    Mr  Ahmed  who  had  given  evidence  in  his  submissions.  Procedural
    impropriety was not made out.

9.   Mr Lindsay submitted that there was no reference to  Tanveer  Ahmed  in
    the grounds and  the  Appellant  had  failed  to  submit  his  original
    marriage certificate. The Appellant entered the UK two weeks before his
    ID card expired and made a false asylum claim.  Whether  the  Appellant
    was married was not material, but the judge  assessed  the  Appellant's
    credibility on the basis he was  married  in  any  event.  The  judge's
    finding that the Appellant was not a credible witness was open  to  him
    on the evidence before him and he gave adequate reasons for  coming  to
    this conclusion.

10.  Mr Ahmed submitted that the judge  made  adverse  credibility  findings
    without balancing the Appellant's account. He sought  to  rely  on  the
    judge's  record  of  proceedings  in  relation  to  the  allegation  of
    unfairness. The Appellant was married and had the judge  accepted  this
    he would have found the Appellant to be a credible witness.  The  judge
    assessed credibility on a false premise. There was ample detail in  the
    Appellant's asylum  interview  and  the  judge's  conclusion  that  the
    Appellant's claim was vague indicated that  the  judge  had  failed  to
    consider the content of the interview.  The  decision  was  unsafe.  Mr
    Ahmed applied for an adjournment to submit a witness statement to  deal
    with the bias/procedural impropriety/unfairness point.


The Appellant's claim

11.  The Appellant arrived in the UK on 8 October 2017  and  claimed  asylum
    on 21 February 2018, after his arrest on 13 January  2018.  It  is  the
    Appellant's case that on 27 October 2016  he  travelled  to  Cyprus  to
    study and met his wife, a Portuguese national. They married on 4 August
    2017, five months after they met. The Appellant  realised  he  was  gay
    because he felt awkward having sex  with  his  wife  and  knew  he  was
    different. He had sex with a man called Billy in Portugal whom  he  met
    at a night club.

12.  The Appellant went to Portugal with his wife to visit her parents.  His
    return flight was via London Gatwick,  but  he  missed  his  connection
    because his wife left him at the home of his friend Mr A and  took  the
    flight herself. His wife had a heart condition and had become unwell on
    the journey back so they had left the airport and gone to Mr A's house.
    His wife went to bed  and  the  Appellant  stayed  downstairs  watching
    homosexual pornography on his laptop. During the night, his  wife  came
    downstairs and saw him watching homosexual pornography and became  very
    angry. There was an argument and she went to back to bed.  He  did  not
    see her leave at 4am to  take  the  connecting  flight.  She  took  his
    passport and ticket and he has not seen or heard from her since. A  few
    days later he received telephone calls from his parents threatening  to
    kill  him.  Mr  A  had  travelled  to  Pakistan  and  spoken  with  the
    Appellant's father who made it clear that he wanted nothing to do  with
    him.


Discussion and Conclusions

13.  I refused Mr Ahmed's application  for  an  adjournment  because  having
    made an allegation of procedural impropriety in the grounds, he  failed
    to substantiate it. He  had  ample  notice  of  the  issue  upon  which
    permission was granted in October 2018. Mr Ahmed failed to act with the
    guidance given in BW  (witness  statements  by  advocates)  Afghanistan
    [2014] UKUT 00568.

14.  In any event, the judge's record of  proceedings  did  not  demonstrate
    any improper conduct  on  the  part  of  the  judge.  The  judge  asked
    questions to clarify the Appellant's account  and  accurately  recorded
    the evidence in his decision. There was no note from Mr Ahmed which was
    relied  on  at  paragraphs  2d  and  2f  of  the  grounds.  There   was
    insufficient evidence before me to show that  the  Appellant  had  been
    deprived of a fair hearing.

15.  The judge did not find the Appellant's account to be  credible  and  he
    gave adequate reasons for coming to that  conclusion.  The  judge  took
    into account all relevant matters and his findings were open to him  on
    the evidence before him. The burden was on the  Appellant  and  he  was
    represented by Mr Ahmed before the First-tier Tribunal. The  judge  did
    not require corroboration  of  the  Appellant's  account  and  was  not
    obliged to put points to him.

16.  The judge's conclusions on the Appellant's marriage were  not  material
    to the decision to dismiss the appeal because the  judge  assessed  the
    evidence on the assumption the Appellant was married and concluded that
    his account was incredible. The judge considered the evidence of Mr Ali
    and assessed the evidence in the round.

17.  I find that there was no error of law in the decision dated  4  October
    2018 and I dismiss the Appellant's appeal.


Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

              J Frances

Signed                                  Date: 15 March 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Frances


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.

              J Frances

Signed                                  Date: 15 March 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Frances
