
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-SAR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10400/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard remotely via Skype for Business|Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 19 February 2021                  |On 04 March 2021                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                     MAK
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Daykin
For the Respondent:    Mr Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, a male citizen of Bangladesh, appeals against a decision
    of the First-tier  Tribunal  promulgated  on  27  February  2020  which
    dismissed his appeal against the Secretary of State's decision dated 14
    October 2019 to refuse him international protection. The appellant  now
    appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. There are two grounds of appeal. First, the appellant contends that the
    First-tier Tribunal erred in law by failing to give weight to  internet
    background material in the form of reports of 'highly reputable'  NGOs,
    including CIVICUS and  Human  Rights  Watch.  It  was  the  appellant's
    evidence that charges had been brought against him notwithstanding that
    he had been living outside Bangladesh for 8 years. At [100], the  judge
    records that the appellant's representative had  submitted  that  there
    were 'credible news reports that many hundreds of cases have been filed
    against BNP [the party the appellant claimed to  support]  ...  by  the
    Awami League.'  The websites cited by the representative in support  of
    her submission included those of Human Rights Watch  and  CIVICUS.  The
    judge  commented  that,  'I  was  not  given  any  information  of  the
    independence or reliability of the websites.'

 3. Whilst I take judicial notice of the high media profile of Human Rights
    Watch, in particular, I agree  with  Mr  Bates,  who  appeared  at  the
    initial hearing for the Secretary of State, that  the  judge  does  not
    actually state that she did not attach weight to the internet  evidence
    as the grounds assert. Her subsequent finding at [101] that she did not
    believe that the appellant had faced charges 8 years after he had  left
    Bangladesh makes no reference  to  the  websites  and  arose  from  the
    judge's assessment of all the appellant's evidence, parts of which  the
    judge  gives  detailed  reasons  for  finding  to  be  inconsistent  or
    unreliable. She notes, for example, that the appellant had  claimed  in
    November 2018 that he did not know why the police should be  interested
    in him; however, the FIR, which first indicated to the  appellant  that
    he was of interest to the police, was not produced  until  24  December
    2018. Further, the judge gives additional detailed reasons at [103-105]
    for her finding that the appellant is an unreliable witness. Whilst  it
    may have been helpful if the judge had made a clear finding as  to  the
    weight she intended to attach to the background internet  material,  it
    is clear that she did not reject it entirely nor did she indicate  that
    any poor opinion she may have taken of that evidence  had  led  to  her
    conclusion that the appellant's claim had been fabricated; looked at in
    the round, there is no causal connection between the  judge's  findings
    on credibility and the weight or lack of weight she may or may not have
    attached  to  the  internet  background  material.  Those  findings  on
    credibility, subject to the judge's findings on the issue of sur  place
    activity, were determinative of the appeal.

 4. The second ground concerns the judge's analysis of  the  issue  of  sur
    place activity. The judge found that the  appellant  had  attended  BNP
    meetings and demonstrations whilst in the United Kingdom  but  rejected
    the 'unsubstantiated' assertion in a letter  from  BNP  United  Kingdom
    that the appellant's activity had led  the  Bangladeshi  government  to
    'put [the appellant's] name at  their  hit  list.'(sic)  The  appellant
    contends that the judge  made  confusing  findings,  on  the  one  hand
    accepting that the appellant had taken part,  as  he  had  claimed,  in
    political activities but also rejecting evidence (the letter  from  BNP
    UK) which supported  his  claim  of  facing  a  risk  on  return  as  a
    consequence of his United Kingdom activities.

 5. I do not accept that the judge's findings are incomplete or  confusing.
    In my opinion, the judge was correct to find that the claim in the  BNP
    UK letter was 'unsubstantiated', no evidence having been advanced which
    supported the claim that attendance at a meeting in the United  Kingdom
    by an individual with no genuine attachment to  the  BNP  or  political
    profile in Bangladesh would lead to the inclusion  of  his  name  on  a
    government 'hit list.' The grounds go on to assert that the question of
    whether the appellant had been identified by the Bangladesh  government
    as a genuine opponent was 'key to the [judge's]  consideration  of  the
    likelihood of the court documents being genuine.' I disagree. I do  not
    see how the fact that the appellant may have attended a few meetings in
    the United Kingdom can undermine the judge's core finding, based on  an
    examination of the whole evidence, that the  court  documents  and  the
    appellant's entire  claim  were  not  genuine.  Moreover,  the  grounds
    entirely fail to explain how sur place activity alone  and  absent  any
    domestic Bangladeshi political or security profile or  criminal  record
    would expose the appellant to a real risk on return to Bangladesh. I am
    not aware of any evidence or  relevant  country  guidance  which  might
    suggest that it would.

 6. For the reasons I have  given,  I  am  satisfied  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal did not err in law for the reasons advanced in the grounds  of
    appeal or at all. Accordingly, the appeal is dismissed.

    Notice of Decision

    The appeal is dismissed.


Signed                                                    Date  23  February
2021
Upper Tribunal Judge Lane



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

