
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10956/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 27th July 2017                     |On 20th September 2017                |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                             Mr MD MIZANUL KARIM
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M A Syed Ali (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr David Mills (Senior HOPO)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge O'Hagan, promulgated on 3rd March 2017, following  a  hearing  at
    Birmingham, Sheldon Court on 1st February 2017.  In the  determination,
    the  judge  dismissed  the  appeal  of  the  Appellant,  whereupon  the
    Appellant subsequently applied for,  and  was  granted,  permission  to
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Bangladesh, who was born on  10th
    October 1984.  He appealed against a decision of the Respondent,  dated
    30th September 2016, refusing his claim  for  asylum  and  humanitarian
    protection.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The Appellant's claim is that he fears persecution and ill-treatment in
    Bangladesh on account of his political activities because he  became  a
    member of the Chatra Dol whilst at college, a party which he joined  in
    2007, and with respect to which he remained involved in  politics  from
    2007 until 2009.  He was the organising secretary in 2008.  There was a
    demonstration  on  28th  May  2009  which  he   had   organised.    The
    demonstration became violent because of trouble caused  by  the  Chatra
    League.  He ran away.  That evening some ten or twelve people  came  to
    his house and threatened his father.  A few days later he  was  tracked
    down.  He was stabbed in the  hand  and  required  hospital  treatment.
    Subsequently two false cases were lodged against him.  The police  sent
    a letter to his house.  He is now at risk of ill-treatment if  he  were
    to be returned.

The Judge's Findings

 4. In his section on "The Evidence at the Hearing", the  judge  considered
    the Appellant's claim with respect to his activities over  a  two  year
    period with the Chatra Dol.  The judge found that the Appellant did not
    have sufficient knowledge of the Chatra Dol and that his  evidence  was
    very general and vague (see paragraphs 15 to 16).  The judge also found
    that the Appellant, who had entered the UK as  a  student,  waited  for
    seven years in order to make  his  asylum  claim  (see  paragraph  19).
    Having concluded that the Appellant's evidence was "vague  and  lacking
    in detail" (paragraph 30), the judge then ended  with  the  observation
    that, having considered the documents in the  bundle  that  purport  to
    support the Appellant's claim, he would not accept the authenticity  of
    these documents because the Appellant was not a reliable  witness  (see
    paragraph 38).

 5. The appeal was dismissed.

 6. On 28th March 2017, permission to appeal was granted on the basis  that
    the only consideration of the documentary evidence  (at  paragraph  38)
    appears to be after the judge had already made findings on the lack  of
    credibility of the Appellant, and the judge does  not  appear  to  have
    engaged adequately with the documentation.

 7. On 20th April 2017 a Rule 24 was entered to the effect that  the  judge
    had made a holistic assessment of the evidence and it was a matter  for
    the judge to come to his decision.

Submissions

 8. At the hearing before me on 27th July 2017, Mr Syed Ali,  appearing  on
    behalf of the Appellant, made the following submissions.   First,  that
    from paragraphs 22 to 37 onwards, the judge was principally preoccupied
    with the timeliness of the Appellant filing an asylum claim,  which  he
    regarded to have taken seven years to file, such that it was inherently
    for that reason lacking in credibility.  Only at paragraphs  38  to  39
    does the judge consider the documentation provided in  support  of  the
    claim.  Second, the judge did not  consider  the  Home  Office  Country
    Information and Guidance: Bangladesh: Prison  conditions  (March  2015)
    with respect to an Article 3 assessment in favour of the Appellant (and
    I note that this was also asserted at paragraph 5  of  the  Grounds  of
    Appeal).  Third, the judge did not consider the political  position  in
    Bangladesh at all in the context of the claim that was raised,  because
    there was no reference to the Country Information and Guidance that had
    been submitted.   Finally,  there  was  no  representation  before  the
    Tribunal, because although there was a Mr  S  Kumar  in  attendance  on
    behalf of the Appellant, he was not representing the Appellant.

 9. For his part, Mr Mills submitted that the  last  point  was  inaccurate
    because Mr S Kumar was actually  a  solicitor  for  the  Appellant.   I
    pointed out that this was entirely correct because Mr S Kumar not  only
    "accepted that the Appellant's evidence was vague" (see paragraph  21),
    but had also made closing submissions before the judge  (see  paragraph
    22).

10. Second, Mr Mills submitted that whereas a number of Grounds  of  Appeal
    had been lodged, the only  question  upon  which  permission  has  been
    granted, is whether the judge considered the documentary evidence as  a
    whole in conjunction with the other evidence, rather than leave it  for
    a consideration at the end of his decision.  In order  to  answer  this
    question, one has to bear in mind that the judge at the  outset,  under
    the  heading  "Analysis,  Findings  and  Conclusions",  had  stated  at
    paragraph 2, that consideration  would  be  given  to  the  "cumulative
    impact of all those matters" before the judge, and that  this  included
    the "overall tapestry of oral and written evidence" (paragraph 28).  It
    was clear that this self-direction was entirely accurate and  that  the
    judge was mindful at the outset of how  he  would  be  approaching  the
    evidence before him.

11. Third, the issue before the judge was that of credibility  and  he  had
    made it clear that, "this  is  a  case  in  which  the  sole  issue  is
    credibility", such that even Ms  Akhtar  had  "conceded,  that  if  the
    Appellant is telling the truth, he would be at  risk"  (paragraph  27).
    Given that credibility was the sole question, it  was  entirely  proper
    for the judge  to  raise  an  eyebrow  over  the  Appellant's  lack  of
    knowledge, with respect to his involvement with the Chatra  Dol  Party,
    where he had actually been an activist for a period of two  years  from
    2007 to 2008, and even held the  position  of  a  secretary,  but  with
    respect to which he gave wholly  vague  and  insufficient  information.
    The Appellant was simply unable to say what this party  stood  for  and
    yet he was fighting for this party.  It was wholly implausible for such
    a state of affairs to exist.

12. Fourth, the judge could not be criticised for taking into  account  the
    fact that the Appellant had not claimed asylum for  seven  years  until
    March 2016, because in doing so, the judge gave regard to the Court  of
    Appeal case of JT (Cameroon) [2008] EWCA Civ 878.  Despite a  reference
    to this Court of Appeal judgment, the judge made it  clear  that,  "the
    guidance that such a failure is something which may damage  credibility
    but does not automatically do so" (paragraph 32).

13. Finally, it is in this context that the judge at paragraph 38 addresses
    the question of documents in the bundle and finds them to be lacking in
    plausibility on the basis of the rule in  Tanveer  Ahmed  [2002]  UKAIT
    00439.  The finding here was entirely consistent with  what  the  judge
    had heard by way of submissions from Ms Akhtar, who appeared on  behalf
    of the Home Office, at paragraph 21, because she had argued that,

         "His answers were vague and  insubstantial.   Further,  he  claimed
         asylum only when all other avenues were closed.  In respect of  his
         documentary evidence, she reminded me of the principles set out  in
         Tanveer Ahmed [2002] UKAIT 00439, and asked me to  find  that  they
         were not credible".

14. In reply, Mr Syed Ali submitted that the judge was wrong  at  paragraph
    27 to simply say that, "this is a case  in  which  the  sole  issue  is
    credibility"  because  he  then  relied  entirely  upon  the  issue  of
    credibility in the form of the oral evidence given by the Appellant.

No Error of Law

15. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA 2007) such that I should set aside the decision.  My  reasons  are
    as follows.

16.  First,  it  is  abundantly  plain  that  the  Appellant  had  adequate
    representation from Mr S Kumar, a solicitor, before the  Tribunal.   He
    accepted the shortcomings in the Appellant's evidence as being  "vague"
    (paragraph 31), and he also drew to the Tribunal's attention a  letter,
    whereby the Appellant told his  then  solicitors  that  "he  wanted  to
    remain in the UK because of  the  political  situation  in  Bangladesh"
    (paragraph 35).

17. Second, the judge was entirely  correct  in  identifying  the  relevant
    issue before him as that of "credibility".  So much so, that  the  Home
    Office Presenting Officer even accepted, that were the Appellant to put
    forward a credible claim, then he would be at risk (paragraph 27).

18. Third, the judge properly directed himself at the outset that he  would
    look at the position of  the  evidence  before  him  in  terms  of  its
    "cumulative impact" and  that  consideration  would  be  given  to  the
    "overall tapestry of oral and written evidence" (paragraph 28).   There
    is nothing to suggest therefore that the judge ignored the  documentary
    evidence.  What the judge did was to then  hear  the  Appellant's  oral
    evidence.

19. Fourth, it is the Appellant's actual evidence before the Tribunal which
    is woefully inadequate and directly points to the implausibility of his
    claim, which the judge rightly described as having been a  "fabricated"
    claim (see paragraph 39).  This  is  because  the  Appellant,  who  had
    become an activist for the Chatra Dol for a two year period, such  that
    he even organised a demonstration, after he had become "the  organising
    secretary in 2008" (paragraph 29), was  simply  unable  to  pinpoint  a
    single credible policy of this organisation.

20. At the outset of his evidence he simply described the  main  policy  as
    being "idealistic" and one that  pursued  "truthful  policy",  and  one
    which "believed in the unity of Bangladesh" (paragraph 15).  The  judge
    repeatedly asked of the Appellant to be more specific  (see  paragraphs
    15 to 16), pointing it out that, "this was all very general" (paragraph
    16).  So much so, that even Mr Kumar  "accepted  that  the  Appellant's
    evidence was vague" (paragraph 31).

21. The judge himself gave adequate reasons for showing why  this  evidence
    was vague, pointing out that,

         "It was strikingly so when  he  was  cross-examined  on  the  point
         before me.  He was unable, when asked, to explain the policies  and
         beliefs of Chatra Dol, other  than  in  the  most  generalised  and
         vacuous of terms.  He was equally unable  to  give  any  meaningful
         account of his own role in the organisation ..." (paragraph 30).

22. Finally, it is in that context that the documentary evidence,  and  its
    role in the judge's estimation of the evidence before him,  has  to  be
    evaluated, and the judge is absolutely correct in saying that  had  the
    Appellant  been  a  "reliable  witness,  I  would  have  accepted   the
    documents", but the documentation could not assert that  the  Appellant
    was a member of the Chatra Dol, when the Appellant himself was found by
    the judge to have no knowledge of the  Chatra  Dol  in  any  meaningful
    sense.  This is the crux of the matter.

23. In addition to this, the Appellant had not claimed asylum for close  to
    seven years, and had only done so when all other  avenues  had  closed,
    and no credible explanation was provided before the  judge  as  to  why
    this course of action  had  been  pursued  in  this  manner.   It  went
    directly to the Appellant's bona fides in making the asylum claim.  The
    judge was entitled to so find.

Notice of Decision

24. There is no material error of law in  the  original  judge's  decision.
    The determination shall stand.

25. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 19th September 2017

