
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10796/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Cardiff Civil Justice                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|Remotely by Skype for Business                |                              |
|On 3 December 2020                            |On 19 January 2021            |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

                                     h m
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Vokes instructed by D&A Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Howells, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008  (SI  2008/2698)  I  make  an  anonymity  order  prohibiting   the
    disclosure or publication of any matter likely to lead  to  members  of
    the public identifying the appellant.  A failure to  comply  with  this
    direction could lead to Contempt of Court proceedings.

Introduction

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Iraq who was born on 1 January 1996.

 3. The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom clandestinely on 19 October
    2017.  He claimed asylum on 20 October 2017.  The basis  of  his  claim
    was that he had been employed by the head of  the  police  "L"  in  the
    Ranya District of Sulaymaniyah Governorate in the IKR in Iraq.  At  the
    instigation of L's wife, he had a sexual relationship  with  L's  wife.
    They were caught hugging and kissing by one of L's  bodyguards.   As  a
    result, the appellant  left  the  IKR  because  he  feared  L  who  was
    influential with the government and political  authorities.   With  the
    assistance of a maternal uncle, he came to the UK.

 4. On 25 October 2019, the Secretary  of  State  refused  the  appellant's
    claims for asylum, humanitarian protection and  under  the  ECHR.   The
    Secretary of State did not accept  the  appellant's  account  which  he
    claimed would put him at risk on return to the IKR.

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 5. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In a  determination
    sent on 23 April 2020, Judge  D  A  Thomas  dismissed  the  appellant's
    appeal on all grounds.

 6. The judge accepted the appellant's account of his  sexual  relationship
    with L's wife  and  accepted  L's  position  in  the  police  in  Ranya
    District.  The judge found that the appellant would be at real risk  of
    serious harm in his home area.   However,  the  judge  found  that  the
    appellant could safely and reasonably internally  relocate  within  the
    IKR.  The judge did not accept that L had influence  and  power  beyond
    the area of Ranya where he was head of the police and that he  had  the
    intention or ability to trace the appellant throughout the IKR.

 7. Further, the judge found that the appellant was  in  contact  with  his
    parents and his maternal uncle  who  had  assisted  him  to  leave  the
    country.  In those circumstances, it was  reasonably  likely  that  the
    appellant could obtain his existing CSID, passport or ID card or,  with
    their assistance, he could obtain  a  suitable  replacement  CSID  from
    Iraq.  Finally, the judge found that the appellant  was  likely  to  be
    returned directly to the IKR and given his circumstances, it would  not
    be unduly harsh or unreasonable for him to relocate  elsewhere  in  the
    IKR.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 8. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal on  two
    grounds.  First, the judge failed to give any reasons, having  accepted
    the credibility of the appellant's account,  why  the  appellant  could
    safely  internally  relocate  within  the  IKR  as  it  had  not   been
    established that L had influence and power beyond the area where he was
    head of the police.   Secondly,  the  judge  failed  to  give  adequate
    reasons for finding that the appellant could obtain his passport and ID
    documents from his family  in  the  IKR  or  that  he  could  obtain  a
    replacement CSID when his evidence was that his family could not assist
    him.

 9. On 18 July 2020, the First-tier Tribunal  (Judge  Scott-Baker)  granted
    the appellant permission to appeal on both grounds.

10. On 15 October 2020, the Secretary of State filed  a  rule  24  response
    seeking to uphold the judge's findings and decision.

11. In the light of the COVID-19 crisis, the appeal was listed before me at
    the Cardiff Civil Justice Centre  on  3  December  2020  for  a  remote
    hearing by Skype for Business.  I was based in court and Mr Vokes,  who
    represented  the  appellant,  and  Mr  Howells,  who  represented   the
    Secretary of State, joined the hearing remotely by Skype for  Business.



Discussion

    Ground 1

12. Ground 1 challenges the judge's finding in para 22 that

         "The appellant has not proved [L] has influence  and  power  beyond
         the region of Ranya, or that he has the  intention  or  ability  to
         trace the appellant throughout the IKR."

13. Mr Vokes, relying upon the grounds of appeal, submitted that the  judge
    had failed to give adequate reasons for this finding.  He  pointed  out
    that the judge had accepted at paras 18 - 21 of his determination  that
    the appellant 's account was genuine and that he was at risk on  return
    to his home area from L as a result of  the  discovery  of  his  sexual
    relationship with L's wife.  It was further accepted by the judge  that
    the appellant could not obtain a  sufficiency  of  protection  in  that
    area.  Mr Vokes submitted that the appellants' evidence was that L  was
    a powerful and influential  police  officer  who  had  links  with  the
    government.  In order to reach  the  adverse  conclusion  in  para  22,
    which was contrary to the appellant's evidence that he feared L  beyond
    his home area, the judge erred by  not  considering  A's  evidence  and
    giving reasons for rejecting his account.  Mr Vokes also relied on  the
    appellant's evidence, in his asylum  interview,  that  the  appellant's
    family had been visited in  order  to  find  the  appellant  after  the
    incident and had been threatened.  The appellant had explained  in  his
    interview that L would still be looking for him because it was a "moral
    issue and dignity".

14. Mr Howells submitted that just because the judge had accepted  part  of
    the appellant's evidence as being  credible  did  not  require  him  to
    accept all that the appellant said.  There was limited evidence  before
    the judge and no specific documentation was relied upon to persuade the
    judge that L had influence and power beyond the district of Ranya.

15. It is axiomatic that a judge, in reaching a finding, must give adequate
    reasons for that finding.  There is a dual requirement: first, to  give
    reasons sufficient to understand the  basis  of  the  finding  and,  if
    relevant, to resolve any conflicts in the evidence; and secondly,  that
    any reasons given  are,  in  themselves,  adequate,  in  the  sense  of
    providing reasonable or rational support for, the finding reached.

16. In MK (duty to give reasons) Pakistan [2013]  UKUT  641  (IAC)  the  UT
    (McCloskey J, President and UTJ Perkins) set out the obligation in  the
    judicial headnote as follows:


         "(1) It is axiomatic that a  determination  discloses  clearly  the
             reasons for a Tribunal's decision.


         (2)   If  a  Tribunal  finds  oral  evidence  to  be   implausible,
             incredible or unreliable or a document to be worth  no  weight
             whatsoever, it is necessary to say so in the determination and
             for  such  findings  to  be  supported  by  reasons.   A  bare
             statement that a witness was not believed or that  a  document
             was afforded no weight is unlikely to satisfy the  requirement
             to give reasons."

17. In this appeal, the judge accepted the appellant's credibility and  his
    account based upon his evidence at paras  18-21.   The  judge  accepted
    that the appellant was at risk as a result  of  the  discovery  of  the
    sexual relationship with L's wife.  In addition, it was the appellant's
    evidence that L was a powerful man in the IKR with influence.   He  was
    the head of police, as the judge accepted, in the Ranya  District.   In
    his interview at  Q29,  the  appellant  was  asked  whether  L  was  an
    influential person and he replied:

         "Yes he had big influence with authority and  power  and  influence
         and wealth,  he  was  quite  wealthy  (Can  you  can  explain  what
         influence he  had  over  the  authorities?)  I  am  sorry  I  don't
         understand the  question  (Did  he  have  any  influence  over  the
         authorities other than the police?) In addition  to  his  role  and
         power as a police officer he had link with the government  and  the
         high-ranking political authority, he had friendship, influence  and
         they used to influence him."

18. Further, in his asylum statement dated 17 September 2019, the appellant
    said he that L was "obviously very powerful and well-connected".

19. In his most recent statement dated 18 February  2020,  at  para  7  the
    appellant said this:

         "In Iraq, a person's seniority and influence  is  measured  by  his
         connections and [L] was a very  well-connected  man.   It  is  only
         someone who plays an important role in the police force or politics
         who will have bodyguards and dealings with influential  people.   I
         think this is true of any country, not  only  Iraq.   So  I  cannot
         comprehend why the Secretary of State thinks I am speculating  that
         [L] was an influential man.  I could clearly see his lifestyle, the
         fact that he had a stream of visitors on a  daily  basis  who  were
         people who had issues and grievances and who needed help to resolve
         them.  Also normally only the influential people  have  big  houses
         where they have a special room designated to receiving visitors.  I
         could  recognise  the  influential   politicians   and   government
         officials who visited him so I was  very  aware  of  his  important
         position."

20. In reaching his finding at para 21, the judge did not engage with  this
    evidence which was, at least, capable of  establishing  that  L  was  a
    person of power and influence whose connections, and therefore the risk
    to the appellant, could potentially extend beyond the area in which  he
    was head of the police.  That was not a necessary inference but it  was
    a possible inference.   That  is  true  even  in  the  absence  of  any
    background evidence directly supporting the appellant's  contention  of
    L's 'reach' in the IKR.  In making his finding in para  21,  the  judge
    gave no reasons for rejecting the appellant's  evidence  which  he  had
    otherwise accepted.  Had he given reasons,  then  the  issue  would  be
    whether they were rationally and reasonably based.  However,  in  fact,
    the judge gave no reasons at all for his finding in para 21.  As I have
    said, it is not a finding that necessarily had to  be  reached  on  the
    evidence before  the  judge.    In  those  circumstances,  the  judge's
    failure to give any adequate reason for that  finding  was  a  material
    error.   The  appellant  would,  in  all  probability,  be  unable   to
    internally relocate if L's influence extended beyond his own area  into
    other parts of the IKR.

21. Likewise, the judge's finding that it had not been established that  it
    was L's intention to trace the appellant, was not adequately  reasoned.
    The appellant had given evidence,  which  the  judge's  accepted,  that
    after the incident the appellant's family were visited and  threatened.
    Likewise, the appellant gave evidence in his asylum  interview  why  he
    believed that L  would  be  interested  in  him  two  years  after  the
    incident.  At Q64 he said:

         "Yes they are still after me and that is because this  is  a  moral
         issue and dignity".

22. That evidence, if accepted, was capable of sustaining  a  finding  that
    there was a real risk that L would remain interested in  the  appellant
    because of his sexual relationship with L's  wife  if  he  returned  to
    Iraq.  Again, it was not an inevitable finding but it  was  a  possible
    finding based on that evidence.  The judge did  not  engage  with  that
    evidence and gave no reason for not accepting or  making  an  inference
    that L would be interested in the appellant on return.

23.  For  these  reasons,  therefore,  I  accept  in  substance  Mr  Vokes'
    submissions on ground 1.  There remains to be made a lawful finding  on
    whether the appellant could safely internally relocate within  the  IKR
    because of his genuine fear arising from his sexual  relationship  with
    L's wife.

    Ground 2

24. Turning  now  to  ground  2,  the  judge  dealt  with  the  appellant's
    documentation and internal relocation at paras 22-24 as follows:

         "22.  ....  The  appellant  worked  in  the  IKR  so  was   clearly
             documented.  I accept, as  an  illiterate  person,  he  cannot
             recall the  details  and  numbers  of  his  card  or  family's
             registration.  However, he has contact with his  parents,  who
             have not disowned, him and his maternal uncle who assisted him
             to  leave  the  country.   In  these  circumstances,   it   is
             reasonably likely that the appellant could obtain his existing
             CSID, passport or ID card or suitable replacement ID documents
             whilst in the  UK  or  through  a  proxy  in  Iraq,  within  a
             reasonable time.

         23.  If the appellant were returned  to  Baghdad,  it  would  be  a
             laissez passer.  The appellant has a  passport  and  other  ID
             documentation with his family in  Iraq.   Whilst,  it  is  not
             reasonable to expect him to remain in Baghdad;  the  appellant
             has close male relatives who  can  meet  him  in  Baghdad  and
             provide his ID documentation and to accompany  him  safely  to
             the IKR.

         24.  Following the case of SMO,  the  appellant  is  likely  to  be
             returned direct to the IKR, where as a Kurd, he would not need
             sponsorship.  He would however need to have a CSID to  survive
             long-term, which he could obtain on  arrival  or  soon  after,
             with the assistance of his family.  He has work experience and
             is in good health, so would be able to  secure  employment  to
             enable him to access accommodation and to forge  a  meaningful
             private life.  For these reasons, it would not be unduly harsh
             or unreasonable for this appellant to  relocate  elsewhere  in
             the IKR."

25. It is not suggested that the appellant would be  returned  to  Baghdad.
    It is accepted that he would be returned to the IKR and  the  issue  is
    whether, when in the IKR,  he  could  internally  relocate  safely  and
    reasonably and, following  SMO  and  others  (Article  15(c);  identity
    documents) Iraq CG [2019] UKUT 400 (IAC), would possess a CSID in order
    to be able to live and work  without  falling  into  destitution  which
    would likely result in a breach of Art 3 of the ECHR and make  internal
    relocation unduly harsh or unreasonable.

26. Mr Vokes submitted that the judge had erred in law in  concluding  that
    the appellant would be able to obtain a CSID from his family  in  Iraq.
    He submitted that there was some doubt whether a CSID would  be  handed
    to anyone other than the individual in person and the most  that  could
    be obtained  was  a  'Registration  Document  (1957)'  which  could  be
    obtained appropriate documentation via  the  embassy  in  the  UK.   He
    referred  me  to  the  relevant  Home  Office  CPIN,  "Iraq:   Internal
    Relocation, civil documentation and returns" (June 2020)  ("CPIN  (June
    2020)") that the appellant would not be able to obtain a  CSID  or  the
    new INID from the embassy in the  UK.   Mr  Vokes  submitted  that  the
    judge's finding that the appellant could obtain documentation from  his
    family failed to take into account the appellant's evidence in para  11
    of his statement dated 18 February 2020 that his family  would  not  be
    able to help him and he had brought shame on the family.

27. It is undoubtedly the case that the appellant would need to have a CSID
    or an INID in order to live and work in the IKR.  Without it, following
    SMO and others, there would likely be a breach of  Art  3  or,  in  any
    event,  internal  relocation  would   likely   be   unduly   harsh   or
    unreasonable.

28. In this appeal, the judge made two findings.  First,  in  para  22  the
    judge found that it was "reasonably likely the appellant  could  obtain
    his existing CSID,  passport  or  ID  card".   Secondly,  in  the  same
    paragraph he also found  that  the  appellant  could  obtain  "suitable
    replacement ID documents whilst in the UK or for a proxy in Iraq".   At
    para 23, albeit in the context of return to Baghdad,  the  judge  found
    that the appellant "has a passport and other ID documentation with  his
    family in Iraq".  In the grounds, it is suggested  that  that  was  not
    part of the appellant's evidence.

29. As regards the first of those findings,  the  judge  noted,  correctly,
    that in para 1.8 of the screening interview the appellant said  he  did
    not know what had happened to his passport.   However,  in  his  asylum
    interview at Q16, the appellant was asked whether he had any  "official
    Iraq ID" and he replied: "Yes (What do you have?)  I  have  got  Hawiya
    (Where is it now?) It's in Kurdistan."  The  appellant's  reference  to
    his "Hawiya" is a reference to his CSID which is also  referred  to  as
    "Bataqa Hawwiya" (see para 5.4.1 of the CPIN  (June  2020).   In  other
    words, the appellant's own evidence was that he had a CPIN in the  IKR.
    The difficulty with the judge finding that the appellant's family could
    obtain his existing CSID is not, as Mr Vokes submitted, because  he  is
    estranged from his family, but because there is no evidence  where  his
    CSID is.  He did not, of course, live with his  family.   His  evidence
    was that he worked for L  and  lived  in  his  house,  specifically  in
    "separate quarters in his house" (see para 6 of the appellant's witness
    statement dated 17 September 2019).  If  the  judge  was  contemplating
    that, the appellant's CSID being in L's house, it could be obtained  by
    the appellant's family then the judge would, at  least,  need  to  give
    reasons  why  he  thought  that,  despite  L's  attitude  towards   the
    appellant, his family could approach L to obtain the appellant's  CSID.
    That seems a most unlikely scenario in reality.  If, however, the judge
    considered that the appellant's CSID was within the possession  of  his
    family, there does not appear to be any evidence (and the judge  offers
    no reasoning for such a finding) that the CSID was in the possession of
    his family.  It has to be remembered that the  appellant's  evidence-in
    relation to his passport was that he did not know where that was.   The
    finding, upon  which  Mr  Howells  placed  reliance,  namely  that  the
    appellant's family could provide him with  his  existing  CSID  is,  in
    those circumstances, unsustainable.

30. The grounds also challenges the judge's alternative  finding  that  the
    appellant's family could obtain a replacement CSID for him.

31. Following SMO and others, and in the light of the more recent  evidence
    set out in the CPIN (June 2020) (at 2.6.15), it is clear that the Iraqi
    Embassy in London does not issue CSIDs or,  since  their  introduction,
    the new INID documents.  The CPIN demonstrates that  the  position  has
    changed since SMO and others in relation to whether the  Iraqi  Embassy
    issues CSIDs.  As a result, these documents could only be  obtained  at
    the local CSA office in the appellant's  home  area  -  depending  upon
    whether a particular local office has moved to issuing  INIDs  when  it
    will no longer issue CSIDs.   An INID card  can  only  be  obtained  in
    person at a relevant CSA Office and not through a proxy.  Even  if  the
    appellant were in Iraq, there can be no  question  that  the  appellant
    could be required personally to attend the CSA office in his home  area
    given the risk from L in his home area.

32. In his oral submissions, Mr Howells did not place any reliance  on  the
    appellant obtaining from the Iraqi Embassy in the  UK  a  "Registration
    Document (1957)" (see CPIN (June 2020) at 2.6.15).  As a result, I need
    say no more about that in this  appeal  other  than  to  note  that  it
    appears to be a document which, if  obtained  via  the  Iraqi  Embassy,
    would assist an individual to obtain an INID in  Iraq  but  that  would
    require that individual to travel to his local CSA  Office  to  do  so.
    Paragraph 2.6.15 provides no  direct  evidence  that  he  'Registration
    Document (1957)' is, in itself, a document which operates to allow safe
    travel and permits an individual to live safely and  reasonably  within
    Iraq.

33. Therefore, the only possibility would be that, if his local CSA  office
    is still issuing CSIDs rather than having moved to the new computerised
    system issuing biometric INIDs, armed with the appropriate  information
    a proxy (such as  a family member) could obtain that document.  Even if
    the appellant does not know the details of the page etc in  his  family
    book, it is likely that his family would do so (see SMO  and  other  at
    [391]).

34. There are, however, two  difficulties  not  properly  resolved  by  the
    judge.

35. First, the option of his family obtaining a CSID for him will not avail
    the appellant if only INIDs are being issued by his local office  -  he
    would need to apply in person.  It is unclear,  to  what  extent,  this
    issue was explored before Judge Thomas.  It was, however, a live  issue
    following SMO and others (see [389])  The  INID  system  was,  to  some
    extent, rolled out in the IKR as is made clear  in  the  November  2018
    Danish Immigration Service and Landinfo Joint  Report  referred  to  at
    para 5.6.2 of the CPIN (June 2020).  If that were the situation in  the
    appellant's local CSA Office then the CSID option is not available.

36. Secondly, although the judge's finding that  the  appellant's  parents,
    with whom he remains in contact, have "not disowned him" is  consistent
    with  his  oral  evidence  at  the  hearing  (see   para   6   of   the
    determination), it does not take into account what he said at  para  11
    of his most recent statement that: "I do not have any ID documents  and
    my family will not help me to get these".  In reaching the finding that
    the appellant's family would assist him, the  judge  did  not  seek  to
    resolve the apparent conflict in the appellant's evidence that  on  the
    one hand his family had not "disowned" him but on the other, they would
    "not help" him to obtain the documents.

37. Given that the  judge's  finding  that  the  appellant  can  internally
    relocate within the IKR cannot be sustained,  and  given  the  problems
    with the judge's reasoning  that  I  have  identified  in  relation  to
    whether the appellant  would  return  with  his  existing  CSID  or  an
    alternative replacement obtained for him, I am satisfied that it  would
    be proper that the judge remaking the decision should  consider  afresh
    the issue of internal relocation in respect of:

               1) any risk to the appellant elsewhere in the IKR;

               2) whether he would have necessary documentation to live  and
                  survive in the IKR; and

               3) taking all those matters into account, together  with  his
                  circumstances  more  generally,  whether   it   would   be
                  reasonable and not unduly harsh  to  expect  him  to  live
                  elsewhere in the IKR.

    I am satisfied that the judge's findings in  paras  22  -  25  are  not
    legally sustainable and should be set aside.

38. For these reasons, the judge materially erred in law in dismissing  the
    appellant's appeal on humanitarian protection grounds and under  Art  3
    of the ECHR.



Decision

39. Consequently, the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  to  dismiss  the
    appellant's appeal involved the making of  a  material  error  of  law.
    That decision cannot stand and is set aside.

40. It was accepted by both representatives that if the judge's finding  in
    relation to internal  relocation  could  not  stand,  subject  to  some
    preserved findings of fact, the appeal should be remitted to the First-
    tier Tribunal in order to remake the decision in relation  to  internal
    relocation.

41. I agree.  The appeal will, consequently, be remitted to the  First-tier
    Tribunal for the decision to be remade in relation to  the  appellant's
    humanitarian protection claim and under Art 3 of the ECHR.  The  appeal
    to be heard at the Birmingham Civil Justice Centre  by  a  judge  other
    than Judge Thomas.

42. The judge's findings in paras 18-21, that the  appellant  would  be  at
    real risk in his home area where he would not be able to  obtain  state
    protection, stand and  are  preserved.   The  issue,  in  remaking  the
    decision, will be whether  the  appellant  can  safely  and  reasonably
    (including the issue of documentation) internally relocate  within  the
    IKR.

43.  It  is  not  disputed  that  the  appellant's  established   fear   of
    persecution/serious harm on return was not  for  a  Refugee  Convention
    reason.  Therefore, regardless of the issue of internal relocation, the
    appellant cannot succeed under the Refugee Convention.

44. The judge also dismissed the appellant's appeal under Art 8 of the ECHR
    and that decision stands unchallenged.



                                                                      Signed

                                                                Andrew Grubb

                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                                            21 December 2020
