
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
PA/10152/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |         Decision & Reasons           |
|                                      |Promulgated                           |
|On 19 October 2017                    |         On 8 November 2017           |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                     M N
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr P Lewis, Counsel, instructed by Birnberg Peirce &
Partners


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against  a  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Beach promulgated on 23 June  2017  in  which
    she allowed the appeal of Mr M N against a decision of the Secretary of
    State  to  deport  him  as  a  foreign  criminal  consequent  upon  his
    conviction of three counts of wounding with intent,  to  which  he  had
    been  sentenced  on  27  March  to  three  years   and   four   months'
    imprisonment.

 2. It is accepted that Mr M N, to whom I refer for ease  of  reference  as
    the appellant, as he was in the First-tier Tribunal, is  a  citizen  of
    Somalia and that he has been in the United Kingdom  for  a  significant
    period of time.  These details and  the  details  of  his  family,  his
    offences and the difficulty he has had with alcohol use are set out  in
    significant detail in Judge Beach's decision and in  the  circumstances
    and given the narrow nature of the appeal I do  not  intend  to  repeat
    them.

 3. The judge, having directed herself in connection with Section  117C  of
    the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act,  Section  117B   also
    considered paragraph 399A of the Immigration Rules in detail. She found
    that he had been lawfully resident in the United Kingdom  for  most  of
    his life, that he was  socially  and  culturally  integrated  into  the
    United Kingdom and found also that  there  would  be  very  significant
    obstacles to his integration into Somalia, the country to which it  was
    proposed that he be deported.  The judge reached the latter  conclusion
    having directed herself to follow the decision in MOJ & Ors (Return  to
    Mogadishu) Somalia CG [2014] UKUT 442, taking particular  note  of  the
    judicial headnote at subparagraphs (ix) to (xi).  It  is,  I  consider,
    important to note that the appellant is not from Mogadishu.

 4. The judge's findings with regard to MOJ are  specifically  set  out  at
    paragraphs [77] to [83].  She  found  in  considering  the  ability  to
    integrate that there would be little prospect of any funds coming  from
    family in the United Kingdom, that although there had been  a  tendency
    to downplay such contacts that there was in effect no family ties other
    than tenuous ones if that in Somalia, he would be unlikely to have  any
    real connection or  ties  with  anyone  in  Somalia  and  he  would  be
    returning without that support, that there was little or  no  financial
    support given the family in the United  Kingdom's  situation,  that  he
    would be returning to a country where he had not lived for  many  years
    and which had changed considerably without financial remittances,  that
    whilst there had been an  economic  boom  in  parts  of  Somalia  those
    returning from the Diaspora are often best placed in finding employment
    this had to be based against an increase in  accommodation  prices  and
    whilst he had some skills which he might be able to utilise the  extent
    to which he can  use  these  is  unknown,  that  the  ability  to  find
    employment  was  only  one  relevant  factor,  that   he   would   have
    difficulties in reintegrating and there was a real possibility he would
    end up in an IDP camp and that accordingly he had met the test to  show
    that there were very significant obstacles.

 5. The Secretary  of  State  sought  permission  to  appeal  against  that
    decision on two primary grounds: first,  that  the  decision  that  the
    appellant had become socially and culturally integrated into the United
    Kingdom  was  incorrect  and  further  that  the  judge  had  erred  in
    concluding that there were very significant  obstacles  of  integration
    into the country in Somalia.

 6. Permission to appeal against the decision of Judge Beach was granted by
    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge  Davey  on  15  August,  the  ground  being
    limited to the second challenge, the judge considering that  the  first
    ground was simply a disagreement with the judge's view of the matter.

 7. In assessing the challenge to the judge's decision Mr Bramble  drew  my
    attention specifically to the somewhat equivocal findings by the  judge
    at paragraphs [77], [81] and [82], in which the judge said  that  there
    was some degree of downplaying of the evidence, which he  had  accepted
    and that the judge had failed properly to engage with the  factors  set
    out in MOJ, appearing to have attached too much  weight  wrongly  to  a
    report from UNHCR which is set out in paragraph 73 of the decision.  He
    submitted that the findings were flawed with specific reference to  the
    family and prospects of employment.

 8. Mr Lewis relied on his Section 24 response, drawing my attention to the
    fact that the appellant is not from Mogadishu and specifically  to  the
    passages at paragraphs [44] to [45] of the decision in MOJ  which  deal
    in more detail with those who are not  from  Mogadishu.   He  submitted
    further that the judge had properly considered the factors cumulatively
    and had reached conclusions about the likelihood of the appellant being
    able to obtain a livelihood which were open to her given  the  evidence
    of the difficulty that the appellant had had in holding down a  job  in
    the United Kingdom and being unable to  find  employment  except  as  a
    security guard.

 9. In considering the findings made by the judge, in particular those that
    the Secretary of State seeks to impugn, I  consider  that  contrary  to
    what is  submitted  at  paragraphs  [77],  [81]  and  [82]   the  judge
    expressly took  a balanced view of the evidence.  This  is  a  case  in
    which the judge considered that there was some evidence pointing in one
    direction, yet other evidence pointed in another.  The weight  attached
    to those various factors was manifestly a matter for the judge and  she
    reached properly reasoned findings of fact in respect  particularly  of
    the issues regarding alcohol abuse at paragraph [77] and  at  paragraph
    [81] that although there had been a tendency to downplay  the  evidence
    by the family that she accepted that the family had in  fact  relocated
    and, as it was open to her to find, that it was likely that their  ties
    with Somalia would have lessened as a result of  the  movement  of  the
    family to the United Kingdom and she reached a  proper  and  adequately
    reasoned finding that it was unlikely that the appellant would have any
    real connection or ties with anyone in Somalia and would  therefore  be
    returning without such support.

10. Similarly, at [82] it was open to the judge to  consider  the  somewhat
    different evidence with regard to financial support and  to  note  some
    downplaying and equally the judge has a  given  proper  and  adequately
    reasoned decision as to why there would not be financial support  based
    on the evidence that she had heard.

11. Whilst there is, I consider, a couple of points where it is less  clear
    why the judge had reached the conclusion with regard to the ability  to
    obtain a livelihood I consider that it cannot be said  that  the  judge
    took into account in reaching that conclusion matters which should  not
    have been taken into account. It is evident that, as was  incumbent  on
    her, she considered the evidence as a whole, and it was open to her  to
    conclude that the ability to find  employment  was  only  one  relevant
    factor.  Whilst this was undoubtedly a  generous  decision  I  consider
    that the judge's reasoning and application of the factors  set  out  in
    MOJ which, as the head note  makes  clear,  are  neither  exclusive  at
    paragraph 9, nevertheless she did consider all  those  which  ought  to
    have been included.

12. It is evident that she did take all the relevant matters  into  account
    and although she did not spend address in detail the  ability  to  fund
    the journey to the West I consider that that, as Mr Lewis submitted, is
    not a relevant factor on the facts of this case, given  the  length  of
    time that has elapsed since the appellant came to  the  United  Kingdom
    and the circumstances in which he came here as a minor.

13. The means of support  in  the  United  Kingdom  again,  similarly,  are
    somewhat different from the prospect of somebody who has lived here for
    a significant period.   The  judge  has,  I  consider,  given  adequate
    reasons bearing in mind that the appellant is not from  Mogadishu,  for
    concluding that he would not be able to profit from  an  economic  boom
    and again that while this  was  undoubtedly  a  generous  decision  she
    reached conclusions bearing in mind that  the  appellant  is  not  from
    Mogadishu which were open to her.

SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS

 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    an error of law and I uphold it.

 2. I maintain the anonymity order made by the First-tier Tribunal


Signed                                  Date:  6 November 2017
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul



