
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number PA/10285/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard by Skype for Business          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|on 12 May 2021                       |On 26 May 2021                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                              UT JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                    B S A
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr S Winter, Advocate, instructed by Jones Whyte
                    LLP, Solicitors, Glasgow
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Iraq, aged 57.  FtT Judge David C Clapham
    SSC dismissed his appeal by a decision promulgated on 17 March 2020.

 2. The appellant applied to the UT on the grounds  set  out  as  1  (i)  -
    (vii), 2 and 3.

 3. UT Judge L Smith granted permission, principally on ground  1,  finding
    it arguable that the judge erred on  a  fingerprint  match  in  Baghdad
    "where no actual evidence of the print was produced, the maker  of  the
    statement was not available for cross-examination and there  was  other
    evidence which may have rebutted that evidence".  Grounds 2 and 3  were
    not excluded.

 4. The appellant has filed a skeleton argument in response to  directions,
    amplifying his grounds.

 5. Mr Walker conceded that ground 1 disclosed error.  He said  that  while
    it was open to the FtT to conclude  that  the  appellant  had  been  in
    Baghdad in 2018, the judge took  the  assertion  of  a  fingerprint  as
    conclusive without evaluating the strengths and weaknesses of  all  the
    evidence on the point.

 6. Parties agreed that the outcome should be as follows.

 7. The decision of the FtT is set aside.  The case is remitted for a fresh
    hearing, not before Judge Clapham.

 8. The FtT may wish to consider holding a case management review  hearing,
    with a view to putting the evidence in better order.  The  respondent's
    lengthy bundle is unpaginated in its paper version.  It may be possible
    to make it available as a PDF for ease of reference.  Also, the parties
    are likely to tender additional evidence.

 9. An anonymity direction remains in place.

        Hugh Macleman

      12 May 2021
      UT Judge Macleman





                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS


1.    A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must  make
a written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any such application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:


2.    Where the person who appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).


3.    Where the person making the application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


4.    Where the person who appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal  is  outside
the United Kingdom at the  time  that  the  application  for  permission  to
appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if  the
notice of decision is sent electronically).


5.    A "working  day"  means  any  day  except  a  Saturday  or  a  Sunday,
Christmas Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.


6.    The date when  the  decision  is  "sent'  is  that  appearing  on  the
covering letter or covering email.

