
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: pa/10925/2019 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided Under Rule 34                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On:  8 October 2020                  |On: 14 October 2020                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                                     HS
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS

This decision has been made on the papers, under Rule  34  of  The  Tribunal
Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008,  further  to  the  decision   and
directions issued by Upper Tribunal Judge Coker on 2 July 2020.

The appellant, a citizen of Iran born on  6  August  1985,  arrived  in  the
United Kingdom on 14 January  2015  and  claimed  asylum  as  the  dependent
spouse of her husband, SA, an Iraqi national. The claim was refused  and  an
appeal against the decision was  dismissed  on  20  April  2016.  SA  lodged
further submissions which were refused on 26 July 2016. The  appellant  then
made a claim in her own name, with SA as her dependant,  which  was  refused
on 10 May  2017  with  no  right  of  appeal.  The  appellant  made  further
submissions on 10 December 2018 which were treated as a  fresh  claim.  That
claim was also refused, on  17  October  2019  and  the  appellant  appealed
against that decision. Her appeal was heard by the  First-tier  Tribunal  on
22 January 2020.

The appellant's claim was based upon a fear of persecution as a member of  a
particular social group, namely a woman at risk of  gender-based  harm.  She
claimed to be at risk of an honour killing from  her  family  on  return  to
Iran because she had shamed them by marrying a person without their  consent
and, moreover, by marrying an Iraqi national. She claimed to be at  risk  on
the basis of her husband's Iraqi nationality as well  as  on  the  basis  of
being a Kurd and having left Iran illegally. She claimed that she could  not
return to Iran as a result and  that  neither  could  she  and  her  family,
namely her husband and son, go to Iraq.

The respondent did not accept that the appellant would be at risk on  return
to Iran and considered as speculative her claim to fear being  a  victim  of
an honour killing. The respondent  considered  further  that  the  appellant
could relocate to Iraq with her husband and son. It was  not  accepted  that
the appellant's removal from the UK would put her at risk  or  would  breach
her human rights.

In a decision promulgated on 30  January  2020,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
Hawden-Beal accepted the appellant's account of having married  without  her
family's consent and accepted that she was at risk of being  the  victim  of
an honour killing owing to her marriage. The judge was  satisfied  that  the
appellant and her husband and son would be at risk of  persecution  in  Iran
because of her membership of a particular  social  group,  namely  women  at
risk of an honour killing. The judge was satisfied that  the  appellant  and
her husband and son could not safely relocate to another  part  of  Iran  as
she accepted that her family could find her wherever she went in  Iran.  The
judge also found that the respondent had  failed  to  consider  whether  the
appellant's husband and son would even  be  permitted  to  enter  Iran.  The
judge found further that the appellant would not be  able  to  access  state
protection in Iran. However, the judge concluded that  the  appellant  could
relocate to Iraq with her husband and son  as  she  was  entitled  to  Iraqi
nationality and there was no risk of persecution in that  country.  As  such
the judge found that she could not qualify as a  refugee  and  that  neither
could she qualify for humanitarian protection.  The  judge  did  not  accept
that the appellant's removal, with her husband and  son,  would  breach  her
human rights. The judge accordingly dismissed the appeal on all grounds.

Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted on 18 March  2020  on
the grounds that the judge, by finding that the appellant could relocate  to
Iraq, had arguably erred by failing properly to apply the  definition  of  a
refugee and had arguably erred by considering the situation in  Iraq  rather
than Iran.

In light of the need to take precautions against  the  spread  of  Covid-19,
the appeal was not listed for a hearing, but the case  was  reviewed  by  an
Upper Tribunal Judge, who took the provisional view  that  the  question  of
whether the First-tier Tribunal's decision involved the making of  error  of
law and, if so, whether the decision should be  set  aside,  could  be  made
without a hearing. Submissions were invited from the parties in response  to
directions sent out on 28 April 2020.

The appellant did not respond to the  directions.  However,  in  submissions
made on 20 May 2020, the respondent accepted that the judge had applied  the
wrong test in stating that internal relocation to the appellant's  husband's
country, Iraq, would not be unduly harsh and accepted  that  the  judge  had
erred in law in her consideration in that regard  since  the  appellant  was
not a national of Iraq, even if it was arguable that she might  be  admitted
there. The respondent did not object to the Tribunal re-making the  decision
in the light of the First-tier Tribunal Judge's findings of fact.

In a decision made under rule 34 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008 without a hearing and promulgated on 2 July 2020, Upper  Tribunal
Judge Coker set aside the First-tier Tribunal's decision and  directed  that
it be re-made on the basis of the facts as found by the First-tier  Tribunal
Judge. Her provisional view was that the resumed  substantive  consideration
of the appeal could  be  made  without  a  hearing  and  again  she  invited
submissions from the parties or objections to that course.

The matter then came before me. Unsurprisingly, in view of the  respondent's
concession in the submissions of 20 May 2020, neither  party  had  responded
to Judge Coker's directions.

Unless I am mistaken and have misunderstood  the  respondent's  submissions,
it seems to me that there  can  only  be  one  outcome  to  the  appellant's
appeal, namely to allow the appeal on all grounds. As  acknowledged  by  the
respondent in the submissions of 20 May 2020, Judge  Hawden-Beal  had  found
the appellant to be at risk in all parts of Iran, with  no  effective  state
protection and no effective internal  flight  alternative.  Given  that  the
respondent  did  not  challenge  those  findings  and  had   conceded   that
relocation to Iraq was not a relevant  consideration,  since  the  appellant
was not an Iraqi national, the only conclusion is that, on the  findings  of
facts made by the judge, the appellant's removal to Iran  would  breach  the
United Kingdom's obligations under the Refugee Convention and  would  be  in
breach of her Article 3 and 8 human rights.



DECISION

The original Tribunal was found to  have  made  an  error  of  law  and  her
decision has been  set  aside.  I  re-make  the  decision  by  allowing  the
appellant's appeal on protection and human rights grounds.

    Anonymity

    The anonymity direction made by the First-tier Tribunal is maintained.


Signed:  S Kebede
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede     Dated: 8 October 2020
