
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10851/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester CJC              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 10 May 2019                       |On 15 May 2019                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

                                     AY
                          anonymity direction made
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr Singh, Consultant Solicitor instructed by Aman
                    Solicitors Advocates
For the respondent:    Ms Young, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI2008/269) an Anonymity Order is  made.   Unless  the  Upper  Tribunal  or
Court orders otherwise,  no  report  of  any  proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  the  original
Appellant.  This prohibition applies to, amongst others, all parties.



Introduction

      1. I have made an anonymity order because the appellant  is  a  minor,
         having been born in Afghanistan in September 2001.

      2. The appellant has appealed, with permission granted  by  First-tier
         Tribunal ('FTT') Judge Buchanan, against a decision  of  FTT  Judge
         Row sent on 12 December 2018, in which his  asylum  and  Article  8
         appeals were dismissed.

Background

      3. The appellant, a citizen of Afghanistan, lived with his grandfather
         in Langham province.  He claims that the  Taliban  were  active  in
         Langham and tried to recruit him.  He fled his home area to  escape
         the Taliban and made his way overland via various countries to seek
         the protection of the UK, where his father has resided since  2004.
         The appellant claimed asylum immediately upon arrival in the UK  on
         27 February 2018 but this  was  refused  by  the  respondent  in  a
         decision dated 28 August 2018.

      4. The appeal against this  decision  was  heard  by  the  FTT  on  13
         November 2018.  The FTT accepted certain aspects of the appellant's
         account but concluded that he was not at risk  in  his  home  area.
         Significantly, the FTT went on to address whether  "in  any  event"
         the appellant could internally relocate away from his home area, in
         Kabul.  The FTT considered the country guidance in  AS  (Safety  of
         Kabul) Afghanistan CG [2018] UKUT, and reached the conclusions  set
         out below.

          a) Even if the appellant's account is true he would  only  be  of
             low level interest to the Taliban and the country guidance  in
             AS makes it clear that  he  would  not  be  at  real  risk  of
             persecution in Kabul.

          b) Although the appellant will be a 17-year-old without family in
             Kabul, he will not be destitute and would be able  to  arrange
             accommodation and employment.  This is because  he  will  have
             financial and other necessary support available  to  him  from
             his family in Laghman province  and  his  father  in  the  UK,
             bearing in mind the family were able to raise at least  $10000
             to finance  the  appellant's  journey  to  the  UK.   The  FTT
             observed that the appellant is a physically robust  young  man
             but if necessary his father could accompany him on the journey
             back to Kabul.

      5. The FTT considered the appellant's family life with his  father  in
         the UK but found that his failure to seek to  join  his  father  by
         lawful means weighed heavily against him.  The appeal was therefore
         dismissed on Article 8 grounds.

Grounds of appeal and hearing

      6. The  grounds  of  appeal  have  been  drafted  by  the  appellant's
         solicitors.  They focus entirely upon the Refugee Convention appeal
         and are threefold:

          i) The FTT failed to take into  account  the  evidence  that  the
             Taliban were prevalent in Laghman.

         ii) The FTT did not provide adequate  reasons  for  rejecting  the
             appellant's claim to be at risk in  Laghman  province,  having
             accepted important aspects of the appellant's background.

        iii) In concluding that the appellant's claim that he was  at  risk
             in Afghanistan was not plausible because  he  failed  to  find
             temporary refuge in Kabul or countries en route to the  UK  at
             [30], the FTT contradicted its acceptance  at  [29]  that  the
             appellant's failure to claim asylum en route  did  not  damage
             his credibility because he understandably wanted to  join  his
             father in the UK and was under the control of an agent.

      7. At the beginning of the hearing Mr Singh confirmed that  he  relied
         upon the grounds of appeal, which focussed entirely upon the  FTT's
         findings of fact in relation to the credibility of the  appellant's
         account in his home area.  I invited Mr Singh to explain how any of
         the three grounds of appeal were material,  in  the  light  of  the
         FTT's clear finding that the appellant could safely and  reasonably
         relocate to Kabul.  At first,  Mr  Singh  submitted  that  the  FTT
         failed to factor in the appellant's age when dealing with  internal
         relocation.  I pointed out that  it  is  clear  from  [18]  of  the
         decision, that the FTT approached the issue of internal  relocation
         correctly, i.e. on the basis that the appellant  is  a  17-year-old
         minor.  Mr Singh was unable to advance any further argument  as  to
         why the errors of law made a material difference to the outcome  of
         the asylum appeal.  In these circumstances, I did not need to  hear
         from Ms Young.

Error of law discussion

      8. I have sympathy with the first and third grounds of appeal.   There
         is country background evidence,  consistent  with  the  appellant's
         evidence, that the  Taliban  has  had  a  significant  presence  in
         Laghman  province.   In  addition,  the  distinction  made  between
         credibility at [29]  and  plausibility  at  [30]  is  difficult  to
         understand, given the respondent's concession in the refusal letter
         that adverse inferences should not be drawn  from  the  failure  to
         claim asylum in other countries when  the  appellant's  father  has
         been lawfully present in the UK for many years.

      9. However, the FTT went on to address the  appellant's  circumstances
         in Kabul on the basis that it was wrong about  the  credibility  of
         his account in relation to his home area.  The  grounds  of  appeal
         entirely omit any reference to the findings on internal relocation.
          Mr Singh did not even attempt to identify any error of law in  the
         findings concerning internal relocation.  The FTT  was  obliged  to
         direct himself to the country guidance case of AS and was  entitled
         to find that the appellant could safely and reasonably relocate  to
         Kabul in all the circumstances.  This conclusion renders the errors
         of law identified  in  the  grounds  of  appeal  immaterial.   Even
         assuming the FTT erred in law in concluding that the  appellant  is
         not at risk of persecution in his home area, it was still bound  to
         dismiss the appeal on the basis that on its unappealed findings, he
         could internally relocate to Kabul.

     10. Mr Singh confirmed that there  was  no  appeal  against  the  FTT's
         Article 8 findings.

     11. When the decision is read as  a  whole  I  am  satisfied  that  the
         grounds of appeal do not contain any material error of law,  and  I
         decline to set aside the decision.

Decision

    12.  The FTT decision did not involve the making of a material error of
         law and I do not set it aside.


Signed:  UTJ Plimmer

Ms M. Plimmer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date:
10 May 2019

