
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
PA/10630/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |      Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|on 2 November 2017                     |      on 16 November 2017           |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE blum

                                   Between

                                     SW
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Iengar, Counsel, instructed by Biruntha
                    Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

     1. This is an appeal against the decision of Judge of  the  First-tier
        Tribunal Zahed (FtJ), promulgated on 1 June  2017,  dismissing  the
        Appellant's appeal  against  the  Respondent's  decision  dated  21
        September 2016 refusing his asylum and human rights claims.



   Factual Background


     2. The Appellant is a national of Sri Lanka, date of birth 20 November
        1985. He entered the United Kingdom on the 9 September  2009  as  a
        Tier 4 (General) Student and was  subsequently  granted  a  further
        period of leave in the same capacity. On the 14 August 2012 he  was
        encountered at a registry office attempting to enter  into  a  sham
        marriage with a Lithuanian national. After being served with papers
        informing him that he had no lawful right to remain in  the  UK  he
        made an asylum claim. This was  however  withdrawn  on  5  November
        2012. The Appellant then made two further applications for leave to
        remain as a Tier 4 (General) Student, both of which  were  granted.
        The last period of leave was however curtailed so as to expire on 7
        February 2016. He then made an application for leave to  remain  on
        the basis of his family life under the 10-year route but  this  was
        refused and certified as clearly unfounded on  the  24  June  2016.
        After being detained at an interview he claimed asylum  on  9  July
        2016.


     3. It is not necessary to consider the specifics of the asylum  claim,
        which revolves around the Appellant's assertion to  be  a  bisexual
        man and his fear of persecution in Sri  Lanka  because  his  sexual
        orientation. He maintains that he has been charged  under  the  Sri
        Lankan Penal Code with committing an act  of  gross  indecency  and
        that an arrest warrant has been issued against him. He  fears  both
        the state authorities and the father of someone with whom he had an
        intimate relationship.


     4. The Respondent does not accept that the Appellant  is  bisexual  or
        that he had a relationship with a man in Sri Lanka. The  Respondent
        relied on inconsistencies and vagueness in the Appellant's  account
        in doubting his credibility as well as his earlier attempt to enter
        a  sham  marriage  and  the  lateness  of  his  asylum  claim.  The
        Respondent   additionally   rejected   the   Appellant's    claimed
        relationship with MT, a British national woman.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

     5. The Appellant exercised his rights of appeal in  relation  to  both
        the refusal of his protection claim and the refusal  of  his  human
        rights claim (there had been no further certification of the  human
        rights claim raised by the Appellant  in  his  asylum  claim).  The
        appeal was initially listed for hearing on  3  November  2016,  but
        this was adjourned following  an  application  by  the  Appellant's
        solicitors stating that he had severe back and knee  pain  and  was
        'not fit to  travel'.  Medical  support  came  in  the  form  of  a
        "Statement of Fitness for Work for  Social  Security  or  Statutory
        Sick Pay" certificate issued on 27 October 2016.  The  hearing  was
        adjourned to 2 February 2017. On 31 January 2017,  the  Appellant's
        solicitors  again  requested  an   adjournment   and   attached   a
        certificate  similar  to  that  previously   provided.   This   new
        certificate stated, "back pain, leg  and  knee  pain.  Not  fit  to
        travel." It was issued in respect of the period 27 January 2017  to
        3 February  2017.  On  1  February  2017  the  First-tier  Tribunal
        informed the Appellant and his  solicitors  that  the  GP  had  not
        certified that  the  Appellant  was  unfit  to  attend  a  Tribunal
        hearing, and there was no indication as to when he was likely to be
        able to do so. The Tribunal noted that the application was made  on
        the same grounds as that made in October 2016. On  the  same  date,
        having received the Tribunal's response, the Appellant wrote to the
        Tribunal stating that he was  not  in  a  position  to  attend  the
        hearing due to backache and reiterated that his GP had informed him
        that he was not fit to travel. The GP surgery declined to  issue  a
        further report as the medical certificate issued covered the period
        from 27 January 2017  to  3  February  2017.  The  Appellant  again
        requested that the hearing be adjourned.


     6. There was no attendance at the appeal hearing on 2 February 2017 by
        the Appellant or his  representatives.  The  judge  instructed  his
        clerk to make inquiries with the Appellant's solicitors. They  then
        faxed a letter stating that  they  were  without  instructions  and
        requested that their attendance be excused.


     7.  In his decision, the judge noted that  a  Reply  Notice  dated  17
        October 2016 indicated that the Appellant was ready to  proceed  to
        full  hearing  and  there  was  no   reference   to   any   medical
        difficulties. The judge additionally noted the previous adjournment
        granted in October 2016, and  the  Tribunal's  refusal  to  adjourn
        dated 1 February 2017. The judge finally noted that on  6  February
        2017, following the hearing, the  First-tier  Tribunal  received  a
        further medical certificate making reference to ongoing  back  pain
        and sciatica. This certificate, which was  valid  from  3  February
        2017 to 17 February  2017,  did  not  make  any  reference  to  the
        Appellant being unfit to travel. At [19] the judge stated,


             I note that the Appellant was able to travel  to  the  surgery
             the day after the hearing  and  was  able  to  travel  to  the
             surgery on 2 previous occasions just days before the hearing.


     8. At [20] the FtJ stated,


             In coming to my decision as to whether to grant an adjournment
             request  I  have  taken  into  account  the  case  of  Nwaigwe
             (adjournment:  fairness)  [2014]  UKUT  418  (IAC).   I   have
             carefully looked at the history of this appeal and  find  that
             this Appellant simply is delaying his appeal. I  do  not  find
             sufficient  evidence  has  been  provided  to  state  why  the
             Appellant cannot come to the tribunal and give evidence  given
             that he lives in Uxbridge and the hearing Centre is in  Hatton
             Cross. I take into account that the Appellant has been able to
             provide these sick certificates by going to the  surgery  days
             before and a day after the hearing.

     9. The judge then concluded that the Appellant was  'malingering'  and
        that  the  hearing  should  proceed.  The   judge   described   the
        Appellant's immigration history and held against  him  his  earlier
        withdrawal of an asylum claim, his delay in  claiming  asylum,  and
        the fact that his current  asylum  claim  was  made  after  he  was
        detained. The judge found that  the  Appellant  had  inconsistently
        claimed to be gay and then bisexual, that he failed to produce  any
        medical evidence of his ill-treatment while in custody,  and  found
        that the documents provided, including a letter from his father and
        a letter from a lawyer in Sri Lanka, were 'self-serving'. The judge
        found that the Appellant was not gay or bisexual, that he  did  not
        have a relationship with a man in Sri  Lanka,  that  there  was  no
        arrest warrant issued against him, and that he held no fear of ill-
        treatment. It is apparent from the judge's decision that  he  found
        the Appellant to be incredible.  The  judge  dismissed  the  asylum
        appeal but gave no consideration to  the  article  8  human  rights
        claim, which was based on the Appellant's relationship with MT.

The grounds of appeal and the error of law hearing

    10. The grounds contend that the judge acted unlawfully in refusing  to
        grant  the  adjournment.  Although  acknowledging  that  the  judge
        referred to Nwaigwe, it is submitted that he failed  to  apply  the
        principles enunciated in that decision.


    11. In granting permission to  appeal  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  O'Connor
        stated,


        It is arguable that the FtJ's hearing was vitiated by procedural
        unfairness. The FtJ refused to adjourn the hearing of the appeal
        (set down for 2 February 2017) in the face of medical evidence from
        a qualified medical practitioner dated 30 January 2017 stating that
        the Appellant was 'not fit to travel' until after 3 February 2017.
        Underpinning the FtJ's refusal of application to adjourn can be
        resolved into a rejection of the evidence as to the Appellant's
        fitness to travel on 2 February. Such reasoning is arguably
        irrational. I further observe that in [19] of its decision the FtJ
        relies upon evidence from the 6 February 2017 as part of its
        rationale for refusing the adjournment of the hearing on 2nd
        February. This of itself is arguably irrational.


    12. At the error of  law  hearing,  which  was  attended  by  both  the
        Appellant and MT, Ms Iengar relied on and expanded the  grounds  of
        appeal. She submitted that the judge acted in a procedurally unfair
        manner by going behind the medical evidence that the Appellant  was
        not fit to travel. The judge engaged in unwarranted speculation  in
        concluding that the Appellant must have  travelled  to  his  GP  in
        order to obtain the sickness certificate. There was said to  be  no
        rational basis for the judge's conclusion that  the  Appellant  was
        malingering.  The  judge  failed  to  give  adequate  reasons   for
        discounting the medical evidence. Ms Iengar additionally  submitted
        that the judge failed to give  any  consideration  at  all  to  the
        article  8  claim.  The  Appellant  had  clearly  relied   on   his
        relationship with MT  in  his  asylum  claim,  and  the  Respondent
        specifically engaged with this claimed relationship in her decision
        under  challenge.  The  bundle  prepared  for  the  appeal  hearing
        included a witness  statement  from  MT,  evidence  of  joint  bank
        statements  and  a  tenancy  agreement.  None  of  this  had   been
        considered by the judge. It was finally submitted  that  the  judge
        was not entitled to attach no weight to the lawyer's letter on  the
        basis that it was 'self-serving', applying R (on the application of
        SS) v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  ("self-serving"
        statements) [2017] UKUT 00164 (IAC).


    13. In his brief response Mr Melvin accepted  that  the  issue  of  the
        Appellant's relationship with MT     had been raised in the  asylum
        claim and that the judge failed to deal with this issue.


    14. I indicated that I was satisfied  that  the  judge's  decision  was
        vitiated  by  several  material  legal  errors,  and  that  it  was
        appropriate to remit the matter back to the First-tier Tribunal for
        a de novo hearing.

Discussion

    15. I am satisfied that the three independent bases advanced as to  why
        the judge fell into legal error are made out.  While  it  is  clear
        that the judge considered in some detail the application to adjourn
        the hearing, and was entitled to consider the procedural history of
        the appeal, including the adjournment granted in October 2016,  the
        judge impermissibly went behind the opinion of a qualified  medical
        practitioner without providing satisfactory reasons, and engaged in
        unsupported speculation.


    16. The fax sent  to  the  Tribunal  on  31  January  2017  included  a
        "Statement of Fitness for Work for  Social  Security  or  Statutory
        Sick Pay" certificate. It indicated that the Appellant was assessed
        on "30/1/2016" but this is highly  likely  to  be  a  typographical
        error and that it should have read 2017. The certificate indicated,
        "back pain, leg and knee pain. Not fit to travel." It was issued in
        respect of the period 27 January 2017 to 3 February 2017.  While  a
        pro-forma certificate of this kind will not usually  be  sufficient
        to demonstrate that an individual is unfit  to  attend  a  tribunal
        hearing and give evidence (the certificate relates to  "fitness  to
        work", not to an inability to give evidence to  a  tribunal),  this
        particular sickness certificate  specifically  indicated  that  the
        Appellant was not fit to travel. It is obvious  that  in  order  to
        attend a hearing one must normally travel. No issue has been raised
        with the authenticity of the sickness certificate. It was completed
        by a qualified medical practitioner and must be  taken  to  reflect
        his or her professional opinion.


    17. The judge rejected the assertion as to the Appellant's  fitness  to
        travel by stating that the Appellant must  have  been  sufficiently
        fit to travel to the GP surgery, that the hearing  centre  was  not
        far from the Appellant's home, that no reference was  made  in  the
        reply notice sent to the Tribunal on 17 October 2016 to any medical
        difficulties, and to  the  fact  that  the  appeal  was  previously
        adjourned in October on the  same  basis.  There  was  no  evidence
        before the FtJ as to whether the Appellant did in  fact  travel  to
        his GP  surgery  to  obtain  the  sickness  certificate.  This  was
        speculation  by  the  judge.  It  is  equally  possible  that   the
        Appellant's GP could have visited him at  his  home.  Even  if  the
        Appellant did travel to his  GP  surgery  to  obtain  the  sickness
        certificate, there was no evidence in respect of the  circumstances
        in which this travel occurred, how far the GP surgery was from  the
        Appellant's  home,  whether  the  Appellant  needed  assistance  to
        travel, or the impact on the Appellant of  having  to  travel.  The
        fact that an individual may have to undertake a journey  to  a  GPs
        surgery does not mean that that person is in a medically fit  state
        to travel. There was simply no basis for the judge to go behind the
        conclusions  of  the  medical  practitioner.  The  absence  of  any
        reference to medical problems in the Reply Notice dated 17  October
        2016 is not of itself sufficient to entitle the judge to reject the
        truthfulness of the assertion contained in the medical certificate.
        It is quite possible for sciatica or  serious  back  pain  to  have
        developed after the issuance of the Notice of Reply. The fact  that
        an appeal hearing was adjourned on the same basis  at  the  end  of
        October 2017 does not  entitle  the  judge  to  conclude  that  the
        Appellant is malingering or intentionally delaying the  hearing  of
        his asylum appeal. It is a matter of common knowledge that sciatica
        may afflict individuals for several weeks or months.


    18. Because of his refusal to grant the adjournment the judge proceeded
        to hear an appeal relating to  a  protection  claim  in  which  the
        Appellant's credibility was very much in issue. Had the appeal been
        adjourned, and had the Appellant attended the adjourned hearing,  a
        judge may have had an opportunity to test the Appellant's  evidence
        and the basis for  the  adverse  credibility  findings.  For  these
        reasons, I am satisfied that the Appellant was deprived of a  right
        to a fair hearing.


    19. For entirely independent reasons I am additionally  satisfied  that
        the judge materially erred  in  law  by  failing  to  consider  the
        Appellant's human rights claim based on his relationship  with  MT.
        There was no dispute that the Appellant  advanced  a  human  rights
        claim within the context of his asylum claim. This was specifically
        considered by the Respondent in her Reasons for Refusal Letter. The
        rejection of this further human  rights  claim  was  not  certified
        under s.94 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, nor
        was it rejected under paragraph 353 of the immigration  rules.  The
        appeal  bundle  contained  a  statement  from  MT  describing   her
        relationship with the Appellant, and their claimed relationship was
        supported by other evidence including joint bank statements  and  a
        tenancy agreement. It was incumbent on the judge to have considered
        the human rights appeal. The  judge  failed  to  engage  with  this
        aspect of the appeal at all, a point accepted by  Mr  Melvin.  This
        constitutes a further material error of law.


    20. I am finally satisfied that the FtJ's decision to attach no  weight
        at all to the letter from a Sri Lanka  lawyer, Mr Talangalla, which
        was supported by a Sri Lankan Bar Association ID card, on the basis
        that it was 'self-serving' was one he was not entitled to make  for
        the reasons identified in R (on the application  of  SS).  The  FtJ
        does not explain why the  letter  is  'self-serving',  or  why  the
        assertions contained in the letter were incapable of belief.  I  am
        satisfied this amounts to a further, independent error of law.


Notice of Decision

The First-tier Tribunal decision is vitiated by material errors of law.  The
case is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh (de  novo)  hearing,
all issues open, to be heard by a judge other than Judge of  the  First-tier
Tribunal Zahed.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  in
this appeal is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.  This
direction applies both to the Appellant and to the  Respondent.  Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



[pic]                               16 November 2017

Signed                                  Date
Upper Tribunal Judge Blum
