
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                   Appeal Number:
PA/10467/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 28 February 2019                     |On 19 March 21019                  |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WOODCRAFT

                                   Between

                                    MR U
                          (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Dhanji, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

   1. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan  born  on  5  August  1992.  He
      appeals against a decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Raymond
      sitting at Hatton Cross on  26  September  2018  in  which  the  Judge
      dismissed the Appellant's appeal against a decision of the  Respondent
      dated 16 August 2018. That decision  was  to  refuse  the  Appellant's
      claim for international protection.


   2. The Appellant applied for a visa to enter the  United  Kingdom  on  24
      March 2011. He arrived here on 18 April 2011 with a Tier  4  (General)
      student visa valid until 7 August 2012. The  Appellant  had  no  leave
      thereafter and consequently overstayed his visa. On 16 February  2018,
      some 5 years after the expiry of his visa he applied  for  asylum  the
      refusal of which has given rise to the present proceedings.

The Appellant's Case and the Respondent's Refusal

   3. The Appellant's case was  summarised  by  the  Judge  at  [3]  of  the
      determination. The Appellant was gay, and this  would  expose  him  to
      risk of death upon return to Pakistan where his family  and  community
      had come to know of his sexual orientation. The Appellant had known in
      Pakistan that he preferred the company of boys since the age of 16 but
      he had a confused understanding of his  sexuality.  He  only  came  to
      realise he was gay after he began to look into homosexuality  in  2016
      which led him to visit a gay club where he had since had a  number  of
      different partners and had LGBT friends who had refugee status on that
      basis. The Appellant attended other gay clubs in London and had  first
      revealed his sexuality to his friends in the United Kingdom a few days
      after visiting a club.


   4. In November 2017 the Appellant's father  requested  the  Appellant  to
      return to Pakistan in order that the Appellant should marry a  cousin,
      but the Appellant refused because  of  his  sexuality.  This  led  his
      father to want to kill the Appellant and to  disown  him  publicly  by
      advertising that fact in a newspaper. As a result  of  this  publicity
      the Appellant's sexual orientation became known within the community.

   5. The Respondent took issue with  the  credibility  of  the  Appellant's
      claim stating it was unclear why if the Appellant's father was ashamed
      of the Appellant he would publicise this by putting  an  advertisement
      in a newspaper claiming to disown the  Appellant.  Little  weight  was
      attached to a copy deed of disinheritance dated 27 July 2018  produced
      by the Appellant in confirmation. Although the Appellant  had  claimed
      to receive threatening telephone calls and texts from his brother,  no
      evidence of these  threats  had  been  provided.  A  letter  from  the
      Metropolitan police related to a recent crime  incident  but  did  not
      confirm that that incident was to do with threatening calls  from  the
      brother. Little weight was given to copy photographs,  a  letter  from
      the Appellant's sister, a print out of a group chat and a print out of
      mobile phone accounts and chat.  The  Appellant's  sexual  orientation
      could not be confirmed but the Respondent held against  the  Appellant
      the delay in claiming asylum pursuant to section 8 of the  Asylum  and
      Immigration (Treatment of Claimants etc) Act 2004.

The Decision at First Instance

   6. At [7] of his determination the Judge stated that an assessment of the
      credibility of the Appellant's narrative "must inevitably focus on the
      journey of self-discovery which he claims to have made as a  gay  man,
      from knowing he was attracted to boys only, when aged 16 in  Pakistan,
      to when as a result of investigating the Koran  on  homosexuality  and
      seeing a film on clubbing young men, he was led to come out as gay  in
      2016".


   7. In a lengthy determination which ran to some 51 pages the  Judge  held
      that the Appellant was not a credible  witness.  At  [134]  the  Judge
      pointed to what he described as  a  stark  contradiction  between  the
      September 2018 appeal statement and  the  Appellant's  earlier  August
      2018 asylum interview. The appeal statement said  that  the  Appellant
      wanted to be a couple with an individual called T, a boy  he  knew  at
      school when he was 16, and about whom he had  fantasies  of  intimacy.
      Whereas in his asylum interview the Appellant  said  that  he  had  no
      notion of his own sexuality when in Pakistan. The Judge considered  at
      [137] that the account given by the Appellant in the asylum  interview
      was different to that in the appeal statement.

   8. The appeal statement was an assertion that the  Appellant's  awareness
      of his sexuality in 2016 was of the same order as that which  he  felt
      towards T in 2007. The Judge did not accept the  criticism  that  this
      had arisen through some fault of  the  Home  Office  interviewer.  The
      Appellant was being interviewed as a 25-year-old man who was  supposed
      to have had a number of casual gay encounters not as a 16-year-old who
      was confused about his  sexuality.  There  was  nothing  to  stop  the
      Appellant in  interview  expressing  the  fuller  and  more  extensive
      account which he had given in his later appeal  statement  of  how  he
      wanted at the time to be a gay couple with T.

   9. After the Appellant came to the United Kingdom in 2011 he said he  was
      watching movies as well as reading online material.  The  Judge  found
      that the Appellant was living a full social life in 2015 before he was
      supposed to have  started  to  explore  his  sexuality  in  2016.  The
      Appellant appeared to be saying in his appeal statement  that  he  had
      come to a full realisation of his gay identity in  2007  when  he  was
      aged 16. It was only a hostile homophobic environment in Pakistan that
      stopped him at that time from exploring his sexuality so  there  could
      have  been  no  confusion  in  his  mind  then.  This  made  it   more
      incomprehensible that in an open society like the United  Kingdom  the
      Appellant had only begun to explore his  identity  in  2016,  5  years
      after arriving here.  If  the  Appellant  had  been  suffering  mental
      torture since 2007 because of the conflict within himself  over  being
      gay, there was no comprehensible reason why 2016 would  be  a  turning
      point for the Appellant to explore his sexuality and visit a  gay  bar
      for the first time.

  10. The Appellant had also said that watching a film  called  "Desi  Boyz"
      acted as a revelatory moment that led him to visit his first gay  club
      in 2016. The film is in fact about two heterosexual Asian men  who  go
      clubbing in London. The Appellant had changed his evidence  about  the
      impact of this film between his August  interview  and  his  September
      statement. From being a revelatory moment that led to him  wanting  to
      go to a gay club, the film was now portrayed as one that made him more
      interested in the idea of close friends clubbing together.  The  Judge
      held at [187] that the Appellant had manipulated his relationship with
      a drag queen as part of his fabricated asylum narrative.

  11. The Appellant had given two inconsistent accounts of himself,  one  in
      the August 2018 asylum interview, as a liberated and happy gay man and
      the other was the picture  presented  to  his  GP  and  mental  health
      workers of being an isolated, cowed and depressed  gay  man  given  to
      suicidal ideation. This dichotomy pointed to the Appellant  as  having
      manufactured his account of his journey of self-realisation as  a  gay
      man. The self-referrals to GPs and mental health workers were part  of
      the strategy of a fabricated gay profile.

  12. At [238] the Judge noted  that  the  Appellant  had  achieved  nothing
      academically since entering the United Kingdom in April 2011.  In  the
      following paragraph he analysed the explanation given by the Appellant
      for this situation The Appellant claimed that by the time  funds  came
      through from his parents to enable him to apply for a  visa  extension
      his visa had already expired, and he was told by  solicitors  that  it
      was too late  for  him  to  do  anything  about  it.   The  Judge  was
      particularly unimpressed by the claim that the Appellant's  solicitors
      appeared to be looking for a college for the Appellant rather than the
      Appellant himself assuming that responsibility. The Appellant had lied
      to his parents telling them that he had made  an  application  for  an
      extension but had not received a reply from  the  Respondent  when  in
      fact he had made no application at all.

  13. It was unclear why the Appellant should have made a disclosure to  his
      family out of  choice,  he  could  have  just  refused  to  return  to
      Pakistan. The Appellant had  not  apparently  visited  his  family  in
      Pakistan since arriving in the United Kingdom in April 2011 and it was
      implausible to suggest that the Appellant's father  and  family  could
      have had any ability  to  persuade  the  Appellant  to  return  for  a
      marriage. The Appellant had not had to give his father the explanation
      that he did not wish to return to Pakistan to marry  because  he,  the
      Appellant, was gay.

  14. There were a number of other discrepancies in the evidence  presented.
      At [381] the Judge concluded that he did not accept the Appellant  had
      a gay sexual identity. He did not accept the  Appellant  had  had  gay
      sexual relationships or that he would be perceived to be a gay man  in
      Pakistan. Neither the Appellant nor his two witnesses  at  the  appeal
      hearing had been honest and truthful in their evidence. The  Appellant
      had only made an asylum claim at a time of his convenience  which  had
      been fabricated with  a  high  degree  of  cynicism.  Concealment  and
      evasion had been a characteristic of the evidence of the Appellant. He
      dismissed the appeal.

The Onward Appeal

  15. The Appellant appealed against this decision making two  main  points.
      The first was that the Judge had used unacceptable terminology in  his
      determination. On 5 occasions, in [9], [18], [28], [71] and [184]  the
      Judge had used the term "gays" as a way of referring to gay  men.  The
      Equal Treatment Bench Book stated that "gays" was  not  an  acceptable
      term.


  16. The 2nd ground argued that there had been a reliance on  a  stereotype
      as the basis  for  identifying  a  contradiction  in  the  Appellant's
      evidence that was cited repeatedly  by  the  Judge  as  a  reason  for
      concluding that the Appellant had not proved he was  a  gay  man.  The
      Judge  had  mischaracterised  the  Appellant's  evidence  basing   his
      assessment of the credibility of that evidence on the stereotype  that
      a man who was physically attracted to another man would have  realised
      he was gay. In this case the stereotype was that the  Appellant  would
      have realised he was gay when he felt physically attracted to T.

  17. The grounds  quoted  from  paragraph  6  of  the  Appellant's  witness
      statement  arguing  that  nowhere  had  the  Appellant  addressed  his
      understanding of his sexual identity. Rather the Appellant  had  given
      evidence about the feelings of attraction he felt towards T which were
      arguably distinct from his understanding of whether he  was  gay.  The
      Appellant's understanding  developed  over  time  culminating  in  his
      decision to identify as a gay man and  the  grounds  quoted  from  the
      witness statement at paragraphs 12 and 13. The  Judge's  error  was  a
      material one. The Judge relied on the conclusion he reached that there
      was a contradiction between  the  Appellant's  evidence  that  he  was
      physically attracted to T in 2007 but did not come out until 2016 as a
      reason for concluding that the Appellant's claim that to be a gay  man
      was not credible. He returned to it throughout his determination as  a
      reason that undermined the Appellant's overall credibility.

  18. The application for permission to appeal came  on  the  papers  before
      Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Wilson  on  17  January  2019.  In
      granting permission to appeal he wrote: "The grounds assert  that  the
      Judge erred in that he failed to make findings in accordance with  the
      evidence. In particular the Judge failed to draw a distinction between
      the Appellant's feelings towards a male  friend  and  his  realisation
      that he was gay. It is arguable that the Judge  failed  adequately  to
      consider the  Appellant's  credibility  within  the  context  of  this
      distinction. That is potentially significant, is definitely  material;
      and is arguably a material error. This arguably material error of  law
      having  been  identified,  all  the  issues  raised  the  grounds  are
      arguable".

  19. The Respondent replied to the grant of permission to appeal by  letter
      dated 26 February 2019 pursuant to rule 24.  In  opposing  the  onward
      appeal, the Respondent  submitted  that  the  Judge  had  forensically
      examined all aspects of the Appellant's claim to be a gay  man.  There
      were dozens of references to the Appellant as  a  gay  man  throughout
      this  determination.  It  was  unclear  whether   the   grounds   were
      challenging that the Judge was somehow showing bias against gay men by
      his use of the term  "gays"  in  three  or  four  paragraphs  of  this
      determination. This made no material difference  to  the  careful  and
      full assessment of the Appellant's claim to be a gay man.

  20. As to ground 2, the Judge directed himself properly to the task before
      him focusing on the journey  of  self-discovery  which  the  Appellant
      claimed to have made. There was a serious contradiction about when the
      Appellant's awakening of the  understanding  of  his  sexual  identity
      began. The Judge had considered all aspects  of  the  claim  at  great
      length including the evidence of the witnesses. The Respondent  quoted
      from the House of Lords authority of HJ  Iran:  "the  Tribunal  should
      first ask itself whether it is satisfied  on  the  evidence  that  the
      Appellant was gay or that he would be  treated  as  gay  by  potential
      persecutors in his country of nationality".

  21. The Judge noted  the  stark  contradiction  in  evidence  between  the
      original statements and the last  appeal  statement.  (I  assume  that
      reference to the "original statements" is meant to be a  reference  to
      the asylum interview.) The reply continued that the  Judge  had  given
      numerous examples to support the finding that the Appellant's claim to
      be gay was not credible. The grounds of appeal challenged only  a  few
      points that were incapable of making a difference to the  overwhelming
      sustainable findings. The Judge had directed himself appropriately and
      the Respondent opposed the appeal.

The Hearing Before Me

  22. As a consequence of the grant of permission to appeal the matter  came
      before me to determine in the first place whether there was a material
      error of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal. If there  was
      not the decision  would  stand,  if  there  was,  then  I  would  make
      directions for the rehearing of the appeal.


  23. For the Appellant counsel argued that the case turned on an assessment
      of the  Appellant's  credibility.  The  Judge  had  used  unacceptable
      terminology. This was a claim involving sensitive issues and it was of
      fundamental  importance  that  the  Judge   making   the   credibility
      assessment was able to appreciate the facts of the Appellant's journey
      of self-discovery. The use of inappropriate terminology left the Judge
      open to the perception of bias and that was not rescued by  other  use
      of appropriate terminology in other parts of the determination.

  24.  The  2nd  ground  related  to  the  assessment  of  the   Appellant's
      credibility. The focus of the Judge's adverse findings was at [134] to
      [154]. The Judge stated that upon the Appellant being attracted  to  T
      he would have realised he, the Appellant, was gay. What the Judge  had
      done was to conflate the Appellant's evidence that he was attracted to
      T with the issue of the Appellant's awareness that he was a  gay  man.
      These were two distinct matters but the Judge instead of treating them
      as one and had then found a contradiction.  This  appeared  repeatedly
      throughout  the  determination  in  the  Judge's  assessment  of   the
      Appellant's claim. The Judge made that same point over and over again.



  25. In reply, the Presenting Officer relied on the rule 24 response  which
      he had drafted. The use of the word "gays" was not  a  material  point
      unless the accusation was  made  that  the  Judge  was  homophobic  or
      otherwise biased against the Appellant which did not seem to  be  what
      was being said. The Judge had assessed what  the  Appellant  had  said
      were his feelings in 2007. It was open to the Judge to  take  a  point
      against the Appellant that he had lived for a long time in the  United
      Kingdom without exploring his sexuality. The Judge had considered  the
      witnesses called on the Appellant's  behalf  but  had  rejected  their
      evidence. The focus of the case was on the questions raised in HJ Iran
      particularly the first question. The Judge considered the evidence and
      reached a conclusion that was open to him. The grounds were an attempt
      to reargue the appeal by making semantic points. There was no material
      error of law. There were no further submissions made and I reserved my
      decision.

Findings

  26. As I have already indicated, there are  two  main  challenges  to  the
      determination in this case. The first is a complaint against the Judge
      of perceived bias because in  five  places  in  the  determination  he
      refers to "gays" rather than "gay men" in breach of  the  guidance  in
      the Equal Treatment Bench Book. In other parts of the determination as
      the Appellant himself acknowledges, the Judge does refer to  gay  men.
      It would appear therefore that the Judge's use of the term  "gays"  is
      something of an aberration and does  not  truly  reflect  the  Judge's
      understanding  of  the  need  for   sensitivity   in   preparing   his
      determination and deciding this case.


  27. The test of perceived bias is whether a reasonable person, in all  the
      circumstances of the case, would have a reasonable  apprehension  that
      there would not be a fair trial from an impartial Judge. As it  is  an
      objective test, it does not invoke the apprehension of a Judge, or any
      party; it invokes the reasonable apprehension of a reasonable  person,
      who is in possession of all the relevant facts.

  28. Applying that test to the instant case, I do not consider that a fair-
      minded person would be  apprehensive  that  the  Appellant  would  not
      receive a fair trial from this Judge. Had the only references  in  the
      determination to gay men been "gays" or  had  there  been  some  other
      evidence from the determination such as derogatory  comments  made  by
      the Judge which went beyond reason-based criticism, the position might
      be different but that is not the case here.  The  mischief  which  the
      guidance is aimed at is the indication of bias by the poor or improper
      use of language. I reject  the  argument  made  by  the  Appellant  of
      perceived bias. Occasional lapses in the use of language when taken in
      the context of the determination as a whole where appropriate language
      is used, do not demonstrate a particular mindset on the  part  of  the
      Judge or bias. This was  a  very  small  proportion  of  an  otherwise
      impeccably worded determination.  It is clear from a fair  reading  of
      the  determination  that  the  Judge  gave  anxious  scrutiny  to  the
      Appellant's  claim  in  this  case  and  rejected  it  on  grounds  of
      credibility not prejudice.

  29. The 2nd complaint made by the grounds is that the Judge's treatment of
      credibility erred in law. As such it is a reasons-based challenge  and
      I remind myself  that  the  Judge  had  the  benefit  of  hearing  the
      Appellant and his witnesses give oral testimony and be cross-examined.



30. The core issue in the case turned on the Appellant's claim that he  had
    been aware of his feelings towards males at the age of 16 but  did  not
    explore his sexuality further until some  years  after  living  in  the
    United Kingdom. The Judge found that to be  implausible.  Firstly,  the
    Judge found that the Appellant changed his evidence  between  what  was
    said in interview and what the Appellant  later  said  in  his  witness
    statement, see paragraph 7 above. The Judge was entitled to assess what
    he found to be an inconsistency and to weigh that in the  balance  when
    deciding whether the Appellant was  a  credible  witness.  That  was  a
    matter for the Judge. It was neither perverse nor  irrational  for  the
    Judge to find an inconsistency in  the  Appellant's  evidence  on  this
    point. The Appellant had difficulties in explaining why  it  had  taken
    him so long to explore his sexuality further in the United Kingdom.  If
    his evidence was that he had not  explored  his  sexuality  further  in
    Pakistan because it was a homophobic country, it was not credible  that
    he would then take so long to  explore  his  sexuality  in  the  United
    Kingdom  where  a  very  different  societal  attitude  towards  sexual
    orientation prevailed.


31. The Judge was concerned that the Appellant had changed his evidence  as
    the case had progressed about how he was said to have felt at  the  age
    of 16. The Appellant's argument  that  there  were  somehow  two  quite
    distinct aspects to the Appellant's case namely his attraction to T  at
    the age of 16 and his later exploration  of  sexuality  in  the  United
    Kingdom is in reality the splitting of hairs. The Judge found that  the
    Appellant had exaggerated his case. That was  a  conclusion  which  was
    open to him on the evidence.

32. There were other aspects of the Appellant's case such as  inconsistency
    between watching a heterosexual film about  Asian  men  going  clubbing
    which provoked the Appellant's interest in clubbing generally  and  the
    Appellant  deciding  that  as  a  result  of  watching  the   film   he
    specifically he wanted to go to a gay club. It was open to the Judge to
    draw an adverse conclusion from that because he  did  not  accept  that
    watching heterosexual men would lead the Appellant to want to go  to  a
    gay club.

33. This was a lengthy determination and the grounds  complain  that  there
    was an element of repetition in the points taken against the  Appellant
    by the Judge. It might be argued that  the  determination  was  perhaps
    longer than was necessary to make the points which the Judge sought  to
    make. That would be a material error of law  if  as  a  result  of  the
    length of the determination it was not clear to the  losing  party  why
    they had lost but I do not consider that argument has any merit. It was
    clear what point  the  Judge  was  making  in  his  determination.  The
    Appellant had changed his evidence about  when  the  awakening  of  his
    understanding of his sexual identity began. Ultimately it was  for  the
    Judge to decide whether the Appellant could explain the very long delay
    in the time spent in the United Kingdom before the Appellant began  his
    claimed exploration of his sexual identity for example by visiting  gay
    clubs.

34. The Judge evidently decided that the Appellant could not explain  this.
    What the Appellant had done, the Judge held, was to construct  a  claim
    for international protection that was not credible. The first  question
    posed by HJ Iran: was the Appellant gay or was he likely to be  treated
    as gay by potential persecutors, required an answer. The Judge did  not
    find the Appellant was gay because he  found  that  the  Appellant  had
    manufactured his claim. He did not accept that the Appellant  would  be
    treated as gay for example by the Appellant's father. The Judge did not
    accept that the Appellant had told his father that the reason  why  he,
    the Appellant, did not wish to return to Pakistan to marry was  because
    of sexual orientation. There was no need for the Appellant to give that
    as a reason, the Appellant had not returned  to  Pakistan  earlier  and
    there was no possibility of pressure being put on the Appellant.

35. The Appellant had demonstrated that he was not a  reliable  witness  by
    admitting that he had lied to his parents about  his  academic  studies
    which, as the Judge pointed out, had achieved nothing in the  time  the
    Appellant was here. There was also the point made by the Respondent  in
    the refusal letter which the Judge was entitled to  take  into  account
    that it made no sense for the Appellant's father to complain about  the
    shame brought upon the family by advertising the whole  affair  in  the
    local newspaper. The Judge gave other  cogent  reasons  (which  I  have
    summarised at paragraph 14 above) for his conclusions and  which  taken
    as a  whole  entitled  the  Judge  to  take  an  adverse  view  of  the
    Appellant's credibility. The grounds of onward appeal amount to no more
    than a disagreement with the decision of the Judge. As such  I  do  not
    consider that any material error of law  is  indicated  by  either  the
    grounds or the submissions made to me and  I  dismiss  the  Appellant's
    onward appeal.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of  an
    error of law and I uphold  the  decision  to  dismiss  the  Appellant's
    appeal

Appellant's appeal dismissed

I make no anonymity order as there is no public policy reason for so doing.


Signed this 13 March 2019


.......................................................
Judge Woodcraft
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee was payable and I have dismissed the appeal and therefore  there  can
be no fee award.


Signed this 13 March 2019


.......................................................
Judge Woodcraft
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge





