
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10450/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 10 April 2019                              |On 15 April 2019              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER

                                   Between

                                     Ts
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs Ahmad, Ahmad & Williams
For the Respondent:    Ms Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

      1. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born  in  1989.   He  is  29
         years old.  He has three British citizen  children  born  in  2012,
         2013 and 2016 respectively.

      2. I have maintained an  anonymity  direction  because  this  decision
         refers to the circumstances of the appellant's three children.

      3. The appellant has appealed against a  decision  of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal ('FtT'), sent on 15 November 2018, in which his appeal was
         dismissed.

Background

      4. The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom ('UK')  in  2011  as  a
         student.  He entered into an Islamic marriage with K, the mother of
         his three children, on  11  July  2012.   Following  this,  he  was
         granted leave on the basis of his family  life  until  21  February
         2016.

      5. On 13 April 2016 the  appellant  was  convicted  of  one  count  of
         putting K in fear of violence and two counts of  breaching  a  non-
         molestation order.  On 11 May 2016 he was sentenced  to  17  months
         imprisonment and  a  restraining  order  was  put  in  place.   The
         sentencing judge drew attention to the aggravating features of  the
         offending: they were committed toward his wife and in the  presence
         of their children; the offending was not out of  character  because
         there was evidence to indicate that the appellant's violence toward
         his wife began in 2012; the threats and acts of past violence  were
         sustained and serious.; the breaches of the  non-molestation  order
         were flagrant.

      6. The  appellant  was  released  from  prison  in  January  2017  but
         immediately placed in immigration detention until his release on 25
         July 2017.  The restraining order was varied on 5 September 2017 to
         permit the appellant to see his children.

      7. The appellant was made the subject of  a  deportation  order  on  9
         March 2017 and  on  9  October  2017  the  respondent  refused  his
         application for leave to remain and his protection claim.

FtT

      8. The matter came before FtT Judge James at a hearing on  23  October
         2018.  He heard evidence from the appellant, K and  his  mother-in-
         law, M, and made the following findings of fact, before  dismissing
         the appeal on all grounds:

          i) The appellant  sought  to  minimise  the  seriousness  of  his
             criminal offending.  There was evidence to  show  a  sustained
             period of violence against K as early as 2012 and some of this
             violence was perpetrated in front of the children.




         ii) After the appellant's conviction he had no  contact  with  his
             children until the restraining order was varied  in  September
             2017.  After this he had supervised contact for 3 hours  twice
             a week.  This was supervised by M and K's sister. In July 2018
             the restraining  order  was  discharged  and  the  appellant's
             contact with his children  increased.   The  appellant  has  a
             genuine and subsisting relationship with his children.


        iii) The appellant and K did not live together but there was "hope"
             by both that they would get back together, albeit K  was  less
             optimistic that this would be in a matter of months.


         iv) It would be unduly harsh for the children  to  live  with  the
             appellant in Pakistan.


          v) Although the children  would  prefer  to  have  the  appellant
             remain in the UK they spent a long period apart  and  are  not
             integrated as a family.  The children are healthy and  do  not
             have special needs.  Balancing these circumstances and  noting
             the seriousness of the appellant's offending it would  not  be
             unduly harsh for the children to remain in the UK without  the
             appellant.


         vi) The appellant is not in a genuine and subsisting  relationship
             with K and the effect of his deportation on  K  would  not  be
             unduly harsh.


        vii) The appellant has not provided a credible account of his  fear
             of serious harm in Pakistan  and  in  any  event  there  is  a
             sufficiency of protection.

Appeal against FtT decision

      9. The appellant applied for permission to appeal  against  the  FtT's
         decision in grounds of appeal drafted  by  his  solicitors.   These
         mount a series of disagreements with the  FtT's  factual  findings.
         FtT Judge Froom granted permission to  appeal  but  focussed  on  a
         single issue, that was not raised in the  grounds  of  appeal.   He
         considered it arguable that the FtT  failed  to  treat  the  unduly
         harsh test as self-contained and arguably  unlawfully  factored  in
         the seriousness of the appellant's  offending.   Judge  Froom  also
         observed that it was arguable that had the FtT  not  done  so,  the
         conclusion might  have  been  different  notwithstanding  the  high
         threshold to be met.

     10. In a Rule 24 response dated 17 January 2019 the respondent  opposed
         the  appeal,  submitting  that  the   FtT   had   directed   itself
         appropriately.  The respondent submitted that the FtT did not weigh
         in the appellant's criminal conduct when applying the unduly  harsh
         test but in any event on no legitimate view of the  evidence  could
         the high threshold be met, even when the offending is left  out  of
         account.

     11. At the beginning of the hearing before me and after some discussion
         the representatives agreed that in determining the question whether
         it would be unduly harsh for the children to remain in the UK,  the
         FtT took into account the seriousness of the appellant's  offending
         and this constitutes an error of law.  However there  continued  to
         be  a  dispute  as  to  whether  that  error  is  material.    Both
         representatives  accepted  that  this  is  the  only  issue  to  be
         determined and that I must consider whether but for the error,  the
         decision regarding s. 117C(5) of the 2002 Act would inevitably have
         been the same.  Mrs Ahmad conceded that at  the  date  of  the  FtT
         hearing the relationship between the appellant and K could  not  be
         described as  subsisting.   As  such,  she  acknowledged  that  the
         appellant only continued to rely upon Exception 2  in  s.117C,  and
         only in relation to his children.

     12. Mrs Ahmad invited me to find that that the  level  of  contact  and
         closeness between the appellant and his children are such  that  it
         remained possible for the unduly harsh threshold  to  be  met.   Ms
         Isherwood submitted that the evidence available did  no  more  than
         demonstrate that the children would be adversely affected but on no
         legitimate view could it be said that the effect  would  be  unduly
         harsh.

     13. After hearing from both  representatives  I  reserved  my  decision
         which I now provide with my reasons.

Legal framework

     14. Paragraphs 399 and 399A of  the  Immigration  Rules  are  reflected
         within section 117C(5) of the 2002 Act, which provides as follows:-


           "Exception 2 applies  where  C  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
           relationship  with  a  qualifying  partner,  or  a  genuine  and
           subsisting parental relationship with a  qualifying  child,  and
           the effect of C's deportation on the partner or child  would  be
           unduly harsh."

     15. It is to be noted that the question in s.  117C(5)  as  to  whether
         "the effect" of C's deportation would be "unduly harsh"  is  broken
         down into two parts in paragraph 399, so that it applies where:

             "(a)     it would be unduly harsh for the child to live in the
             country to which the person is to be deported; and
             (b)       it would be unduly harsh for the child to remain in
             the UK without the person who is to be deported."

     16. The correct approach to paragraph 399 and s. 117C(5)  of  the  2002
         Act has recently  been  considered  by  the  Supreme  Court  in  KO
         (Nigeria) v SSHD  [2018]  UKSC  53.   It  is  now  clear  that  the
         assessment of unduly harsh does not  require  a  balancing  of  the
         relative  level  of  severity  of  the  parent's   offence.     The
         assessment solely requires a careful consideration of  whether  the
         elevated threshold is reached from the point of view of either  the
         child or partner.  If that high threshold is met, then  deportation
         would be a breach of Article 8 of the ECHR and no further  analysis
         is required.

Error of law discussion

     17. When [38 and 39] of the FtT decision are  read  together,  the  FtT
         clearly  factored  in  the  appellant's  criminal  offending   when
         determining whether it would be unduly harsh for  the  children  to
         remain in the UK without the appellant.  The parties agreed that  I
         must determine whether this error is material or such that the  FtT
         decision should be set aside.  I must consider whether or  not  the
         conclusion reached was inevitable on the evidence available to  the
         FtT.

     18. I note that when granting permission Judge Froom indicated it might
         be possible for  the  FtT  to  have  concluded  differently.   That
         observation must be viewed in context - at that stage  Judge  Froom
         was only determining the arguability of any error of  law  and  the
         arguability of the materiality of that error.  I do not agree  with
         Judge Froom's observation.  The elevated threshold (as explained in
         KO (Nigeria)) and the factual findings are such that the FtT  could
         only reach one conclusion in this case:  it  would  not  be  unduly
         harsh for the children to remain in the UK without  the  appellant.
         The required elevated threshold cannot be  met  on  any  legitimate
         view given the main features of the evidence  and  irrespective  of
         the children's best interests militating in favour of their  father
         remaining in the UK.

     19. Firstly, although the  appellant  substantially  increased  contact
         (said to be  daily)  with  the  children  in  July  2018  when  the
         restraining order was lifted on an application from K (see [33]  of
         the FtT decision), by the time of the FtT hearing in October  2018,
         those arrangements were only in place for a short period i.e. about
         three months.  Prior to this the appellant had  limited  supervised
         contact and prior to that  he  was  in  prison  or  detention.   It
         follows, as the FtT found, that the appellant  spent  a  long  time
         away from his children, and his resumption of  daily  contact  with
         his  children  underpinning  their  close  relationship,  was  very
         recent.  The suggestion in  the  grounds  of  appeal  that  it  was
         significant that K supported the lifting of the  restraining  order
         does not obviate the short period of time the  appellant  had  been
         enjoying increased contact.

     20. Second, although (as K said) the children may have  been  adversely
         affected by not having their father with them and they preferred to
         be with him, they are still very young and are all  healthy.   They
         have had and will have the love and support of their mother and her
         family members to assist them to  transition  through  the  changes
         consequent on the appellant's offending.  Although it was difficult
         for the children, there was  no  cogent  evidence  that  they  were
         unable to cope or function on  a  day  to  day  basis  without  the
         appellant when he was imprisoned.  Similarly, there was  no  cogent
         evidence beyond the assertions of the appellant and  K,  that  with
         time and support, the children would not be able to adapt and  cope
         without their father.  Mrs Ahmad highlighted that M  gave  evidence
         that she would not be able to assist K any longer and as  such  the
         FtT's made a mistake in finding at [40] that K  would  continue  to
         have the support of M.  The grounds of appeal  make  no  meaningful
         effort to properly plead that the FtT made a mistake of  fact  that
         caused unfairness  in  this  or  any  other  regard.   The  passing
         reference to this matter at (8) of the grounds makes no  effort  to
         explain  why  the  asserted  fact   can   be   considered   to   be
         incontrovertible  or  why,  having  assisted  in  caring  for   her
         grandchildren for an extended period, M was minded to end this.

     21. Third, the family dynamics remained fragile at the time of the  FtT
         hearing. Although  the  restraining  order  had  been  lifted,  the
         appellant had not returned  to  the  family  home  and  K  remained
         (entirely  understandably)  cautious  about  this.   The   asserted
         "extremely strong bond" between  the  appellant  and  the  children
         would have to be  viewed  in  context:  there  was  only  a  recent
         resumption in regular and unsupervised contact  and  the  appellant
         did not live with his children.

     22. In KO (Nigeria), Lord Carnwath emphasised at  [23]  that:  "One  is
         looking  for  a  degree  of  harshness  going  beyond  what   would
         necessarily be involved for any child faced with the deportation of
         a parent".    Mrs Ahmad was unable to  point  me  to  any  evidence
         available to the FtT to support her submission  that  the  children
         would  face  a  degree  of  harshness  going  beyond   what   would
         necessarily be involved for any child faced with the deportation of
         a parent, in relation to  whom  there  is  a  genuinely  close  and
         subsisting relationship with the child.  In addition, at [35] of KO
         (Nigeria), Lord  Carnwath  made  it  clear  that  when  making  his
         alternative assessment regarding the impact  of  KO's  deportation,
         the judge applied "too low a standard" and treated unduly harsh  as
         no more than "undesirable".  The impact on  the  children  in  KO's
         case on any view is more serious than  in  the  present  case.   KO
         lived  with  his  children.   This  appellant   does   not.    KO's
         relationship with his children had not very recently developed more
         significantly having previously been the  subject  of  supervision.
         The main household income would be not be lost by  the  appellant's
         deportation.

     23. Having considered all the evidence available  to  the  FtT  in  the
         round, I am satisfied that  the  conclusion  that  the  appellant's
         deportation would not have an unduly harsh effect upon the children
         was an inevitable one, when the appellant's offending is  left  out
         of account.  It follows that in taking into account the appellant's
         offending when determining the relevant unduly harsh test, the  FtT
         has not committed a material error of law.

Conclusion

     24. I dismiss the appellant's appeal and do not set aside the  decision
         of the FtT.

Direction regarding anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008
Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date
UTJ Plimmer

Upper Tribunal Judge Plimmer                     11 April 2019
