
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10509/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Heard at Manchester    Decision and Reasons Promulgated
On 19th February 2019  On 11th April 2019


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY JUDGE UPPER TRIBUNAL FARRELLY


                                   Between

                                     M H
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Dr Khan, Counsel, instructed by MS Solicitors.
For the respondent:    Mr Tan, Senior Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

    1. The appellant is a national of Egypt. His wife and 3 children remain
       in Egypt. He entered the United Kingdom in September 2016 on his own
       passport endorsed with a visitor's visa. In October 2016 he made a
       claim to protection on the basis of political opinion.

    2. He worked in the United Arab Emirates and Qatar since 2010. He said
       he returned to Egypt in early February 2016 and was arrested 6 days
       later and accused of providing funds for the Muslim Brotherhood.
       Whilst detained he was abused. He claimed that his uncle, a retired
       police chief, facilitated his release on bail and organised
       documentation, including the visit Visa so he could leave the country
       through the main airport. He claims his uncle was unaware he intended
       to claim protection. An arrest warrant has now been issued and he
       subsequently was sentenced to 15 years imprisonment in absentia.

    3. He claims he is at risk because of his association with his brother,
       F, a journalist who drew cartoons and made Internet postings critical
       of the regime. His brother was living in Qatar and has since gone to
       America where he has been granted protection.

    4. The respondent rejected his claim in October 2017. It was accepted he
       might have had some low-level activity within the Muslim Brotherhood
       and the Freedom and Justice Party(FJP).It was not accepted he was a
       member. The truth of his underlying claim was not accepted.
       Discrepancies in his account of being detained were highlighted. The
       respondent did not find it credible that he could pass through
       airport security if he was on a watchlist. His failure to claim
       immediately on arrival at Heathrow was highlighted.

The First tier Tribunal

    5. His appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge J Hillis at
       Bradford on 20 August 2018. In a decision promulgated on 13 September
       2018 it was dismissed. The judge did not find the appellant credible.
       The judge pointed out the appellant had a brother in Egypt and him,
       and the appellant's wife and family members had not complained of any
       difficulties.

    6. The appellant had claimed his brother had been indirectly punished by
       being removed from his position as a public contractor. At hearing
       the appellant produce his passport which remained in his own name but
       said that details about his address and occupation had been changed.

    7. The judge was provided with evidence about the appellant's brother
       who formerly lived in Qatar and had been given protection in America.
       The judge noted that his brother had not attended the hearing nor had
       there been a request for a video link. The judge found
       inconsistencies between his brother's account in his statement and
       the appellant's own account, with the former stating that the
       appellant's family were also threatened. The judge was not prepared
       to attach weight to his brother's evidence in relation to the
       appellant's claim, pointing out that his brother had no personal
       knowledge of what happened to the appellant in Egypt.

    8. The judge referred to the documents provided in support of the claim
       particularly the translation of the purported court decision. The
       document went to the core of the claim and the judge was not prepared
       to attach any weight to the document on the basis only a summary had
       been provided by the translator.

The Upper Tribunal

    9. Permission was granted on a renewed application on the basis it was
       arguable the judge erred in giving no weight to the translation of
       what was said to be a court document. This was the last of 4 grounds
       advanced and the permission was granted on all.

   10. The 1st ground contended that the judge erred in law in concluding
       the appellant had failed to provide a reasonable explanation as to
       why the Egyptian authorities would detain and abuse him but not his
       brother who lived in the country. It was argued on his behalf that
       their circumstances were different in that the appellant had been
       living with his other brother in Qatar when that brother was engaged
       in anti-government activity. This in turn imputed suspicion to him.
       Furthermore, the appellant said he was a member of the Muslim
       Brotherhood and Freedom and Justice party whereas his brother in
       Egypt was not.

   11. The second ground was that the judge failed to make clear findings on
       whether it was accepted the appellant was a member of the Muslim
       Brotherhood and the Freedom and Justice Party. If he were, this
       enhanced the risk.

   12. The third-ground was that the judge failed to take into account the
       country information. Reference was made to the respondent's guidance
       referred to in the refusal letter that the Egyptian authorities
       target family members. On behalf of the appellant it was contended
       this is what happened when his brother in Egypt had to relocate and
       lost his government work.

   13. At hearing, Dr Khan relied upon the grounds for which permission had
       been granted and expanded upon them. In terms of the court document
       he explained that the procedure under Egyptian law was that such
       court documents are released to a person's lawyer. In this case, he
       said the appellant's lawyer would not then release the document until
       paid for their services. He said that the appellant did not have the
       funds. He said that his brother in America provided the funds and his
       brother in Egypt arranged to have the document collected and
       forwarded. He said that the appellant's uncle who had financed his
       release and travel, no longer wanted to have any further involvement.
       He said the appellant then arranged to have it translated services
       operated by Manchester City Council. There is a covering letter from
       the Council dated 7 February 2019. However, the covering envelope
       from Egypt indicated it had been forwarded on 2 January 2018 which
       predated the First-tier Tribunal hearing Khan was unaware why if the
       document was then available a full translation had not been arranged
       before the First tier hearing.

   14. Dr Khan went on to argue that there was an explanation as to why the
       appellant would be treated differently from his brother in Egypt's.
       There was no suggestion that his brother in Egypt had been involved
       in any politics and in any event did receive punishment by being
       required to relocate because of his job change. He said the appellant
       was closely associated with his brother in America. Both had been
       living outside of Egypt. His brother had been granted protection by
       the American authorities.

   15. Dr Khan argued that there was confusion on the part of the judge in
       relation to the membership card produced. He said that the Freedom
       and Justice party gives political expression of opposition to the
       regime.

   16.  Mr Tan respondent to the different grounds advanced. He said the
       judge had given clear reasons for rejecting the appellant's claim.
       The judge did not find the appellant to be credible.

   17. At paragraph 56 to 58 the judge compared the account given by F with
       the appellant's and found significant inconsistencies between the
       two. The judge made the point at paragraph 59 that his brother F was
       not in Egypt at the time of the appellant's claim difficulties. The
       account he gave was hearsay.

   18. At paragraph 60 the judge deals with the claim that there is a
       distinction between the appellant's situation and that of his brother
       in Egypt. The judge rejected this at paragraph 61 and at paragraph 62
       and 63 gave reasons.

   19. Regarding the 2nd ground advanced he acknowledged the judge had not
       made clear findings but the judge was aware that even low ranking
       members faced imprisonment. This was reflected at paragraph 64 and
       65.

   20. Mr Tan commented on the 3rd and 4th grounds. Regarding the latter he
       submitted the judge had correctly applied the principles set out in
       Tanveer Ahmed.

Consideration

   21. From reading the decision as a whole it is clear that the judge has
       carefully considered the claim made; the evidence and the arguments
       advanced. At paragraph 18 onwards the judge sets out the point taken
       by the respondent in the reasons for refusal letter and in subsequent
       submissions. At hearing the presenting officer confirmed the
       respondent was no longer taking an issue about the absence of a
       photograph on the membership card for the freedom and Justice party
       submitted.

   22. At paragraph 38 onwards the judge sets out various reasons for
       rejecting the claim. At hearing the appellant had confirmed that his
       wife and their 3 children remained in Egypt as did his 2 sisters and
       a brother. There was no claim of difficulties for them following his
       departure. His brother in Egypt had never been arrested but it was
       said he had to relocate and was removed from his employment because
       of his brother Fras activities and not because of anything the
       appellant did. The appellant had not trained political activity in
       Qatar or in the United Kingdom. On his account he had been away from
       Egypt for many years. It was recorded his difficulties were because
       of his association with Fra.

   23. The appellant had claimed when interviewed that he was on a blacklist
       after being released from custody. Notwithstanding this, the judge
       comments on his ability to leave on his own passport from the
       airport. The passport had been submitted to the British authorities
       so he could obtain a visit Visa and it was a genuine document albeit
       he claimed his occupation and address had been changed.

   24. The appellant's brother in America had provided a statement. Details
       of his claim and also been submitted. The judge compared the claims
       made by Fras with the appellant's account and found significant
       inconsistencies between the 2. His brother for instance stated that
       the appellant's family had been threatened with the appellant had not
       claimed stop the judge concluded either his brother was honestly
       mistaken was exaggerating to assist the appellant. The judge
       commented on the fact that his brother had not attended the hearing
       to give evidence in person had been any request for a video link.

   25. The judge attached significance to the fact that the appellant's
       other brother was apparently able to remain in Egypt, as were other
       family members, without difficulties. The claim advanced was that he
       had to relocate and had been demoted. Reasons were advanced on behalf
       of the appellant to explain why he would be targeted but not his
       brother in Egypt. The judge rejected the attempts at drawing a
       distinction.

   26. The reasons for refusal letter advances a number of reasons for
       rejecting the appellant's claim. Overall, the account was not
       considered credible.

   27. The appellant had produced various pieces of evidence in support of
       his claim. These are set out in the refusal letter at paragraph 10.

   28. Paragraph 20 refers to an apparent discrepancy in his account as to
       how long he was detained for. He subsequently explained this by
       distinguishing an initial period spent in police custody and the
       subsequent period when he was in a prison.

   29.  He described being subjected to regular beatings yet there was no
       evidence to support any injuries. On his account he was detained from
       10 February 2016 to 12 April 2016, claiming protection on 7 October
       2016.There was no evidence of medical treatment in Egypt nor was
       there any evidence of residual signs of injury after he arrived.

   30.  It was pointed out that on his account he had remained living openly
       in each of for 6 months after his release.

   31. The respondent question his ability to pass through airport security
       on his own passport, even if details had been changed.

   32. Section 8 was then raised because of his failure to claim immediately
       on arrival.

   33. At paragraph 64 the judge deals with the appellant's claim membership
       of the Freedom and Justice party and the Muslim Brotherhood. The
       judge was not satisfied that the membership card provided was
       genuine. The judge gave reasons.

   34. The judge then deals with the court document submitted. The
       translation covered only the start and end. The judge raised this
       with the appellant's representative who acknowledged this detracted
       from it. The judge felt unable to give any weight to the document and
       does refer to the evidence taken as a whole. It may be the judge at
       para 71 was overly prescriptive in stating ` I am unable to give any
       weight to the contents of this Court document as it is merely
       "summary" by the translator.'Although the sentence suggests the
       reason for rejecting the evidence is because it is a summary when
       read in the context of the paragraph the judge correctly considered
       it along with all the other evidence in the round.

   35. In conclusion I find that no material error of law has been
       established. I find the arguments largely are an attempt to reargue
       issues. It was for the judge to assess the claim and evaluate the
       evidence. I find the conclusions reached where one's open to the
       judge and no material error is disclosed.

Decision.

No material error of law has established in the decision of First-tier
Tribunal Judge J Hillis. Consequently, that decision dismissing the appeal
shall stand.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Farrelly.

Dated 08 April 2019

