
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10817/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Field House                        |Decision Promulgated         |
|On : 21 July 2017                             |On : 25 July 2017            |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                                    [e i]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms U Dirie, instructed by Sentinel Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Singh, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The appellant appeals, with permission, against the decision of  the  First-
tier Tribunal dismissing her appeal against the respondent's decision of  20
September 2016 to refuse her protection and human rights claim.

The appellant is a citizen of Albania, born on [ ] 1998. She arrived in  the
UK on 14 September 2014, aged 16 years, having left Albania on  5  September
2014 and spent a few days in  Italy.  She  claimed  asylum  on  the  day  of
arrival and was served with illegal entry papers. She was interviewed  about
her claim which was then refused on 2 April 2015. She was, however,  granted
a period of leave as an unaccompanied asylum seeking child until 1  February
2016. She then submitted an application for further leave to  remain  on  22
January 2016, but that was refused on 20 September 2016, by which  time  she
was 18 years of age.


The appellant appealed against that decision and her  appeal  was  heard  in
the First-tier Tribunal on 23 January 2017 and was dismissed in  a  decision
promulgated on 7 February 2017.

The Appellant's Case

The appellant claims to fear persecution from Albanian  criminals  who  were
in conflict with her father. She was originally from Kukes in  Albania,  but
her family moved to Durres in 2006. Her claim is that her father used to  be
the Chief of the Police in Kukes in the narcotics section and  as  a  result
of that position and his subsequent senior role in  the  narcotics  unit  in
the police in Durres, she was followed by those criminals, from  the  summer
of 2012 or 2013. She noticed that she was being followed after  school  when
she went to the supermarket or other places and  this  continued  until  May
2014. The problems increased in October 2013 when she  was  stopped  in  the
street by two or three men who pulled her by the arms and told her that  she
was a target because she was very close to her father. At  the  end  of  May
2014, when she was returning from school, a car stopped  in  front  of  her,
three men came out and pulled her by the arms and tied  to  force  her  into
the car. She screamed and tried to fight the men off. When another car  came
they went away and she  fell  to  the  ground  unconscious.  She  went  home
afterwards but did not tell her family. She did not tell her father  as  she
did not want to be kept inside the house and  did  not  want  to  cause  him
stress. She next saw  these  people  at  the  end  of  June  2014  near  her
apartment and she stopped going out alone. The incidents caused her  extreme
stress and as  a  result  she  had  headaches  and  stomach  aches  and  was
hospitalised four or five times.  In the summer  of  2014  she  hardly  left
home as she was traumatised and scared. At the beginning of  September  2014
she asked her father if she could visit her cousins in Bari,  Italy  and  he
agreed and accompanied her there on 5 September 2014 before  returning  home
the same day. She told her cousin about the problems and he took  her  to  a
place in Italy where there were lorries going to the UK. She got in a  lorry
and travelled to the UK. She  called  her  family  and  explained  what  had
happened and her mother told  her  that  she  had  seen  people  around  her
apartment block looking towards the windows.

The respondent, in refusing the appellant's claim in  her  initial  decision
of 2 April 2015, considered that her account was vague and  inconsistent  in
dates and that her  father's  and  family  members'  ability  to  reside  in
Albania without incident over an extended  period  of  time  undermined  her
claim to have been approached by these men due to her  connection  with  her
father  and  his  work.  The  respondent  noted  that  the   appellant   had
experienced no problems from May 2014  until  September  2014  and  that  no
actions had been taken against her family since she had  left  Albania.  The
respondent therefore did not accept the appellant's account  of  having  had
problems in Albania as a result of her father's work, but  considered  that,
in any event, there was a sufficiency of protection and internal  relocation
option open to her. It was not accepted that her removal  to  Albania  would
breach her human rights.


The respondent maintained the same grounds  of  refusal  in  her  subsequent
decision of 20 September 2016. The respondent noted that the  appellant  had
submitted further evidence showing that her father had been  transferred  to
Durres and was a police officer in Fushe Kruj near  Durres.  The  respondent
accepted that the appellant's father  was  currently  a  police  officer  in
Durres but noted that the evidence did not confirm that  he  had  previously
been the chief of police in the narcotics section in Kukes.  The  respondent
noted the appellant's  account  in  her  further  representations  that  her
father had been transferred from the place where he was  working  previously
and that he believed that was because his directors were corrupt and  worked
with the drug traffickers. The respondent noted that there was  no  evidence
to corroborate such a claim. The respondent maintained  that  the  appellant
would not be at risk on return to Albania.


The appellant's  appeal  against  that  decision  was  heard  by  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Nolan. The judge heard from the appellant and considered  the
documentary evidence before her which included  letters  from  the  Albanian
Ministry  of  Internal  Affairs  relating  to   the   appellant's   father's
employment as a  police  officer,  a  letter  from  the  appellant's  social
worker, a letter from the appellant's GP and letters from a senior  clinical
psychologist Dr Dan Keren stating that  her  return  to  Albania  may  cause
deterioration to her mental health and could put her  at  a  higher  suicide
risk. The judge recorded the appellant's evidence that she had  been  living
with a foster family in the UK for over two years and that they were like  a
second family. She was at college studying business and finance NVQ and  was
achieving well and had lots of friends. She was currently doing  her  GCSEs.
She  attended  therapy  sessions  every  week  or  fortnight  and  was  very
stressed. The judge also heard from the appellant's foster mother.


The judge accepted that the appellant's father was a police officer, as  she
had provided documentary evidence to that effect,  confirming  that  he  was
currently working as a crime specialist in Durres and had previously  worked
as part of the specialist anti-money laundering section in Kukes. The  judge
noted that there was no evidence to support the appellant's claim  that  her
father had been the chief of the narcotics section and did not  accept  that
he had held that role. Neither did the judge accept that the  appellant  had
been followed every time she went to and from school  for  the  year  before
she left Albania. She did not find it  credible  that  the  appellant  would
have been constantly followed without anyone in the family  or  outside  the
family having noticed and did not accept that she would not  have  told  her
parents. She did not accept that criminals would invest substantial  amounts
of time, resources and personnel in following  the  appellant  and  did  not
accept that the appellant would have been able to fend off three large  men.
The judge did not accept the appellant's account and  did  not  accept  that
she was  at  risk  from  criminals  in  Albania.  She  did  not  accept  the
appellant's claim that she had no contact with her  family  in  Albania  and
that her family had rejected  her  and  considered  that  her  parents  were
colluding with her asylum claim. The judge  considered  that  the  appellant
could return to her family home in Durres or relocate  to  Tirana  and  that
she could access medical treatment there for  her  mental  health  problems.
The judge considered that the  appellant's  removal  would  not  breach  her
human rights and she dismissed the appeal on all grounds.

The appellant sought permission to appeal  Judge  Nolan's  decision  to  the
Upper Tribunal on the grounds that the judge  had  erred  by  rejecting  her
account of her  father's  role  in  narcotics  merely  because  it  was  not
supported by documentary  evidence  and  that,  since  the  further  adverse
credibility findings were predicated on the core finding that the  appellant
had lied about her father's role, such an error was material.  It  was  also
asserted that the judge's adverse credibility  findings  were  unsustainable
as being rooted in speculation and conjecture as to how  Albanian  criminals
would act.


Permission to appeal was granted on 6 June 2017.

Appeal hearing and submissions

The appeal came before me on 21 July 2017. Both parties made submissions.

Ms Dirie submitted that  it  was  too  simplistic  for  the  judge  to  have
rejected  the  appellant's  evidence  of  her  father's  role  as  chief  of
narcotics when her evidence had otherwise  been  consistent  throughout  and
when  she  was  a  minor.  The  requirement  for  corroborating  documentary
evidence was an error of law. That in turn impacted  on  the  judge's  other
findings.


Mr Singh submitted that the judge's  findings  were  open  to  her.  In  any
event,  the  judge's  finding  rejecting  the  appellant's  account  of  her
father's role as  chief  of  narcotics  did  not  infect  the  rest  of  the
credibility findings, as the adverse findings at [44]  were  nothing  to  do
with her father's role.


In response Ms Dirie reiterated the points  previously  made  and  submitted
that the judge's adverse findings were based on speculation and conjecture.

Consideration and findings.

I would point out as a preliminary matter that the appellant appeared to  be
very distressed at  the  hearing  and  indeed  that  is  borne  out  by  the
correspondence from her consultant  psychiatrist  and  her  senior  clinical
psychologist, which was produced before me. However,  whilst  I  have  every
sympathy for the appellant, who is clearly  having  difficulty  coping  with
the asylum process, the appeal before  me  is  not  related  to  her  health
issues or findings on that matter, but is solely related to  the  lawfulness
of the First-tier Tribunal's adverse  credibility  findings  on  her  asylum
claim.

With  regard  to  those  adverse  findings,  I  cannot  see  any  basis  for
concluding that Judge Nolan erred in law. Her decision  is  a  thorough  and
careful one, based upon a detailed assessment of the evidence,  taking  full
account of the appellant's youth, and providing  clear  and  cogent  reasons
for  the  adverse  conclusions  reached.  I  find  nothing  unreasonable  or
irrational  about  the  judge's  findings  with  respect  to  the  role  the
appellant's father held in the police. The appellant's claim  was  that  her
problems arose as a result of her father's senior position in the  narcotics
unit of the police and she claimed that he had previously held the  role  of
the chief of police in Kukes. Yet the documents she had  produced  confirmed
that he had been a police officer in the anti-money  laundering  section  of
the police in Kukes and that he was currently a police employee  working  as
a crime specialist in the police directorate in Durres.  Clearly  the  judge
was entitled to find that the documents  did  not  support  the  appellant's
claim as to the nature and seniority of her father's past and current  roles
and to consider that that undermined her claim as to the  level  of  adverse
interest that he would have attracted. Her adverse findings were  not  based
simply on an absence of documentary evidence corroborating his role  in  the
narcotics unit, as the grounds suggest, but upon the fact  that  the  nature
and seniority of his role as claimed by the appellant to have given rise  to
her problems, was not supported by the evidence. Accordingly I find  nothing
unreasonable, irrational  or  unlawful  in  the  judge's  findings  in  that
respect.

I am, furthermore, in agreement with Mr Singh's submission that the  judge's
adverse findings on the appellant's father's role were not  central  to  her
other adverse credibility findings. The  judge  gave  detailed  reasons,  at
[44], for  rejecting  the  appellant's  claim  to  have  been  harassed  and
threatened  by  criminal  elements,  independent  of  her  findings  on  her
father's role in the police. The judge did not find  it  credible  that  the
appellant, a child, would have been followed every day after  school  for  a
year, without anyone noticing. She  did  not  find  it  credible  that  such
criminal elements would invest  so  much  time  and  so  many  resources  in
following a policeman's daughter to and from school for a year. She did  not
accept that three large criminals would cease their efforts  to  kidnap  her
simply because someone heard her screaming or that a teenage girl  would  be
able to fend off three large men. The judge did not find  it  credible  that
the appellant would not have told her parents about  the  problems  she  was
facing or that she would have thought that her father  would  be  forced  to
leave his job if she told him. All of these concerns were, it seems  to  me,
perfectly rational and reasonable and  I  do  not  agree  that  they  amount
simply to speculation and conjecture as the grounds assert.

It is also relevant to note that the judge provided reasons,  at  [45],  for
finding  other  areas  of  the  appellant's  evidence  to  be   lacking   in
credibility, namely her claim as to her family disowning her  and  as  to  a
lack of, or limited, contact with her family. Those reasons  were  perfectly
cogent ones. It was the  judge's  overall  conclusion,  at  [45],  that  the
appellant's parents were colluding  with  the  appellant  in  concocting  an
asylum claim. Contrary to the suggestion in the  grounds,  this  was  not  a
case where the judge found the appellant to be telling the  truth  but  then
rejected her claim due to  a  lack  of  corroborative  evidence.  The  judge
simply did not accept any of the appellant's  claim,  other  than  that  her
father was a police officer,  as  that  was  confirmed  in  the  documentary
evidence provided. The judge provided full and cogent reasons  for  reaching
such a conclusion and for making the adverse findings that  she  did.  There
was nothing unlawful, unreasonable or irrational about her findings.

For all of these reasons I conclude  that  the  grounds  of  appeal  do  not
disclose any errors of law in the First-tier Tribunal's decision.


Returning to the preliminary matter referred to above at [15],  the  grounds
of challenge and the issues relevant to the error of law  were  not  related
to the appellant's mental health  concerns,  as  I  have  already  said.  No
challenge has been made to the judge's findings in that  regard  and  indeed
the judge gave full and careful consideration to the matter at [51].  Should
there be further concerns about the appellant's mental health  as  a  result
of the negative outcome of these proceedings, that may  be  the  subject  of
further representations, but for the  purposes  of  the  appeal  before  me,
however, I find no reason not to uphold the findings and conclusions of  the
judge.

DECISION

The appellant's appeal is accordingly dismissed. The making of the  decision
of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve an error on a point of law. I  do
not set aside the decision. The decision to dismiss the  appellant's  appeal
therefore stands.





Signed   [pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede                               Dated: 24 July
2017
