







UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10715/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On: 4 April 2019                     |On: 9 April 2019                     |


                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer


                                   Between

                                     N K
                          anonymity direction made
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr A Mackenzie, counsel, instructed by TRP
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms K Pal, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    Unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  appellant
    is granted anonymity. No report of these proceedings shall directly  or
    indirectly identify them or any member of their family. This  direction
    applies both to the appellant and to the respondent. Failure to  comply
    with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

 1. The appellant is a national of Afghanistan, born on 1 January 1998.  He
    appeals with permission against the decision of the first-tier Tribunal
    allowing his appeal against the respondent's  decision  to  refuse  his
    asylum and human rights claim. She allowed his appeal under  Article  3
    of the Human Rights Convention.

 2. In granting permission to appeal, First-tier Tribunal Judge Bird  found
    that it was arguable that in failing to either  dismiss  or  allow  the
    protection appeal as the Judge was required to do, there  has  been  an
    error. It is  further  arguable  that  whilst  she  set  out  extensive
    findings of the consultant psychiatrist, she does  not  state  that  in
    considering inconsistencies she bears in mind  the  appellant's  mental
    health and did not make any findings as to how the  appellant's  mental
    health may have affected his  credibility,  if  at  all.  It  was  also
    arguable that the Judge failed to consider  the  risk  of  inhuman  and
    degrading treatment to the appellant as a  person  with  mental  health
    problems.

 3. The appellant had contended before the First-tier Tribunal that he  was
    at risk as he had refused to assist the Taliban. His  late  father  and
    uncle were members of the Taliban. His father was  the  deputy  of  the
    District Governor and their area was  controlled  by  the  Taliban.  He
    asserted in his interview that about sixteen or  seventeen  years  ago,
    his father was killed whilst working for the Taliban.

 4. The appellant claimed that his uncle used  to  carry  out  killings  on
    behalf of the Taliban. When he was told  to  kill  a  person  from  his
    village, the  appellant  refused.  He  was  injured  in  an  attack  by
    government forces on the family home. One of his brothers is a  British
    citizen. The other is a failed asylum seeker whose appeal was  rejected
    [26].

 5. The Judge accepted that the  appellant  was  suffering  from  a  severe
    mental illness and that he would  not  receive  adequate  treatment  in
    Afghanistan.  She  also  accepted  the  evidence  of   the   consultant
    psychiatrist and country expert regarding  the  adequacy  of  treatment
    available in Afghanistan.

 6. The Judge stated in the Notice of  Decision:  "The  appeal  is  allowed
    under Article 3".

 7. Mr Mackenzie, who did not represent the appellant before the First-tier
    Tribunal, submitted that the Judge rejected the appellant's claim to be
    at risk from the Taliban having regard  to  discrepancies  in  his  own
    account and between his  account  and  those  given  by  his  brothers.
    However, he submitted that she did not indicate in  her  judgment  what
    the outcome of the appellant's protection appeal was, and in particular
    whether she allowed or dismissed it. The only formal  decision  was  to
    allow the appeal under Article 3.

 8. Although having regard  to  the  findings  at  [40-42],  she  may  have
    intended to dismiss the appeal on asylum and/or humanitarian protection
    grounds, this was not in  fact  done.  Nor  did  she  explain  why  her
    rejection of the appellant's credibility as a witness save  as  to  the
    reality and severity of his mental illness, led to the dismissal of his
    appeal.

 9. Her failure to determine the protection appeal constituted  a  material
    error.

10. In addition, before making findings on credibility, she failed to  take
    into account the psychiatric evidence of Dr Bell and the expert  report
    of Mr Foxley. He referred to the decisions of the court  of  appeal  in
    Mibanga v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 367 and SA (Somalia) v SSHD [2006]  EWCA
    Civ 1302 at [32-33]. The Judge  erred  in  not  having  regard  to  the
    medical  or  other  expert  evidence  before   reaching   findings   on
    credibility. She "fell into the  trap"  of  finding  that  Mr  Foxley's
    report did not assist her in light of the credibility assessment  which
    she had already made at [40] that the evidence  of  his  mental  health
    condition did not assist the appellant at all as regards credibility.

11. Mr Mackenzie noted that Dr Bell expressed the view that the appellant's
    severe psychiatric conditions were caused by his experience of  extreme
    violence in Afghanistan, including the deaths of his father  and  uncle
    and the bombing  of  his  family  home.  That  evidence  was  therefore
    relevant, given that  his  psychiatric  conditions  were  accepted,  to
    consider the extent to which they supported his account  of  events  in
    Afghanistan.

12. In any event, the fact that the appellant was in poor mental health may
    have affected the quality of his evidence. He referred to the  decision
    of the Senior President of Tribunals in AM (Afghanistan) v SSHD  [2017]
    EWCA Civ 1123 at [21(d)] that expert medical evidence can  be  critical
    in providing an explanation of the difficulties in  giving  a  coherent
    and consistent account of past events.

13.  Mr  Mackenzie  also  relied  on  the  guidance  given  in  the  Senior
    President's 2008  Practice  Direction  to  the  First  and  Upper  Tier
    Tribunal: Child, Vulnerable Adult  and  Sensitive  Witnesses,  and  the
    Joint Presidential Guidance Note no. 2 of 2010: Child, Vulnerable Adult
    and Sensitive Witness Guidance. The Judge did not consider  the  extent
    to which his poor mental health might have explained any  discrepancies
    in his evidence.

14. He submitted  that  Mr  Foxley's  report  found  that  aspects  of  the
    appellant's account were plausible in the light  of  the  situation  in
    Afghanistan, including the recruitment practices of  the  Taliban,  the
    risks to persons who  disobeyed  them  and  the  extent  to  which  the
    appellant could have remained in hiding, if of interest to the Taliban.
    These matters needed to be factored into the credibility assessment but
    were dismissed briefly as an add on to the findings that the Judge  had
    already reached.

15. The third ground of appeal  asserts  that  the  Judge  failed  to  make
    findings on the risk that a mentally ill person  faced  on  return.  He
    referred to the decision in NO (Afghanistan) v  SSHD  [2016]  EWCA  Civ
    876.

16. A risk of inhuman or degrading treatment  of  mentally  ill  people  on
    return to their country of origin would qualify them  for  humanitarian
    protection: per Tomlinson LJ at [38] with reference to the findings  of
    the First-tier Tribunal reproduced at [32],  including  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's citation of evidence that many Afghans suffering from mental
    health problems are believed to be possessed, some are chained in rooms
    and others are simply abandoned by their families; and  its  conclusion
    that there was a real risk that [the appellant] will be  shunned,  will
    become homeless and destitute or fall victim to those who use  inhumane
    methods in order to attempt exorcism.

17. Tomlinson LJ noted at [44-45] that  such  cases  are  not  "health"  or
    "medical" cases in the usual sense:

         "The appellant does not simply claim that the healthcare  available
         to him in the UK is not available in Afghanistan, rather he submits
         that his condition, which generates the  need  for  that  care,  of
         itself gives rise to a risk of ill treatment in Afghanistan. He  is
         not complaining about the consequences of the lack of treatment  in
         Afghanistan but about the consequences to which his condition gives
         rise in Afghanistan, that  is  to  say,  the  risk  of  inhuman  or
         degrading treatment.

         [...] It is a complete misreading of the regulatory  and  statutory
         materials...to  think  that  the  risk  of  inhuman  or   degrading
         treatment  does  not  generate  an  entitlement   to   humanitarian
         protection if caused by a medical condition. On the contrary, it is
         the risk of inhuman or degrading  treatment  which  is  capable  of
         lifting those cases out of the category  of  mere  "medical  cases"
         into   a   category   attracting,    exceptionally,    humanitarian
         protection."

18. Mr Mackenzie also submitted that if a Convention reason  were  accepted
    for  the  persecution  (which  did  not  seem  to  be  argued   in   NO
    (Afghanistan) an individual facing such a risk would be a refugee.

19. He referred to Mr Foxley's expert report at paragraphs 53-64, where  he
    identified a number of features of the treatment of mentally ill people
    in Afghanistan which raised the same  issues  as  in  NO  (Afghanistan)
    about whether the appellant was  entitled  to  humanitarian  protection
    and/or refugee status. Those features included evidence of mentally ill
    people:  being chained up; being ostracised by their  families  and  by
    society  generally;  becoming  destitute;  and/or  being  exploited  by
    criminals, traffickers or armed militant groups.

20. Mr Mackenzie submitted that the Judge expressly relied on  Mr  Foxley's
    report in concluding that there would not be adequate treatment for the
    appellant's mental health condition at [44], but  nevertheless  appears
    to have overlooked the passages which indicated that he would not  only
    be deprived of treatment but would be actively harmed if returned.

21. On the basis of Mr Foxley's report, Dr Bell also  referred  to  a  risk
    that those who suffer  from  mental  health  difficulties  tend  to  be
    treated harshly and the appellant might end up living  rough  or  being
    exploited by others. Although accepting Dr Bell's report, the Judge did
    not make any findings on this.

22. Mr Mackenzie submitted that the appellant was a member of a  particular
    social group, having immutable characteristics and would be marked  out
    as a mentally ill person.

23. Ms Pal referred to the respondent's position on the appeal as  set  out
    in the Rule 24 notice.  The  respondent  does  oppose  the  appellant's
    application for permission  to  appeal  and  invited  the  Tribunal  to
    determine the appeal with a fresh oral  hearing.  Although  it  may  be
    inferred from the First-tier decision that the asylum claim was in fact
    dismissed, it was submitted that more and fuller detail was required in
    order for the decision to be above criticism by the appellant.

    Assessment

24. I am satisfied that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did involve
    the making of an error on a point of law. The Judge did not dismiss  or
    allow  the  protection  appeal.  Nor  did  she  consider  whether   the
    inconsistencies she referred to may be  referable  to  the  appellant's
    mental health. Nor did she consider the medical and expert evidence  as
    part of a holistic assessment of the appellant's credibility which  was
    not simply to be treated as an add on or separate exercise. Nor was  it
    considered whether a person facing such a risk would be a refugee as  a
    member of a particular social group under the Convention.

25. In the circumstances I set aside the decision. Mr  Mackenzie  submitted
    that this is  an  appropriate  case  for  remittal  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for a fresh decision to be  made  subject  to  preserving  the
    Judge's findings in respect of the appellant's mental health. All other
    issues 'are at large'. Ms Pal did not disagree.

26. The nature and extent of the judicial fact finding  necessary  for  the
    decision to be re-made is such that it is appropriate to remit the case
    to the First-tier Tribunal. Apart  from  from  preserving  the  Judge's
    findings regarding to the appellant's mental health, no other  findings
    of the First-tier Tribunal are to stand.

    Notice of Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law.

    The decision is set aside and is remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Birmingham) for a decision to  be  made.  Apart  from  preserving  her
    findings regarding the appellant's mental health, no other findings  of
    the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

    Anonymity direction continued.




    Signed                              Date 7 April 2019


    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer
