
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10087/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 29 May 2019                                |On 05 June 2019               |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    M A-S
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

For the Respondent:    Ms Khan, instructed by Parker, Rhodes Hickmotts


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I shall refer to the appellant as the 'respondent' and  the  respondent
    as the 'appellant', as they appeared respectively before the First-tier
    Tribunal. The appellant was born in 1968 and is  a  female  citizen  of
    Nigeria. She appears to have first entered the  United  Kingdom  in  or
    about 1995 1996. She committed criminal offences in May 1996  including
    obtaining pecuniary advantage by deception for which she was  sentenced
    to 12 months imprisonment. She was returned to Nigeria in 1997 but  re-
    entered the country in the same year before being removed for a  second
    time in July 1998. She claims to have re-entered the United Kingdom  in
    2000. After making an unsuccessful application to remain as  a  spouse,
    she was convicted again of obtaining pecuniary advantage  by  deception
    in 2012. She was served in April 2014 with  a  notice  of  decision  to
    deport her to Nigeria. She then  claimed  that  she  was  a  victim  of
    trafficking but the Competent Authority reached a negative decision  on
    her claim in 2015.  By a decision dated 1 August 2018, the Secretary of
    State refused her application for her international  protection  claim.
    She  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  which,  in   a   decision
    promulgated on 28 December 2018, allowed the appeal. the  Secretary  of
    State now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The judge found large parts of the appellant's account of  past  events
    to be untrue. However, and contrary to the conclusions reached  by  the
    Competent Authority, the judge found that the appellant was a victim of
    trafficking and that, as a consequence, she would be  at  risk  in  her
    home area of Nigeria from those who had trafficked her  to  the  United
    Kingdom.  As  regards  internal  flight,  the  judge  found  that   the
    appellant's vulnerability and fragile  mental  condition  would  render
    such an option unduly harsh.

 3. The grounds of  appeal  complain  that  the  judge  applied  the  wrong
    standard of proof to the question of trafficking. The judge applied the
    lower standard of reasonable likelihood  rather  than  the  balance  of
    probabilities,  which  is  the  standard  applied  by   the   Competent
    Authority. The Secretary of State relies on the judgment  of  the  High
    Court in R(NM) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2018] EWHC
    3268 (QB). However, it is clear from that judgement that the court  did
    not intend to suggest that, when considering an  asylum  or  Article  3
    ECHR claim, the  Secretary  of  State  or  the  Tribunal  should  apply
    anything other  than  the  lower  standard.  Adopting  the  issue-based
    approach approved by the court in NM, the judge in the  instant  appeal
    has, as she was required to do, considered the question of  trafficking
    in the context of asylum/Article 3 ECHR and has, correctly, applied the
    correct lower standard. In this regard, see NM in  particular  at  [60-
    64].

 4. The judge in the instant appeal made  'mixed'  findings  of  fact;  she
    believed part of the appellant's account of past  events  but  rejected
    other parts. The grounds of appeal rely heavily upon the argument  that
    the judge should have either believed everything the appellant had said
    or rejected it  because  the  various  elements  of  her  account  were
    inextricably  linked;  for  example,  but  the   judge   rejected   the
    appellant's claim that she has a husband and children but she  accepted
    that the appellant had been trafficked. I accept that, if a judge makes
    'mixed' findings, then he or she must provide  a  thorough  explanation
    for finding part of an account credible whilst rejecting the remainder.
    In the present case, I  find  that  the  judge  has  provided  such  an
    explanation in her  careful  and  thoughtful  analysis.  I  reject  the
    Secretary of State's argument that the appellant's claim regarding  her
    family and husband could not be separated from her claim to  have  been
    trafficked; there is no illogicality inherent in the judge's  analysis.
    Having reached that finding, much of the grounds of appeal fall away as
    constituting little more than a disagreement with findings available to
    the judge on the evidence.

 5. Finally, I am satisfied  that  the  judge's  analysis  with  regard  to
    internal flight including  her  findings  as  regards  the  appellant's
    emotional and mental fragility were available to her on  the  evidence.
    Likewise, the judge has been aware of the need to explain why  she  did
    not consider the appellant to be a wholly unreliable witness as  had  a
    judge in the First-tier Tribunal  in  the  course  of  the  appellant's
    previous appeal.

 6. The judge has reached findings of fact and a conclusion in this  appeal
    which, on the same facts, may not have been reached by  another  judge.
    However, that is not the point. The judge has explained adequately  why
    she has believed part of the account but rejected other  parts  of  the
    appellant's  evidence;  she  has  reached  findings  as   regards   the
    appellant's vulnerability and medical condition which were available to
    on the evidence; she has explained adequately why she took a  different
    view from a judge who reached negative credibility findings reached  at
    a previous appeal. Accordingly, I do not find that the judge has  erred
    in law for the reasons advanced  by  the  Secretary  of  State  in  the
    grounds of appeal.

Notice of Decision

    This appeal is dismissed.


 Signed                             Date 29 May 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

