
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                    Appeal Number:
PA/10106/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 7th May 2019                        |  On 22nd May 2019                    |
|                                       |                                      |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LEVER

                                   Between

                              mr M D Sabuz MIAH
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Lee of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Tufan


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant born on 2nd January 1989 is a citizen of Bangladesh.  The
    Appellant had originally come to the United Kingdom in October 2009  on
    a student visa.  He made a claim for asylum on 14th  July  2017.   That
    appeal had been refused by the Home Office on 20th December 2017.

 2. The Appellant had appealed that decision and his appeal  was  heard  by
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Sweet sitting at Hatton Cross on  18th
    February 2019.  The judge had dismissed the Appellant's appeal  on  all
    grounds.

 3. Application for permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal  had  been
    made on behalf of the Appellant and permission  granted  on  1st  April
    2019 by the First-tier Tribunal on the basis that it was  arguable  the
    judge had failed to give adequate reasons for finding  the  Appellant's
    account was not credible and had failed to take relevant evidence  into
    account and further had failed to give adequate reasons for conclusions
    reached in respect of Section 8.

 4. Directions were issued for the matter to  firstly  be  decided  by  the
    Upper Tribunal on the question of whether or not an error  of  law  had
    been made by the First-tier Tribunal and the matter came before  me  in
    accordance with those directions.

Submissions on Behalf of the Appellant

 5. Submissions were made in line with  the  Grounds  of  Appeal.   It  was
    submitted that the decision of the  judge  was  too  brief  and  having
    rejected the Appellant's account in its entirety there needed to be  an
    adequacy of reasoning.  It was said that the decision  was  limited  to
    three brief paragraphs in respect of  findings.   The  first  paragraph
    appeared to  focus  on  the  limited  involvement  of  the  Appellant's
    political career but the  Appellant  had  never  claimed  that  he  was
    involved in politics at any high level,  his  concern  was  rather  the
    position of his father.   Secondly  it  was  said  that  the  paragraph
    dealing with Section 8 had no "punchline" so it was impossible  to  say
    whether Section 8 had been taken into account and if so to what extent.



Submissions on Behalf of the Respondent

 6. It was submitted that it would have been an error of law if  the  judge
    had not considered any political involvement of the Appellant  although
    it was conceded there was no real finding made by the judge in  respect
    of Section 8.

 7. I concluded that a material error of law had been made and  provide  my
    decision and reasons as follows.

Decision and Reasons

 8. There is nothing inherently wrong in brevity and indeed  if  adequately
    reasoned much to commend such style and decision writing.

 9. In this case the judge's findings  are  confined  to  three  paragraphs
    (paragraphs  31  to  33).   The  decision   does   not   disclose   any
    misunderstanding on  the  part  of  the  judge  as  the  basis  of  the
    Appellant's claim.  He was  clear  that  the  Appellant's  claim  arose
    essentially from that which had occurred allegedly  to  his  father  in
    November 2014 as a result of his father's political  position.   It  is
    understandable that the judge referred in part to the  Appellant's  own
    political involvement in Bangladesh and in  the  UK  for  the  sake  of
    completeness.

10. Unfortunately, there is an inadequacy of reasoning within  those  three
    paragraphs and an inherent error.  The judge  began  his  reasoning  at
    paragraph  31  by  stating  "for  various  reasons  I  have  found  the
    Appellant's claim wholly lacking in credibility".  At paragraph 31  the
    first point the judge finds damaging the Appellant's credibility is his
    lack of political involvement in Bangladesh and the UK.  Whilst  it  is
    understandable the judge refers to the Appellant's own political career
    and understandable that he would find no risk on return in  respect  of
    that career, it was an error to find that the Appellant's inherent lack
    of political involvement affected his credibility.  The  Appellant  had
    never sought to suggest his involvement  at  any  higher  or  different
    level.  The issue  of  credibility  needed  to  focus  on  whether  the
    Appellant was at risk in respect of his father's alleged  activities  -
    position - disappearance.

11. Paragraph 32 considered the Appellant's late claim for asylum  and  the
    effect of Section  8  upon  credibility.   The  judge  was  obliged  to
    consider Section 8.  However it is entirely unclear what conclusion the
    judge reached in respect of that matter and whether he made an  adverse
    credibility finding and if so what weight he  attached  to  it  in  his
    overall assessment of the case.  In a  decision  providing  several  or
    longer findings in respect of credibility that short coming in  respect
    of Section 8 may not necessarily have led to a material  error  but  in
    such a brief set of findings that lack of credibility in  one  of  only
    three pertinent paragraphs has a material effect.  Although  the  judge
    provided further reasons at paragraph 33  they  did  not  address  core
    issues that needed to be considered, for example  the  suggestion  that
    the Appellant would be at risk because he would be perceived  and  want
    to seek vengeance against those who  had  detained  -  ill-treated  his
    father.

12. The combination of brevity together with the error in paragraph  31  of
    making a finding adverse to the Appellant's credibility when  such  was
    not an issue together with the lack of clarity in relation to  findings
    under Section 8 means that there was  unfortunately  an  inadequacy  of
    reasoning such that that inadequacy led to a material error of law.

Decision

13. A material error of law was made by the First-tier Tribunal Judge  such
    that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal should be  set  aside  and
    the matter heard afresh in the First-tier Tribunal before a judge other
    than Judge Sweet or Judge Telford.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lever






