

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/10441/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgation    |
|On 8 February 2019                    |On 14 March 2019                   |
|                                      |                                   |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY


                                   Between

                                     AC

                             (ANONYMITY DIRECTED)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Pipe (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Aboni (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)








                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.  This is the claimant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal,  brought  with  the
   permission of a Judge of the First-tier Tribunal, from a decision of  the
   First-tier Tribunal ("the tribunal") which it sent to the parties  on  25
   May 2017 following a hearing  which  took  place  on  10  May  2017.  The
   tribunal decided to dismiss the claimant's appeal from a decision of  the
   Secretary of State of 3 February 2016 refusing to grant him international
   protection. But in a decision of 18 April 2018, I decided  to  set  aside
   the tribunal's decision (whilst preserving its credibility assessment and
   its findings set out below) and I directed that the  decision  should  be
   remade by the Upper Tribunal following a further  hearing.  That  hearing
   took place before me on  8  February  2019.  Accordingly,  this  decision
   explains how I have remade the decision and why I have remade it  in  the
   terms in which I have.

2. The claimant had been granted anonymity by the tribunal.  Mr  Pipe  urged
   me to continue that grant. Since the case concerns matters touching  upon
   the claimant's quite severe (as is accepted on behalf of the Secretary of
   State) mental health difficulties which he is now  experiencing,  I  have
   now decided it is appropriate to continue to  grant  him  anonymity.  Mrs
   Aboni did not seek to persuade me otherwise.

3. The claimant is a national of the Ivory Coast  and  he  was  born  on  12
   January 1991. The background to his claim for international protection on
   the basis of his experiences in the Ivory Coast is most fully set out  in
   his substantive asylum  interview  of  12  January  2016  and  a  witness
   statement signed by him on 19 March 2015.

4. The account relied upon may be  summarised  as  follows:  The  claimant's
   father was a politician and his mother was a housewife. The claimant  has
   one sibling, a brother. At a time when he was aged  fourteen  or  fifteen
   years (and so in 2005 or 2006) rebel  forces  entered  the  family  home,
   murdered both his parents  due  to  their  disapproval  of  his  father's
   political activities, and detained him and his brother. The two were ill-
   treated during what was a prolonged period  of  detention.  However,  the
   claimant was able to escape. Having done so, he left the Ivory Coast on a
   date in 2009. He did so because he feared the rebels would harm  or  kill
   him if they recaptured him. Having left his own country he spent time  in
   various other countries including Algeria, Libya, Italy and France, prior
   to making his  way  to  the  United  Kingdom  ("UK")  which  he  entered,
   clandestinely, on 5 January 2010. The basis of his claim, therefore,  was
   that he would  be  persecuted  by  the  rebels  who  had  persecuted  him
   previously, if he were to be returned to his home country.  The  claimant
   also indicated when making his claim that  his  mental  health  had  been
   impacted by his experiences although that impact has become significantly
   more pronounced more recently, a matter which I shall deal with below.

5. Although the Secretary of State did not find the  claimant's  account  to
   be credible the tribunal did. It gave cogent reasons for doing so and for
   making favourable findings  with  respect  to  the  claimed  account.  As
   indicated, I preserved the  credibility  assessment  and  the  consequent
   favourable findings such that they represented the starting point when  I
   came to consider how to remake the decision. The part of  the  tribunal's
   decision which I preserved reads as follows:

             "14.  I  have  taken  into  account  the  appellant's   witness
                 statement                     which                      he
                                              adopted.  I  have  taken  into
                 account the evidence he gave at the combined  interview.  I
                 have also taken into account the appellant's oral evidence.

            15.  The respondent does not accept the appellant's  account  of
                 his experiences in the Ivory Coast. I shall deal with  each
                 of the points identified in the refusal letter in turn.

             16.   The  respondent  (sic)  states  that  his  father  was  a
                 politician. However, he did not  know  anything  about  his
                 father's job. The appellant's evidence is that  his  father
                 told his mother that he was a politician and that he wore a
                 suit. The respondent states that this does  not  amount  to
                 evidence that the appellant's father was  a  politician.  I
                 note that the appellant was about 14 or 15 years  old  when
                 his mother and father were killed. I accept  that  at  that
                 age, it is unlikely that a child would  know  what  exactly
                 their parents did for a job. Given the Appellant  was  told
                 by his mother that his father was a  politician  and  given
                 the Appellant remembers his father meeting people at  their
                 home, I  find  to  the  low  standard  of  proof  that  the
                 Appellant's father may have been a politician.  I  draw  no
                 adverse inferences against the appellant for his  inability
                 to state was (sic) exactly his father did  because  of  his
                 age at the time.

            17.  The appellant states that the was  tortured  by  rebels  in
                 the Ivory Coast. Although the respondent accepts  that  the
                 appellant  has  been  consistent  with  his  account,   the
                 respondent states that there is no evidence to suggest that
                 his injuries came from  the  events  that  he  claims.  The
                 respondent refers to the medical and dental  practitioner's
                 letters and states in the refusal letter that this does not
                 amount to evidence that the appellant had been tortured.

            18.  I also remind myself that it is the low standard  of  proof
                 that applies in protection claims.  I  also  remind  myself
                 that corroboration is not required if the  requirements  of
                 paragraph 339L are satisfied. I have  carefully  considered
                 the written and oral evidence of the appellant. I find  the
                 appellant's evidence  to  be  given  in  a  straightforward
                 manner and without embellishment. The  appellant's  account
                 has  been  consistent  throughout  that  his  parents  were
                 murdered by the rebels and the appellant was taken  by  the
                 rebels. The  time  period  referred  to  by  the  appellant
                 coincides with a time of political instability and violence
                 in Ivorian history.

            19.  I have had regard to the point made by  the  respondent  in
                 the refusal letter regarding the medical  evidence.  It  is
                 correct  that  the  medical  evidence  presented   by   the
                 appellant is not medico legal evidence that he obtained for
                 the  purpose  of  corroborating  his  claim.  I  note   the
                 appellant is unrepresented. I find that the extent  of  the
                 corroboration is that the appellant has ten missing  teeth.
                 Given I have found his account to be consistent, the dental
                 practitioner's letter is therefore corroboration  that  the
                 appellant  does  indeed  have  ten   missing   teeth.   The
                 appellant's evidence is that he was tortured by the rebels.
                 He states that they asked him how many fingers  he  had  to
                 which he replied ten. They then laid him on a  table,  tied
                 his wrist, open (sic) his mouth wide and proceeded to  purl
                 ten  teeth  out  with  pliers.  I  am  satisfied  that  the
                 appellant's account had been internally consistent. He  had
                 provided evidence from the dental practitioner that he  had
                 ten missing teeth. Having accepted that the  appellant  was
                 taken by the rebels and having found that his  account  has
                 been consistent and given in a  straightforward  manner,  I
                 found that I can be satisfied that he was tortured  by  the
                 rebels. I find that I can be satisfied to the low  standard
                 of proof that the appellant's missing teeth was as a result
                 of torture by the rebels.

            20.  The respondent does not accept that the rebels trained  the
                 appellant to use guns and how to shoot and  then  told  the
                 appellant they were going to kill him. I remind  myself  of
                 the  need  to  guard  against  inherent  improbability  and
                 speculative arguments as set out in HK v Secretary of State
                 for the Home Department [2006] EWCA Civ 1037. I  find  that
                 it is entirely plausible that the rebels would use  threats
                 to kill as a means of control over the appellant and  other
                 persons detained. It is clear from the appellant's  account
                 during his interview with the respondent that he said  that
                 everyone was told they should be rebels and those  who  did
                 not want to become rebels would be killed. The  appellant's
                 account is also that the rebels would choose  prisoners  at
                 random to kill in  front  of  others.  I  find  the  method
                 employed by the rebels to be the  ultimate  tool  in  their
                 exercise of control and installing fear in the minds of the
                 prisoners. Furthermore, I find that the appellant cannot be
                 expected to account for the thoughts of his persecutors.  I
                 find nothing  inherently  plausible  with  the  appellant's
                 account.

            21.  I turn to consider the appellant's account  of  his  escape
                 from the rebels.  The  respondent  doubts  the  appellant's
                 account on the basis that the rebels would not  leave  just
                 one rebel in charge of the  prisoners  whilst  four  rebels
                 went to investigate the gunshots they heard. The respondent
                 states that his is doubtful. Having heard  the  appellant's
                 explanation, I find there is nothing incredible  about  the
                 appellant's account which was given  in  a  straightforward
                 manner. I remind  myself  of  the  need  to  guard  against
                 inherent improbability and speculative arguments as set out
                 in HK v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2006]
                 EWCA Civ 1037. Firstly, I find that the appellant cannot be
                 expected to account for the thoughts  of  his  persecutors.
                 The appellant states that he does not know why four  rebels
                 left one rebel to guard the  prisoners  who  were  at  that
                 moment digging their own graves.  I  note  the  appellant's
                 evidence that they had already  been  tasked  with  digging
                 their graves for the previous two nights. Furthermore,  the
                 prisoners had been beaten and torture by having their  feet
                 cut or their wrist [sic] broken. Some had hot iron  applied
                 to their backs and the appellant had hot  iron  applied  to
                 his right foot. The appellant states that he  was  tortured
                 by being hit on the wrist with a wooden club and he  showed
                 the respondent a lump on his left wrist around one inch  in
                 diameter. He had a scar from being  stabbed  in  his  lower
                 abdomen which he showed the respondent and also showed  the
                 Tribunal. Given the appellant is unrepresented,  I  do  not
                 have the benefit of a medico-legal report  to  confirm  the
                 consistency of the scarring as per  the  Istanbul  Protocol
                 and therefore I have placed no reliance on the lump on  his
                 wrist and the scarring on his stomach  as  consistent  with
                 his claim to have been tortured in the manner he describes.

            22.  At the date of  the  interview  with  the  respondent,  the
                 appellant had blood in his urine. This was confirmed by the
                 medical evidence sent to  the  respondent  previously.  The
                 appellant  states  that  he  has  contracted  an  infection
                 because he was forced to drink  urine  by  the  rebels.  As
                 stated above, because the appellant is unrepresented, I  do
                 not have the benefit of a  report  from  his  urologist  to
                 confirm whether this is a plausible cause of haematuria  or
                 blood in the urine. I therefore find the appellant has  not
                 substantiated his claim that the haematuria was ca used  by
                 the rebels forcing him to drink urine. I have already found
                 to the low standard of proof that the  appellant  did  have
                 ten teeth pulled out by the rebels. I conclude that  it  is
                 entirely possible that the rebels were  of  the  view  that
                 they were in complete control of the prisoners  because  of
                 the torture meted out such that they felt able to leave one
                 guard in control of  the  prisoners  whilst  four  went  to
                 investigate the gunshots heard. It is likely  that  because
                 of the torture and the injuries sustained by the  prisoners
                 that the rebels did  not  contemplate  that  any  prisoners
                 would attempt to escape. Thus, it  is  plausible  that  the
                 rebels felt able to leave  one  guard  in  control  of  the
                 prisoners whilst the other went to investigate the sound of
                 the gunshots".

6.    So, the claimant was believed. The reason the tribunal did  not  allow
the appeal, though, was because it thought that given the  passage  of  time
there would no longer be any adverse interest in him  on  the  part  of  the
rebels. The reason I set aside its decision  was  because  I  thought  that,
whilst such a conclusion was open to  the  tribunal  in  principle,  it  had
failed  to  adequately  explain  it.  That  issue  has,  indeed,  been   the
battleground before me with respect to how the decision should be remade.

7.    It is appropriate for  me,  though,  to  now  mention  the  claimant's
mental health difficulties. He raised  those,  briefly,  when  pursuing  his
application for international protection. But it  is  obvious  that  matters
were not then as serious as they  have  subsequently  become.  The  claimant
was, in fact, able to attend the tribunal hearing of 10 May 2017  (absent  a
representative) and to give what appears to have been  quite  detailed  oral
evidence. He was subsequently able to make his own written  application  for
permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal  and  was  then  able  to  secure
legal representation which he has had since. But, as  a  direct  consequence
of his mental health difficulties, he was not able to attend before me at  a
hearing which led  to  my  setting  aside  decision  of  18  April  2018  or
subsequently. There are various items of  medical  evidence  concerning  his
mental health difficulties in the paperwork in front of me.  I  shall  focus
upon the most informative but all of them come together to  demonstrate  the
unfortunate overall picture.

8.    On 14 June 2018 one Dr S Acharya, a consultant psychiatrist,  wrote  a
letter confirming that the claimant had become an  in-patient  at  a  mental
health unit in Bradgate on 23 March 2018 and that he remained there  at  the
date the letter was  drafted.  It  was  confirmed  that,  in  fact,  he  was
detained under Section 3 of the Mental Health Act 1983.  The  letter  talked
of him displaying symptoms of "severe depression with  psychotic  symptoms".
Reference was made to auditory  hallucinations  and  in  particular  "voices
telling him that he is dead" and voices asking him to end  his  life.  There
is a letter of  9  October  2018  from  Dr  Acharya  indicating  a  lack  of
significant improvement in the claimant's  condition  and  again  mentioning
psychotic symptoms. It is said that he has  constant  thoughts  "of  suicide
and homelessness" and that he "firmly believes that the rebels are going  to
kill him in Ivory Coast and he sees no hope for himself". In a letter  of  7
February  2019  one  Dr  B  Kumari,  a  different  consultant  psychiatrist,
explained that the claimant continued to be detained under section 3 of  the
above Act but that more latterly his mental  state  had  settled  though  it
appears he was continuing to hear voices including those of the  rebels  who
had ill-treated him asking him to kill himself or others  and  that  he  had
also been hearing the voices of his  deceased  parents.  It  was  said  that
there would be a risk of marked deterioration in  his  condition  should  he
face the prospect of removal to the Ivory Coast.

9.    I anticipated, at the remaking hearing, that  I  would  hear  argument
concerning entitlement to international protection on the basis of  risk  at
the hands of the rebels and also argument with respect to mental health  and
linked  suicide  risk  under  article  3  and  article  8  of  the  European
Convention on Human Rights ("ECHR"). However,  before  me  Mrs  Aboni,  both
fairly and appropriately in my view, indicated that she would  accept  given
the claimant's current mental health difficulties  and  given  the  lack  of
what she said would be adequate medical facilities in the Ivory Coast,  that
it would be appropriate to allow the claimant's appeal  on  both  Article  3
ECHR and Article 8 ECHR grounds with respect  to  mental  health.  She  did,
though, say that the Secretary of  State's  position  with  respect  to  the
claim to be otherwise entitled to international protection was that, as  the
tribunal had found, there would no longer be any risk now.

10.   As to the  latter  point,  Mrs  Aboni  accepted  that  the  background
country material demonstrated that there were former  rebels  who  were  now
members of the government in the Ivory Coast. However, the appalling  events
which the claimant described had occurred at a time of  instability  in  the
Ivory Coast. Matters were more stable  now.  The  claimant  himself  had  no
political profile and there was no reason why anyone should have an  adverse
interest in him today. The relevant events had all occurred many years  ago.
Mr Pipe relied upon the content  of  a  skeleton  argument  which  had  been
provided on behalf of the claimant  by  different  Counsel  at  a  different
hearing. He noted that on the accepted account the  claimant's  parents  had
been murdered in front of him and that he  had  then  been  detained  for  a
number of months and been subjected to torture. His  fear  of  a  number  of
individual rebel leaders remained. He had listed a number of those  leaders.
He could, potentially be a witness as to the appalling  behaviour  of  those
rebels who were now part of the government.  Further,  he  would  stand  out
upon return as a man who had been a previous victim of torture and as a  man
who has severe mental health difficulties. The fact of past  persecution  is
a serious indication that there will be a risk of further  persecution.  So,
Mr Pipe, urged me to allow the appeal on human rights grounds  with  respect
to mental health (his gratefully accepting Mrs Aboni's concession) but  also
on protection grounds on the basis of the account given.

11.   I should add that the remaking  hearing  proceeded  on  the  basis  of
submissions only because, of course, the claimant given  his  mental  health
difficulties was again unable to attend. Both representatives  were  content
to proceed in his absence and, indeed, so was I  given  that  there  was  no
clear indication as to when he might be fit to attend a  hearing  and  there
was no request that the hearing be adjourned.

12.   The concession made by Mrs Aboni  has  made  my  task  straightforward
with respect to the mental health aspect of the case.  She  now  accepts  on
the basis  of  the  evidence  available,  including  the  letters  from  two
consultant psychiatrists who have been involved  in  the  treatment  of  the
claimant, that he should  succeed  in  this  appeal  before  me  under  both
Article 3 and Article 8 of the ECHR. I have no difficulty in accepting  that
freely given  concession.  Given  the  evidence  of  serious  mental  health
difficulties, the necessity for him to have been detained for  what  is  now
quite a lengthy period of time under Section 3 of  the  Mental  Health  Act,
given the evidence that he has  been  hearing  voices  urging  him,  amongst
other things, to end his life, given the apparent linking of aspects of  his
mental health difficulties to the prospect of  his  being  returned  to  the
Ivory Coast,  I conclude that in the circumstances of this  particular  case
the Article 3 threshold, albeit a very high one,  with  respect  to  suicide
risk caused by return or the prospect of return, is made out.  So,  I  allow
the appeal on human rights grounds under Article 3. It  occurs  to  me  that
there is nothing to be gained by my then going on to allow it on,  the  same
factual basis and for the same reasons under Article 8 but since  Mrs  Aboni
invites me to do so and Mr Pipe  unsurprisingly  does  not  urge  me  to  do
otherwise, I shall do so.

13.   I then move on to what had become the only  area  of  dispute  between
the parties. As already indicated, I  preserved  the  tribunal's  favourable
credibility assessment and its fact finding as set  out  above.  I  approach
this aspect of the case, therefore, on  the  basis  that  the  claimant  has
given a truthful account of the murder of his parents which  was  linked  to
his father's political activity (though the claimant has never been able  to
give very much information about the substance or nature of  that  political
activity), his subsequent detention and  torture  whilst  in  detention  and
then his subsequent escape.

14.   Mr Pipe,  in  his  submissions,  takes  me  as  a  starting  point  to
paragraph 339K of the Immigration Rules which reads as follows:

                  "The fact that  a  person  has  already  been  subject  to
                 persecution or  serious  harm,  or  to  direct  threats  of
                 persecution or such harm, will be  regarded  as  a  serious
                 indication of a person's well-founded fear  of  persecution
                 or real risk of suffering serious harm,  unless  there  are
                 good reasons to consider that persecution or  serious  harm
                 will not be repeated".




15.   That is an important provision in the context of this appeal.  I  have
applied the approach set out therein  in  my  consideration  of  what  might
await the claimant with respect to persecution or  serious  harm  if  he  is
returned to the Ivory Coast. In particular, I have borne in mind  that  past
persecution is a serious indication as to what might happen upon return  and
that  good  reasons  are  required,  where  there  is  a  history  of   past
persecution or serious  harm,  for  a  conclusion  that  such  will  not  be
repeated upon return.

16.   Mrs Aboni, essentially, relies upon the passage of  time.  There  has,
indeed, been a substantial passage of time since the events  which  underpin
the claim to be entitled to international protection occurred. The  horrific
murder of the claimant's parents  happened  in  either  2005  or  2006.  The
detention and torture occurred after that but since the  claimant  fled  his
home country in 20009, even that occurred something in the order of nine  or
ten years ago. So, in this case,  the  passage  of  time  is  a  potentially
significant factor. Of course, the passage of  time,  especially  a  lengthy
one such as this, can, generally speaking, result in potential  perpetrators
of persecution forgetting about matters or  becoming  less  concerned  about
matters which  had  previously  caused  them  to  persecute  an  individual.


17.   Further, in the circumstances of this case, the claimant was  a  child
and a young man when the events of persecution occurred. On  that  basis  it
occurs to me that  it  is  very  likely  indeed  that  the  perpetrators  of
persecution will have lost the capacity to recognise him as  his  appearance
will have changed somewhat in addition to there being scope for memories  to
have faded. Further still, as Mrs Aboni points  out,  the  claimant  himself
does not have a political profile.  That  means  that  there  is  really  no
reason to expect the former persecutors in the Ivory Coast to  remember  him
at all.

18.   There is then the  question  of  how,  if  the  claimant  were  to  be
returned to the Ivory Coast, any of his past persecutors would even  get  to
know about it. It has not been positively asserted,  before  me,  that  they
would. I appreciate Mr Pipe suggested that he would stand  out  upon  return
as a person with mental health difficulties and  as  a  previous  victim  of
torture. But I am not taken to any background material that  indicates  that
there is the sort of scrutiny of returnees, even those bearing the signs  of
physical injury and mental health difficulties, which would  lead  to  their
return being flagged and notified to former members of the rebel forces  now
in the government.

19.   To deal with certain other concerns raised by Mr Pipe, it is right  to
say that a number of previous prominent rebels do now have a  place  in  the
current government in the Ivory Coast so, looked at in one way it  might  be
thought that they are now in a better  position  to  be  able  to  harm  the
claimant than they previously were. But, on the  other  hand,  it  might  be
thought that even if they did get to know about the  claimant's  return  and
about who he is (and I conclude they would not)  they  would  not  feel,  in
their  current  position  of  power,  threatened  by  him  and  would   not,
therefore, feel any motivation to deal with him in any way. Mr Pipe makes  a
specific point to the effect that he has knowledge of what  the  rebels  did
to his parents  and  that  disclosure  of  that  by  him  might  cause  them
difficulties such that they would wish to ensure such did not  happen.  But,
as I say, I do not believe that they would even be aware of his return.

20.   I have had regard to Rule 339K and indeed  to  the  general  principle
that past persecution is an indicator as to likely future persecution.  But,
in this case, as set out  above,  I  have  concluded  that  there  are  good
reasons to consider that such  persecution  or  serious  harm  will  not  be
repeated.

21.   So, the appeal does succeed under Articles 3 and 8  of  the  ECHR  but
not on any other basis.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal has been set aside.

The Upper Tribunal remakes the decision itself. In  remaking  the  decision,
the  Upper  Tribunal  dismisses  the  appeal  on  asylum  and   humanitarian
protection grounds but allows it on human rights  grounds  under  Article  3
and Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights.



Signed:                                 Date: 12 March 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway



Anonymity

The claimant was previously granted anonymity by the First-tier Tribunal.  I
continue that grant so that the claimant continues to have anonymity.  I  do
so under Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.  So,
no report of these proceedings shall either directly or indirectly  identify
the claimant or any member of his family. The grant of anonymity applies  to
all parties to the proceedings. Failure to comply may lead  to  contempt  of
court proceedings.



Signed:                                 Date: 12 March 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway


To the Respondent

Fee award
Since no fee is payable there can be no fee award.


Signed:                                 Date: 12 March 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway


