

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:  PA/10633/2019 (V)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House via Microsoft Teams      |Determination Promulgated    |
|On Friday 30 July 2021                        |On Tuesday 24 August 2021    |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH

                                   Between

                                    K M A
                         [ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
An anonymity order was made by the First-tier Tribunal.  This is  an  appeal
on protection grounds.  It is therefore appropriate to continue that  order.
 Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify  him  or  any  member  of  his  family.  This  direction
applies, amongst others, to  both  parties.  Failure  to  comply  with  this
direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Representation:
For the Appellant:  Mr F Ahmad, Legal representative, Hanson Law Ltd
For the Respondent: Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS


BACKGROUND

1.           The  Appellant  appeals  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
      Tribunal  Judge  J  Burns  promulgated  on  5  February   2021   ("the
      Decision").  By the Decision,  the  Judge  dismissed  the  Appellant's
      appeal against the Respondent's decision dated 7 October 2019 refusing
      his protection and human  rights  claims.   This  is  the  Appellant's
      second appeal.  The earlier appeal was rejected on the basis that  the
      Appellant's claimed fear of persecution was not credible.

2.          The Appellant is a national of Iraq. His original  asylum  claim
      was that he feared persecution from ISIS.  His current claim  is  that
      he will be at risk on return  as  he  has  converted  to  Christianity
      whilst in the UK.

3.          The Judge correctly took as his starting point the  decision  of
      the First-tier Tribunal Judge which included the  adverse  credibility
      findings. The Judge did not accept the Appellant's  current  claim  as
      credible and therefore dismissed the appeal.

4.          The Appellant appeals the Decision on nine grounds as follows:
            Ground 1:  The Judge  acted  procedurally  unfairly  because  he
      gave an appearance of  bias;  he  also  used  discriminatory  comments
      contrary to the Equality Act 2010.
            Ground 2:  The Judge made a finding  that  the  original  asylum
      claim was a sham without giving reasons for that finding.
            Ground 3 (misnumbered as second ground 2):    The  Judge  failed
      to  consider  the  Appellant's  given  reasons   for   converting   to
      Christianity.
            Ground 4 (misnumbered as  ground  3):     The  Judge  considered
      immaterial matters.
             Ground  5  (misnumbered  as  ground  4):     The   Judge   made
      assumptions or failed to give adequate reasons for his findings.
            Ground 6 (misnumbered as ground 5):    The Judge  misinterpreted
      the evidence of the witnesses.
            Ground 7:  The Judge pre-determined the claim.
            Ground 8 (misnumbered as ground 9):    The Judge failed to  give
      reasons for the finding that the Appellant is  not  a  member  of  any
      political  party  or   organisation   and   has   not   attended   any
      demonstrations.
            Ground 9 (misnumbered  as  ground  10):  The  Judge  misdirected
      himself as to the Appellant's ability to obtain a CSID card.

5.          Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge  Martin
      as a First-tier Tribunal Judge on 9 March 2020 in the following terms:

            "... 2.    It is arguable that the Judge's intemperate  comments
           at [14] and [36] indicate a closed mind and that the proceedings
           were thus unfair.
                 3.    All the grounds may be argued."

6.          Although the Respondent filed  and  served  a  lengthy  Rule  24
      reply, Mr Walker conceded at the outset of the hearing that ground one
      of the Appellant's  grounds  was  made  out  and  therefore  that  the
      Decision  should  be  set  aside.   The  basis  for   his   concession
      encompasses also the Appellant's ground seven.
7.          Based on that concession, I agreed that the Decision  should  be
      set aside.  Given the nature of the challenge, which is accepted to be
      made out, and as both parties agreed, it is appropriate for the appeal
      to be remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal  for  re-determination.   I
      indicated that I would provide reasons  for  my  decision  in  writing
      which I now turn to do.

DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS

8.          There are three paragraphs of the Decision  which  make  up  the
      Appellant's grounds one and seven, the grant  of  permission  and  the
      Respondent's concession as follows:

            "14. This chronology is consistent with the  Appellant  deciding
           to create a further sham basis for an asylum claim by pretending
           to become a Christian after he received the refusal of his  2017
           submissions.  That this is likely to be the case is supported by
           the varying explanations he has given as to  what  prompted  his
           conversion.
                 ...
            36.  Attendance at church, bible  studies,  the  acquisition  of
           some basic knowledge, and reciting stock professions  of  belief
           may be indications of genuine Christian belief, but equally  may
           be the empty gestures of a non-Christian wishing  to  ingratiate
           himself with and obtain the support of a priest for purposes  of
           making a bogus asylum claim.  Church ritual  can  be  undertaken
           for purposes other than  genuine  belief.   Pretending  to  have
           become a genuine Christian, is a well-worn and recognised  means
           for Muslims who have come from Islamic countries, and  who  have
           no other basis for claiming asylum, to make such claims.
                 ...
            44.  The Appellant's previous account put forward  in  2016  was
           rejected  with  findings  that  he  had  given  incredible   and
           nonsensical evidence.  That decision, in respect  of  which  the
           Upper Tribunal refused to grant permission to appeal,  indicates
           that the Appellant was, at least  in  2016,  a  person  who  was
           capable of deliberately presenting false and  invented  evidence
           to try to advance his immigration objectives."

9.          I begin with [44] of the Decision which the Appellant  says,  at
      his ground 7, shows  that  the  Judge  has  pre-determined  the  claim
      because this claim is a new one and based on different  evidence.   On
      this point, I would not have  found  for  the  Appellant.   Given  the
      extracts from the previous  appeal  decision  cited  at  [10]  of  the
      Decision, the Judge was  entitled  to  find  that  the  Appellant  had
      fabricated his original claim.  That  was  relevant  to,  although  of
      course not decisive of the new claim.

10.         However, I agree with Mr Walker's concession that  [14]  of  the
      Decision is indicative of a  pre-determination  of  the  claim.   This
      paragraph was also one of those cited by Judge  Martin  when  granting
      permission  and  described  as  showing  "a  closed  mind"  and  being
      "intemperate".  I agree.

11.          Whilst  the  structure  of  a  Decision  is   not   necessarily
      determinative in relation to the way in which the Judge  has  reasoned
      his or her findings, in  this  case,  [14]  of  the  Decision  appears
      immediately following two paragraphs which merely set out the basis of
      the claim. The Judge had not considered the substance of the claim  at
      that stage but launched in with a statement that, in effect, the claim
      was not to be believed because of the timing of it.  As  Judge  Martin
      commented, the statement is also "intemperate" in its language.

12.         The test for apparent bias is set out most notably in  Porter  v
      Magill [2001] UKHL 67 at [102] and [103] as follows:

           "102. In my opinion however it is now possible to set this
           debate to rest. The Court of Appeal took the opportunity in In
           re Medicaments and Related Classes of Goods (No 2) [2001] 1 WLR
           700 to reconsider the whole question. Lord Phillips of Worth
           Matravers MR, giving the judgment of the court, observed, at p
           711 A-B, that the precise test to be applied when determining
           whether a decision should be set aside on account of bias had
           given rise to difficulty, reflected in judicial decisions that
           had appeared in conflict, and that the attempt to resolve that
           conflict in R v Gough had not commanded universal approval. At p
           711B-C he said that, as the alternative test had been thought to
           be more closely in line with Strasbourg jurisprudence which
           since 2 October 2000 the English courts were required to take
           into account, the occasion should now be taken to review R v
           Gough to see whether the test it lays down is, indeed, in
           conflict with Strasbourg jurisprudence. Having conducted that
           review he summarised the court's conclusions, at pp726H-727C:
                 '85 When the Strasbourg jurisprudence is taken into
                 account, we believe that a modest adjustment of the test
                 in R v Gough is called for, which makes it plain that it
                 is, in effect, no different from the test applied in most
                 of the Commonwealth and in Scotland. The court must first
                 ascertain all the circumstances which have a bearing on the
                 suggestion that the judge was biased. It must then ask
                 whether those circumstances would lead a fair-minded and
                 informed observer to conclude that there was a real
                 possibility, or a real danger, the two being the same, that
                 the tribunal was biased.'
           103. I respectfully suggest that your Lordships should now
           approve the modest adjustment of the test in R v Gough set out
           in that paragraph. It expresses in clear and simple language a
           test which is in harmony with the objective test which the
           Strasbourg court applies when it is considering whether the
           circumstances give rise to a reasonable apprehension of bias. It
           removes any possible conflict with the test which is now applied
           in most Commonwealth countries and in Scotland. I would however
           delete from it the reference to 'a real danger'. Those words no
           longer serve a useful purpose here, and they are not used in the
           jurisprudence of the Strasbourg court. The question is whether
           the fair-minded and informed observer, having considered the
           facts, would conclude that there was a real possibility that the
           tribunal was biased."
           [my emphasis]

13.         Whilst there is no suggestion in  the  grounds  that  the  Judge
      behaved during the hearing in a manner which suggested bias,  I  agree
      with Judge Martin that the Judge's comments at [14] and in  the  final
      sentence  of  [36]  of  the  Decision  are   properly   described   as
      "intemperate".  A fair-minded and informed observer, having considered
      the facts and having read the Decision, would be  likely  to  conclude
      that there was a real possibility that the Judge was biased because of
      his pre-conceptions about conversion claims of  this  nature  and  the
      timing of the Appellant's claim.

14.          For  those  reasons,  the  hearing  before  Judge   Burns   was
      procedurally unfair.  The Decision is set aside for that reason.   The
      complaint under the Equality Act based on what is said at [36] of  the
      Decision adds nothing to the  remainder  of  ground  one.   I  do  not
      therefore need to deal with it. Nor would it be appropriate for me  to
      deal with the remaining  grounds  challenging  the  substance  of  the
      Decision.  The concession that the  hearing  was  procedurally  unfair
      vitiates the Judge's findings as a whole.

CONCLUSION

15.         For those reasons, I conclude that ground one  discloses  errors
      of law in the Decision. I therefore set  the  Decision  aside  in  its
      entirety.  The credibility of the  Appellant's  claim  will  therefore
      need to be considered afresh.  Since I have found the Decision to have
      been reached on a procedurally unfair basis,  this  appeal  should  be
      remitted for a de novo hearing.


DECISION
I am satisfied that the Decision involves the making of a material error  on
a  point  of  law.  The  Decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  J  Burns
promulgated on 5 February 2021 is set aside in its  entirety.   No  findings
are preserved. The appeal is remitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  re-
hearing before a Judge other than Judge J Burns.

Signed           L K Smith                         Dated: 3 August 2021
Upper Tribunal Judge Smith
