
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: PA/10625/2017
                                                               PA/10626/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham CJC              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5 March 2019                      |On 25 March 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN


                                   Between

                                     ABA
                                     SA
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr. A. Barnfield, Counsel instructed by Freedom
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr. D. Mills, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellants against a  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Dhaliwal, promulgated on 7 December 2017, in  which  she
    dismissed the Appellants' appeals against the Respondent's decision  to
    refuse a grant of asylum.

 2. As these are asylum appeals, I make an anonymity direction.

 3. Permission to appeal was granted as follows:

         "It is arguable that there were errors in  the  assessment  of  the
         credibility of the appellants' claim for asylum due to the repeated
         use of the concept of plausibility and the guidance of the Court of
         Appeal in HK v SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ 1037.  It is arguable that  the
         assessment of the credibility of the asylum claim has infected  the
         view taken of the documentary evidence in support of the claim.  It
         is apparently accepted in the grounds that the First-tier  Tribunal
         was entitled to hold against the credibility of the appellants that
         they had denied an earlier application for entry clearance for  the
         second appellant, but it is arguable that  even  if  this  fact  is
         properly balanced against the appellants it cannot be said that the
         outcome of the appeal would be that it was bound to be  dismissed".



 4. The Appellants attended the hearing.  I  heard  submissions  from  both
    representatives following which I stated that the decision involved the
    making of a material error of  law.   I  set  the  decision  aside  and
    remitted it to the First-tier Tribunal to be re-made.

Error of law

 5. There are two grounds  of  appeal.   The  first  concerns  the  Judge's
    credibility findings, and the second concerns the  documents  provided,
    although to a large extent these issues are connected.

 6. Although the Judge has set out at [9] the correct burden of proof,  and
    at  [23]  has  stated  that  "In  assessing  the  credibility  of   the
    Appellants, I considered all of the evidence that  was  before  me",  I
    find that she has in fact failed  to  take  into  account  all  of  the
    evidence when assessing the  credibility  of  the  Appellants,  as  she
    failed to take into account the documentary evidence  until  after  she
    had made her finding as to the Appellants' credibility.

 7. I further find that she has consistently referred  to  the  concept  of
    plausibility without taking  into  account  the  Appellants'  evidence.
    Therefore she has found certain aspects of the Appellants'  account  to
    be implausible without stating why she  has  rejected  the  Appellants'
    evidence.  At [30] she states:

         "In assessing this aspect, if I  accept  at  face  value  that  the
         sister of her boyfriend was present on each occasion, it then seems
         unlikely in view of the culture prevalent in Iraq and  females  not
         being allowed to have boyfriends, that the Second Appellant  and  H
         would be in a position to either verbally express their feelings to
         each other, have intimate  conversations  with  each  other  or  be
         demonstrative in front of the sister.  More so, that they would not
         be able to show any displays of affection towards each other  in  a
         crowded public place, let alone, hold hands, kiss and  hug  openly,
         as the Second Appellant mentions on (sic) her statement.   This  is
         inconsistent  with  objective  country   information.    It   seems
         implausible that a relationship would have grown  with  the  sister
         accompanying  them  on  each  occasion  or  that  they  would  have
         conducted themselves in the manner suggested  in  a  public  place,
         which is only 30 minutes away from where she lived."

 8. The Judge failed properly to consider the evidence of  the  involvement
    of H's sister.  She has used the presence of the sister  to  strengthen
    her finding that the second Appellant and H would not  have  been  able
    publicly to display affection,  but  this  is  not  the  way  that  the
    evidence was presented.   On  the  contrary,  it  was  put  forward  in
    evidence that the reason the second Appellant and H were able  to  meet
    up in public was due to the presence of H's sister.   This  is  clearly
    explained in the second Appellant's statement.  At [5] she states  that
    she met H's sister before she met H.  At [6] she states that it was H's
    sister who said to the second Appellant that H liked  her.   Throughout
    the statement she explains how she was able to see H due to his  sister
    being present.  The evidence  was  that  the  presence  of  H's  sister
    legitimised the second Appellant and H being together in public.

 9. However, the Judge has taken the  evidence  to  show  that  the  second
    Appellant would not have been able to develop  a  relationship  with  H
    with his sister being there.   She  has  not  indicated  that  she  has
    rejected the evidence of the second Appellant that she  was  introduced
    to H by his sister, or that it was H's  sister  who  indicated  to  the
    second Appellant that H was interested in her.  Rather she  has  stated
    that she has found it unlikely that they would be able  to  continue  a
    relationship with H's sister present.  I find that she has  selectively
    cited the second Appellants' evidence in this paragraph in relation  to
    how they were able to meet, hold hands, kiss  and  hug,  etc.,  without
    referring to the second Appellant's evidence as to why they  were  able
    to do this.

10. I find that the Judge has failed  to  take  into  account  all  of  the
    evidence which was before her when making her findings  in  [30].   She
    has failed to give reasons for why she has not  accepted  the  evidence
    that the second Appellant was able to be with H in public  due  to  the
    presence of his sister.  At [34] she again states that the presence  of
    H's sister would not have enabled the relationship to  progress.   This
    runs entirely contrary to the second Appellant's  evidence,  and  again
    there is no reason given for rejecting this part of the evidence.

11. The Judge has referred to the background evidence when considering this
    account, and its plausibility, but this does  not  mean  that  she  can
    ignore the explanation given by the second Appellant.  It was incumbent
    on the Judge to consider that explanation rather  than  selectively  to
    choose which parts of the second Appellant's evidence to rely on in her
    findings.  I find that this is a material error of law.

12. The Judge finds at [35]:

         "I am simply not persuaded  on  the  evidence  that  there  was  in
         existence a relationship with H and  that  she  engaged  in  sexual
         intercourse with him.  I do not find the  account  given  to  be  a
         credible and plausible account.  It thus follows, if  there  is  no
         sexual intercourse, there is no risk to the Second  Appellant  from
         her uncle, if there is indeed an uncle in the background.  As  this
         is my finding then the risk to the Appellants disappear."

13. At [39] she states:

         "It is my view that the credibility of the both (sic) Appellants is
         damaged and on that basis, as I have been unable to  accept  either
         of their accounts."

14. I find that these paragraphs clearly  show  that  the  Judge  made  her
    finding that there was no risk to the Appellants from the  uncle  prior
    to consideration of the documents, which are not considered until  [40]
    and [41].  The conclusion that  there  is  no  risk  is  based  on  her
    findings set out from  [30]  to  [34].   Although  the  "assessment  of
    evidence and findings of fact" start at [23], the first findings do not
    appear until [30].  I have stated above these findings  have  not  been
    adequately reasoned, and that the Judge has failed to explain  why  she
    has rejected some of the evidence, relying instead on selected parts.

15. The Judge came to  her  conclusion  that  there  was  no  risk  to  the
    Appellants from the uncle before considering the documentary  evidence.
    Her credibility findings have been applied  to  the  documents  without
    considering the documents in their own right.  The two short paragraphs
    at [40] and [41] are the  full  extent  of  the  consideration  of  the
    documents on which  the  Appellants  relied.   The  documents  are  not
    referred to elsewhere in the decision.  The Judge states:

         "I also question the assertion that the uncle is a  member  of  the
         PUK Party, has considerable influence over others and  could  trace
         them is reliable.  In support, a copy of a mediation agreement  was
         placed  before  me  together  with  a  newspaper  article.    These
         documents appear to have been obtained by an Omer Ali, who is  said
         to be the person who assisted them in leaving Iraq and  was  traced
         by the Second Appellant through Facebook.   Facebook  entries  have
         been exhibited to show a conversation that took place between  Omer
         Ali and the Second Appellant.  It is said that they have been  able
         to obtain these documents as Omer Ali knows one  of  the  mediators
         which is how the mediation document is said to be placed before me.
         [40]

         On the face of it, whilst the documents are before me, based on  my
         concerns about credibility thus far and in the absence of  anything
         further, I  cannot  be  satisfied  of  the  authenticity  of  these
         documents.  As it happens, the "newspaper article" seems  to  refer
         only to initials and not names.  I cannot infer from that that they
         relate to the same individuals that have been referred to  in  this
         decision.  Likewise, I find it is rather convenient that  Omer  Ali
         just happens to know one of the mediators." [41]

16. The Judge gives no detail of what  the  mediation  document  is  about.
    There is no detail regarding the newspaper article.  From a reading  of
    the decision, it is not at all clear what these  documents  are.   They
    have been dismissed purely on the  basis  of  the  Judge's  credibility
    findings, and have not been considered as stand-alone documents.

17. Mr. Mills submitted that the Judge had assessed all  the  evidence,  as
    she had stated at [23], but I find that it is clear that her conclusion
    was reached prior to any proper consideration of  the  documents.   The
    credibility findings are made  at  [34]  and  [39],  but  there  is  no
    consideration of the documents until [40].  I find that the  Judge  has
    failed to consider the evidence in the round.  This is a material error
    of law.

18. I find that the decision involves the making of material errors of law.
     I have taken account of the Practice Statement dated 10 February 2010,
    paragraph 7.2.  This contemplates that an appeal may be remitted to the
    First-tier Tribunal where the effect of the error has been to deprive a
    party before the  First-tier  Tribunal  of  a  fair  hearing  or  other
    opportunity for the party's case to be put to  and  considered  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  Given the nature and extent of  the  fact-finding
    necessary  to  enable  this  appeal  to  be  remade,  given  that   the
    credibility findings cannot stand, and having regard to the  overriding
    objective, I find that it is appropriate to  remit  this  case  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

19. The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  involves  the  making  of  a
    material error of law and I set the decision aside.

20. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be remade.

21. The appeal is not to be listed before Judge Dhaliwal.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  Appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellants and to the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date 21 March 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain
