
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/10838/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 3 June 2019                      |On 13 June 2019                     |


                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR
                      UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CALLAGHAN


                                   Between

                                    A.A.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:  Mr. N. Paramjorthy, Counsel, instructed by ABN
Solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr. E. Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Widdup ('the Judge'), issued on 21 March  2019,  by  which  the  asylum
    appeal of the appellant was refused.

 2. The Judge made an  anonymity  order  under  rule  13  of  the  Tribunal
    Procedure (First-tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Rules
    2014. We have decided that the order should continue so as to  avoid  a
    likelihood of serious harm arising to the appellant in relation to  the
    allegations made within  her  protection  claim.  Unless  and  until  a
    Tribunal or Court directs otherwise, no report of these proceedings  or
    any form of publication thereof shall directly or  indirectly  identify
    the appellant to these proceedings. The direction applies  to,  amongst
    others, the appellant and the respondent. Any failure  to  comply  with
    this direction could give rise to contempt of court proceedings.

 3. The appellant is a Sri Lankan national of Tamil ethnicity. She  secured
    entry clearance as  a  student  and  subsequently  made  an  in-country
    application for international protection. She details that she provided
    low-level support to the LTTE whilst a school student  in  Jaffna.  She
    states that she was detained in 2014 following her return from studying
    in Bangladesh and subjected to serious ill-treatment at  the  hands  of
    the Sri Lankan authorities after an  immigration  official  at  Colombo
    airport observed that there was an LTTE flag on a picture profile found
    on her mobile phone. She asserts that she was  released  following  the
    payment of a bribe and she consequently travelled to this country.  Her
    position is that her account of having been tortured is supported by  a
    scarring report authored by  a  medical  practitioner  and  also  by  a
    favourable psychiatric report. She contends that she has been  involved
    with the TGTE whilst in the United Kingdom.

 4. The hearing of the appeal took place on 13 March  2019.  The  appellant
    relied upon medical opinion that she was not fit to give  evidence  and
    so was not called. By way of  the  decision  and  reasons  it  was  not
    accepted that the appellant has been detained and  ill-treated  by  the
    Sri Lankan authorities. The  Judge  accepted  that  the  appellant  had
    attended demonstrations in this country but found  that  her  political
    profile to be negligible, and she is not someone who  can  properly  be
    described  as  having  a  significant  role  in  separatist   politics.
    Consequently, it was decided that she had not proved to  the  requisite
    standard that she is at risk of persecution  or  serious  ill-treatment
    upon return to Sri Lanka.

 5. Grounds of appeal were drafted by Mr. Paramjorthy, who represented  the
    appellant before the First-tier Tribunal.  Three  grounds  were  relied
    upon:

    i)     The Judge failed to properly consider the evidence  relating  to
         the appellant's scarring and her history of previous torture.

    ii)    The  Judge  failed  entirely  to  consider  the  sufficiency  of
         treatment available to the appellant on her return  to  Sri  Lanka;
         and

    iii)   The Judge failed entirely to consider the  fundamental  question
         as to whether or not the appellant would be a perceived  threat  to
         the unitary state of Sri Lanka, rather  focusing  on  her  personal
         knowledge of the TGTE.

 6.  Permission  to  appeal  was  granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal   Judge
    Hollingworth  by  way  of  a  decision  dated  24  April  2019.  Though
    permission was granted on all grounds, focus was directed to Ground 1.

 7. At the hearing before us  the  representatives  addressed  the  Judge's
    approach to the medical evidence, in particular [70] - [74], [99]:

         '70.     Mr. Paramjorthy referred me to the very recent case of  KV
             Sri Lanka (scarring).

         71.      There is a world of difference between the facts  of  that
             case and the present. The scars in KV were caused by  branding
             with a hot metal rod. There were five scars on  his  back  and
             two on his  arm.  In  the  view  of  the  Supreme  Court  such
             injuries, if the result of SIBP  [self-infliction  by  proxy],
             could only have been inflicted under anaesthetic by a  medical
             practitioner who had the equipment and drugs to  perform  this
             procedure and who was willing to commit a serious offence  and
             contravene medical ethics and  good  medical  practice.  These
             were factors which should have been  considered  in  assessing
             the relative likelihood of SIBP as opposed to torture.

         72.      The appellant's case does not involve injuries which would
             need to be inflicted under anaesthesia by a doctor.  They  are
             cigarette burns. If this is a case of SIBP  such  burns  could
             have been self-inflicated on the appellant's knees by proxy.

         73.      I note that Dr. Al Wakeel was not asked about SIBP nor did
             he consider it as a possibility. The statement in  his  report
             that the injuries were most likely caused  intentionally  does
             not therefore exclude the possibility that they were cause  by
             the appellant self-harming or by someone else doing so at  her
             request.

         74.      I emphasis that I do not find that this is a case of  SIBP
             but I do  say  that  the  possibility  that  they  were  self-
             inflicted is greater in this case than in the case of  KV  and
             is not excluded by the opinion of Dr. Al Wakeel.

         ...

         99.      The evidence of Dr. Al-Wakeel fails to consider  SIBP  and
             the evidence of Dr. Dhumad is flawed and of little weight.'

 8.  We  observe  that  the  issue  of  SIBP  was  not  raised  within  the
    respondent's decision letter of 28 August 2018.

 9. The Judge was provided by Mr. Paramjothy with what was  then  the  very
    recent judgment of the Supreme Court in KV (Sri Lanka) v. Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2019] UKSC 10; [2019] 1  WLR  1849.  The
    Supreme Court considered the limit of the role of a medical  expert  in
    contributing  to  the  evidence  referable  to  a  claim  of   torture,
    specifically with regard to SIBP cases.

10. At the hearing we indicated to the representatives our  concern  as  to
    the Judge's adverse criticism of Mr. Al-Wakeel's  scarring  report  for
    not considering the  possibility  of  the  appellant's  scarring  being
    caused by  SIBP.  Such  criticism  negatively  influenced  the  Judge's
    overall assessment of the report. The approach adopted by the Judge  is
    consistent with the procedural approach to  medical  reports  and  SIBP
    adopted by the Upper Tribunal in KV (Scaring - medical evidence) [2014]
    UKUT 230 (IAC). However, this approach was rejected  by  the  Court  of
    Appeal on appeal: [2017] EWCA Civ 119; [2017] 4 WLR 88, at [87] - [96].
    At [94] Sales L.J. (as he then was) held:

         'Contrary to the UT's guidance,  I  do  not  consider  that  it  is
         incumbent on medical experts in scarring  cases  to  refer  to  the
         possibility of SIBP, where the Secretary of State has not raised it
         as an issue, unless there is some feature of the case which engages
         the duty of the medical expert to bring it to the attention of  the
         tribunal, pursuant to  the  guidance  in  the  Practice  Direction.
         Subject to that duty, an expert witness does not have to raise  and
         comment on issues which have not been raised by the parties to  the
         proceedings.'

11. This element of the Court of Appeal's  reasoning  was  not  subject  to
    consideration by the Supreme Court.

12. We further observe that Mr. Al-Wakeel did consider as  to  whether  the
    scars were caused by other means and in concluding  that  his  clinical
    findings were 'typical' of cigarette burns he framed his conclusion  in
    accordance  with  the  Manual  on  the  Effective   Investigation   and
    Documentation  of  Torture  and  Other  Cruel,  Inhuman  or   Degrading
    Treatment or Punishment (the Istanbul Protocol).

13. Before us Mr. Tufan fairly, and appropriately, accepted that there  was
    an issue with the approach adopted by the Judge to the medical evidence
    of Mr. Al-Wakeel.

14. We further drew the representatives' attention to the  judgment  of  ME
    (Sri Lanka) v. Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2018]  EWCA
    Civ 1486, where the Court of Appeal concluded on the facts of the  case
    before it that the important question  in  the  appellant's  claim  was
    whether there was a real risk of his being detained and  beaten  if  he
    were to be returned. The fact that his arrest took place long after the
    cessation of  the  conflict  in  Sri  Lanka  should  have  led  to  the
    conclusion that he was perceived at that time as being  of  significant
    interest to the authorities, and  therefore  a  person  who  fell  into
    category (a) of the risk categories  identified  in  GJ  and  Others  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013] UKUT  319  (IAC).  We
    noted in the matter before us that if the Judge erred in law as to  his
    consideration of the appellant's arrest and detention in Sri  Lanka  in
    2014,  and  his  assessment  of  the  medical  evidence  was   a   core
    consideration in such regard, it was a material error  as  it  impacted
    upon his assessment as to whether or not the appellant fell into one of
    the risk categories identified in the Country Guidance decision  of  GJ
    and Others.

15. Mr. Tufan accepted that this was the  case  and  that  in  all  of  the
    circumstances the decision and reasons were subject to a material error
    of law.

16. In light of the above the Judge's decision must be set aside.

17. The representatives were in agreement that none of the  findings  could
    stand and that in such circumstances the matter should be  remitted  to
    the First-tier Tribunal  rather  than  be  relisted  before  the  Upper
    Tribunal. In such circumstances, we did not proceed to consider Grounds
    2 and 3.

Remittal to First-Tier Tribunal

18. Under Part 3 paragraph 7.2(b) of the Upper Tribunal Practice  Statement
    of the 25 September 2012 the case may be  remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal if the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that:

    (a)    the effect of the error has been to deprive a party  before  the
         First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other opportunity for that
         party's case  to  be  put  to  and  considered  by  the  First-tier
         Tribunal; or

    (b)    the nature or extent of  any  judicial  fact  finding  which  is
         necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be re-made  is
         such that, having regard to the overriding objective in rule 2,  it
         is appropriate to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

19. In this case we have determined that the adverse  credibility  findings
    cannot stand. The appeal will be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal so
    that a new  fact-finding  exercise  can  be  undertaken.  None  of  the
    findings of fact are to stand and a complete re-hearing is necessary.

Notice of Decision

20. For all of these reasons, the decision discloses an error on a point of
    law such that it must be set aside. We set aside the  Judge's  decision
    promulgated on 21 March  2019  pursuant  to  section  12(2)(a)  of  the
    Tribunal, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007.

Direction

21. We remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal sitting at Hatton  Cross
    to be heard before any First-tier Judge other than Judge Widdup.


Signed: D. O'Callaghan

Upper Tribunal Judge O'Callaghan

Date: 11 June 2019
