
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                   Appeal Number:
PA/10341/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham Civil Justice      | Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Centre                                 |                                      |
|On 19 November 2018                    | On 20 December 2018                  |
|                                       |                                      |

                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT

                                   Between

                                     R a
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms O Duru, instructed by Jemek Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Ms H Aboni, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a national of Afghanistan.  He appeals with permission
    against the decision of a First-tier Tribunal Judge, Judge Birk, who in
    a decision sent out on 11 December 2017 dismissed  his  appeal  against
    the refusal of asylum.  The appellant's appeal was on refugee and human
    rights grounds.

 2. The principal individual material before the judge was the  appellant's
    own evidence of his history and circumstances and a medical  report  by
    Dr Carter under the  auspices  of  Freedom  from  Torture.   The  judge
    considered the appellant's own evidence as largely without credit.  The
    appellant had put up a  story  about  a  threat  from  a  family  whose
    daughter he wanted to marry and the judge regarded that as  a  complete
    fabrication.

 3. The judge then  went  on  to  consider  the  appellant's  more  distant
    history.  The appellant had claimed to have  been  taken  and  severely
    beaten by the Taliban about ten years before his flight to  the  United
    Kingdom and, looking at the appellant's account of that  together  with
    the strong support for his account that was contained  in  Dr  Carter's
    report, the judge concluded that that part of his account was credible.
     Thus, he was a person who had been ill-treated in the past but had not
    established a risk of ill-treatment based on his own account of  recent
    facts in the present.

 4. The judge then went on to consider whether the appellant was at risk of
    ill-treatment in the present as a result of his  ill-treatment  in  the
    past, whether it would be repeated or  whether  it  would  provide  any
    basis for repeated ill-treatment, and concluded that there was no basis
    for supposing anything of the sort.

 5. The judge then went on to consider the other  aspects  of  the  medical
    report.  That report dealt with the appellant's general,  physical  and
    psychological health.  So far as his physical health  is  concerned  he
    suffers from long term pain, particularly in his neck and I think  also
    one of his ribs as a result of a beating from  the  Taliban.   That  is
    dealt with by painkillers (Co-Codamol) of which he takes four daily  on
    prescription.  He also has kidney  stones,  a  matter  mentioned  at  a
    number of points in the evidence, but not by either party so far  as  I
    can see in relation to the appeal.

 6. More particularly  in  issue  is  the  evidence  of  his  psychological
    condition as diagnosed by Dr Carter.   Dr  Carter  regarded  him  as  a
    victim of post-traumatic stress disorder, found that he  was  depressed
    and said that he was at significant risk  of  suicide  which  would  be
    exacerbated if his asylum claim were refused.

 7. The judge considered all that material and concluded that the appellant
    could properly be returned to Kabul,  which  incidentally  is  a  place
    different from the place where his persecutors of long ago  were.   The
    judge noted that there was no update following the report as to whether
    the appellant had been able to act on the doctor's suggestion  that  he
    have treatment for his depression and also  said  this:  "I  find  that
    there are health needs which the appellant has which would be difficult
    to  access  because  of  the  disparity  of  healthcare  facilities  in
    Afghanistan than in the UK" but was unable to be  specific  about  what
    those needs were because there was so little  evidence.   He  concluded
    that on balance they did not amount to a reason why he  should  not  be
    removed to his country of nationality.

 8. The grounds of appeal  against  that  decision  do  not  challenge  the
    judge's findings on the credibility of the account the  appellant  gave
    of his recent difficulties, nor do they challenge anything relating  to
    the judge's findings on his past persecution or to the judge's findings
    on the  likelihood  of  that  persecution  being  repeated.   They  are
    directed instead solely to the judge's treatment  and  appreciation  of
    the medical evidence.  They are not, I have to say,  entirely  easy  to
    understand; and I have asked Ms Duru  who  presents  the  case  on  the
    appellant's behalf what it is precisely that is said to have been wrong
    with the judge's decision.

 9. This is a case in which the appellant's psychological  condition  today
    is now because of the grounds, said to be at the  heart  of  the  case;
    but, as Ms Duru accepted there was and is no evidence of any  treatment
    for depression, even though it appears that the depression arises  from
    his ill-treatment by the Taliban before he left Afghanistan a long time
    ago.  The judge noted that there  was  no  suggestion  of  any  medical
    intervention for depression, and that remains the case today.   Bearing
    in mind the lack of evidence of that before the judge, it is  difficult
    to see what else she could have done.  It was not for her to  speculate
    what medication might be provided  for  a  person  who  claimed  to  be
    depressed.  Ms Duru said at  one  point  during  the  submissions  that
    "unfortunately" there is no prescription.  The truth of the matter  may
    be that the appellant  does  not  need  any  prescription  because  his
    depression is not at that level.  Nobody can say  anything  other  than
    that the appellant has obviously not  established  a  case  under  that
    head.

10. So far as suicide is concerned, this is a matter which anybody needs of
    course to treat with the gravest attention.  So far as the  doctor  was
    concerned, she recorded that there had been an  occasion  when  he  had
    trashed his room, but, although having that possibility at the front of
    her mind no doubt, did not  regard  that  as  an  attempt  at  suicide.
    Although Ms Duru asserted to me that the doctor had recorded a previous
    attempt at suicide, which Ms Duru said doubled the risk of a subsequent
    attempt, she was unable to point to  anything  in  the  medical  report
    which actually did record a previous attempt at suicide.  What is  said
    at paragraph 112 is this:

         "The appellant denies any suicidal ideation at  the  present  time,
         although he has had it in the past.  It is recognised,  in  working
         with survivors  of  abuse  especially  torture  survivors,  that  a
         subjective fear of further persecution tends to act as a 'stressor'
         and as a re-traumatising factor.  This  subjective  fear  therefore
         tends to trigger deterioration in the symptoms  of  depression  and
         PTSD.  The appellant has expressed to me  that  he  would  consider
         taking his own life should he be denied asylum  and  faced  with  a
         removal.  He has considered the  method  (jumping  in  front  of  a
         train).  I am therefore  concerned  that  if  this  should  be  the
         outcome and he is returned to Afghanistan,  then  his  symptoms  of
         depression and PTSD will become more florid and  potentially  place
         him at a greater, significant risk of suicide than he  has  at  the
         moment."

    and at paragraph 124:

         "The appellant is having regular  suicidal  ideation  but  although
         considering a method, he has no active plans at present.   However,
         he has told me that should he be removed to  Afghanistan,  then  he
         would rather take his own life in the UK.  In my opinion he  is  at
         significant risk of suicide and his  psychological  distress  would
         deteriorate considerably should he be denied asylum."

    It may be noted that the level of ideation appears  to  have  increased
    between paragraphs 112 and 124: but the point is that at paragraph  124
    the suicidal risk is clearly limited to suicide in the United  Kingdom.
    There is no evidence to  support  Ms  Duru's  submission  that  if  the
    appellant were actually removed he would  be  at  risk  of  suicide  on
    arrival in his own country.  There  is  no  evidence  in  the  doctor's
    report to support that.

11. So far as suicide in the United Kingdom is concerned,  again  it  is  a
    matter the risk of which is considered very seriously; and as Ms  Aboni
    points out on behalf of  the  Secretary  of  State  that  is  something
    against which he could be protected in the  course  of  any  action  to
    remove him.

12. Ms Duru has told me that the appellant has not made  himself  available
    to her firm for some time.  It is right to record that the judge was so
    concerned about the possibility of his  taking  action  in  the  United
    Kingdom immediately on receiving the determination  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, there was a direction that he be not told directly about  it.
    I am told that after the decision was published it was explained to him
    first of all by his solicitors; and then he was taken through it  on  a
    separate occasion, and returned on a further occasion  to  discuss  the
    possibility of  appealing.   Those  appointments  were  on  14  and  17
    December 2017 and 18 January 2018.   He has not been seen since. I  did
    specifically enquire whether Ms Duru's note gave any indication that he
    was in a state of noticeable distress apparent to those seeing  him  in
    the solicitors' office, and she was able to confirm that  there  is  no
    note to that effect.  That does provide at any rate some comfort for  a
    Tribunal which is bound to note that the evidence of the  psychological
    risks argued on his behalf is very thin.

13. It seems to me that the judge looked at all the  material  and  gave  a
    self-direction that was  accurate  and  in  accordance  with  it.   The
    account by the appellant of his recent past has not  subsequently  been
    said to be true at all.  The account of his more distant past was found
    by the judge to be true, but there  has  been  no  appeal  against  the
    conclusion that there was no evidence that it would  be  repeated.   So
    far as the medical evidence is  concerned,  the  judge  looked  at  it,
    evaluated it in context, noted its defects as well as the parts  of  it
    which would support the appellant's case,  and  reached  a  view  which
    appears to me to have been entirely open to the judge on that material.

14. For those reasons I affirm the determination as containing no error  of
    law and dismiss this appeal.


                                                           C. M. G. OCKELTON
                                        VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                       Date: 7 December 2018
