
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10966/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 17th May 2019                     |On 15th August 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

                                     K A
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Semega-Janneh, instructed by CB Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Tan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The First-tier Tribunal ("FtT) has made an anonymity order and for the
      avoidance of any doubt, that order continues.  KA is granted anonymity
      throughout these proceedings.  No report of these proceedings shall
      directly or indirectly identify him.  This direction applies both to
      the appellant and to the respondent. Failure to comply with this
      direction could lead to proceedings being brought for contempt of
      court.


   2. This is an appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal ("FtT")
      Judge Anthony promulgated on 10th December 2018.  The FtT Judge
      dismissed the appellant's appeal against the decision of the
      respondent dated 7th September 2018, to refuse his claim for
      international protection.


   3. The appellant is a national of Egypt.  The background to the claim for
      international protection and the events that the appellant claims led
      to his departure from Egypt, are summarised at paragraph [4] of the
      decision of the FtT Judge and I do not repeat the claim in this
      decision.  The findings and conclusions of the FtT Judge are set out
      at paragraphs [14] to [32] of the decision.  Again, I do not set out
      in any detail, the findings that were made by the Tribunal.  It is
      sufficient for present purposes to simply note that the FtT Judge
      comprehensively rejected the account of events relied upon by the
      appellant.  The FtT Judge found that the appellant had been unable to
      articulate what his political beliefs are, and the appellant had been
      unable to give a credible explanation as to what motivated him to
      attend a demonstration in May 2014, and the cause that he was
      championing at the demonstration.  The FtT Judge did not accept that
      the appellant had attended a demonstration, or that he was
      subsequently detained, as he claimed.  At paragraph [26] of the
      decision, the FtT Judge summarises his conclusions upon the claim for
      international protection as follows:


         "I find the inconsistencies in his account renders his account
         wholly unreliable.  I find the appellant has not been truthful
         regarding his involvement with an anti-government demonstration.
         Nor has he been truthful regarding any arrest and detention.  I
         find the appellant has failed to discharge the burden of proof to
         the low standard that he was arrested and imprisoned."


The appeal before me


   4. The appellant criticises the Judge's assessment of the evidence given
      by the appellant.  Mr Semega-Janneh adopted the grounds of appeal and
      submits that the FtT Judge was mistaken in stating, at [16], that the
      appellant had stated in the substantive interview that there are no
      political parties in Egypt but the Muslim Brotherhood.  In answer to
      the question "What political parties exist in Egypt?", at question 66
      of the interview, the appellant had also referred to the Communist
      Party.  He submits that the reference to there being no other
      political parties, was a reference to there being no other political
      parties in his village.  The Judge states that it is reasonable to
      expect the appellant to be aware of the existence of some political
      parties but failed to have regard to the answer given by the appellant
      during the interview.  Mr Semega-Janneh submits that the Judge
      proceeds, at [17], to note that the appellant now names other parties
      in Egypt, whereas the appellant had clearly done so, previously.


   5. Mr Samega-Janneh submits that it was irrational for the FtT Judge to
      conclude, at [17], that the fact that the appellant could not name any
      political party that shares his claimed beliefs, is a strong
      indication that he has no political beliefs.  He submits that it is
      possible for an individual to hold a view or belief that does not fit
      with any mainstream political party, and an individual is not required
      to be aligned to a political party, to hold a political belief.  The
      appellant claims that he had articulated the difficulties that were
      being experienced in Egypt that caused him to attend the
      demonstration, and the appellant gave a clear explanation in response
      to question 89 of the substantive interview, as to how he had become
      aware of the demonstration.  Mr Samega-Janneh submits that the
      appellant was demonstrating for a cause. That was, as he explained in
      answer to question 89 of the substantive interview, the release of his
      colleagues.  Attending a demonstration directed to a cause did not
      require the appellant to be aligned to a political cause, or a
      political party. The appellant had given a credible explanation for
      what motivated him to attend the demonstration in interview, and it
      was irrational for the FtT Judge to conclude that there is no credible
      explanation provided by the appellant.


   6. The appellant claims that in considering the appellant's account of
      his detention, the FtT Judge attached undue weight to the answers
      given by the appellant during his screening interview.


   7. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Grubb on 12th
      March 2019.  The matter comes before me to consider whether the
      decision of the FtT involved the making of a material error of law,
      and if so, to remake the decision.  At the end of the hearing before
      me, I informed the parties that in my judgement, the decision of the
      FtT is not tainted by a material error of law, and the appeal is
      dismissed. I informed the parties that I would provide my full written
      reasons for dismissing the appeal in due course. I now do so.


Discussion this


   8. The findings and conclusions of the Judge are set out at paragraphs
      [15] to [25] of the decision.  The Judge had the benefit of hearing
      from the appellant, and of having his evidence tested in cross-
      examination.  It was for the appellant to establish that there is a
      reasonable degree of likelihood that he faces a risk upon return, and
      it was for the Judge to make his findings on whether, and to what
      extent, the appellant's account is credible.


   9. The appellant does not claim to be aligned to any particular political
      party, and as the FtT Judge properly notes at [17], when the appellant
      was asked in interview whether any parties or politicians in Egypt
      share a similar view to him about the current president and government
      (Q.82), the appellant responded that there were no political parties
      in Egypt.  The appellant's evidence regarding political parties in
      Egypt was on any view, very vague.   Although there is some force to
      the appellant's claim that the FtT Judge proceeds, at paragraph [16],
      upon the mistaken premise that in his substantive interview the
      appellant stated that there are no political parties in Egypt but the
      Muslim brotherhood, without having regard to the reference to the
      Communist Party, that mistake is immaterial.


  10. I have carefully read the decision of the FtT Judge and his findings
      regarding the events of 12th May 2014, and the two periods of
      detention that the appellant claims, followed.  The Judge rejected the
      appellant's account of events and in my judgement it was open to him
      to do so.  At paragraphs [18] to [25] of the decision, the FtT Judge
      carefully considered the appellant's evidence regarding the
      demonstration that he claimed to have attended, and his subsequent
      detention which was at the heart of the claim for asylum.   Whilst the
      findings were perhaps not as well-expressed as they might be, that is
      not to say that the FtT Judge failed to consider the evidence or
      reached a conclusion that was not open to him.  The obligation on a
      Tribunal is to give reasons in sufficient detail to show the
      principles on which the Tribunal has acted and the reasons that have
      led to the decision.  Such reasons need not be elaborate, and do not
      need to address every argument or every factor which weighed in the
      decision.   The FtT Judge considered the appellant's motives for
      joining the demonstration, his claimed role in the demonstration, the
      reasons for the demonstration, and how he had become aware of the
      demonstration.  The Judge noted the inconsistencies in the evidence of
      the appellant.


  11. The appellant claimed that he had been detained twice following his
      attendance at the demonstration.  He claimed in his substantive
      interview that he was hit whilst he was running away from the
      demonstration by an investigator wearing civilian clothes. He was then
      put in a vehicle and detained, initially for one week, and then a
      further 11 months after he had been taken to the 'Prosecutor Bureau'.
      The appellant claimed that he was released after he had been called to
      sign a document, and that he had been released in April 2015.  The FtT
      Judge found at [22], that the appellant had been unable to articulate
      why he had been detained and that photographs that he relied upon in
      support of his claim, did not assist the Tribunal in determining
      whether the appellant had been detained.  The FtT Judge found that the
      appellant had given inconsistent evidence regarding his encounters
      with the authorities and when he had last had problems in Egypt. The
      FtT Judge also noted that despite claiming that he had been detained
      for 11 months, in his screening interview completed on 11th April 2018
      when the appellant arrived in the UK, in answer to the question
      (Q.5.4) "have you ever been detained, either in the UK or any other
      country for any reason?", the appellant had replied "No".


  12. The assessment of risk upon return and credibility is always a highly
      fact sensitive task. It is well established that the ingredients of
      the story, and the story as a whole, have to be considered by
      reference to the evidence available to the Tribunal. In any assessment
      of the account relied upon by an appellant, factors such as
      consistency with what the appellant has said before, and with other
      evidence, including any documents relied upon are relevant. On a
      proper reading of paragraphs [18] to [25] of the decision, the Judge
      had regard to the factors relevant to his assessment of the claim.  On
      appeal, the Upper Tribunal should not overturn a judgment at first
      instance, unless it really cannot understand the original Judge's
      thought process when he or she was making material findings.


  13. In my judgement, a careful reading of the consideration by the Judge
      demonstrates that he had clearly in mind, the various facets to the
      appellant's claim. It was for the Tribunal to make its own findings on
      whether, and to what extent, the appellant's account is credible. In
      my judgement the FtT Judge carefully weighed up the evidence and
      reached a conclusion that was neither irrational nor unreasonable in
      the Wednesbury sense.


  14.  The Judge did not reach findings that were wholly unsupported by the
      evidence.  The FtT Judge was required to consider the evidence as a
      whole.  The decision must be read as a whole and when properly read,
      in my judgement, it was open to the Judge to conclude that the
      appellant is not at risk upon return.  The decision is one that was
      open to the Judge, and cannot be said to be perverse, irrational or
      unreasonable. It follows that in my judgment, the decision of FtT
      Judge Anthony is not infected by a material error of law and I dismiss
      the appeal.


Notice of Decision


  15. The appellant's appeal against the decision of FtT Judge Anthony is
      dismissed and the decision of the FtT Judge is to stand.


  16. I continue the anonymity direction previously made.


      Signed                                 Date         21st June 2019

      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia







TO THE RESPONDENT


FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal but in any event, as no fee  is  payable,  there
can be no fee award.


Signed                                                21st June 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia
