
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10090/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice Centre      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4th April 2019                             |On 30th April 2019            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                  KAYA [S]
                       (ANONYMITY direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms L Mensah (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates (Senior HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge A J Parker, promulgated on 29th October 2018, following a hearing
    at Manchester on 3rd October 2018.  In  the  determination,  the  judge
    dismissed  the  appeal  of  the  Appellant,  whereupon  the   Appellant
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Turkey, and was born on [~] 1986.
     He  appealed  against  the  decision  of  the  Respondent  dated  22nd
    September 2017, refusing his claim  for  asylum  and  for  humanitarian
    protection, pursuant to paragraph 339C of HC 395.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The essence of the  Appellant's  claim  is  that  he  has  objected  to
    military service in  Turkey,  on  the  basis  that  he  is  of  Kurdish
    ethnicity, and is against killing, and believes that if he is  returned
    back to Turkey he will be subjected to military conscription, whereupon
    he will be deployed in areas where he will have  to  fire  upon  fellow
    Kurdish people.  The Appellant had earlier been a  student  whereby  he
    was not required to undergo military service.  Now that he was not,  he
    would be compelled to do so.

Submissions

 4. At the hearing before me on 4th April 2019, there was agreement between
    Ms Mensah, appearing as Counsel for the  Appellant,  and  Mr  Bates,  a
    Senior Home Office Presenting Officer, that the judge had erred in  law
    in a number of respects.  He had failed to have regard to the  relevant
    country guidance case of IA and Others (Risk - Guidelines - Separatist)
    Turkey CG [2003] UKIAT 00034, given that the Appellant had  claimed  to
    have been a PKK sympathiser, and had previously been arrested, and been
    detained.  Second, the judge had failed to  provide  adequate  reasons.
    Third, he had failed to make relevant findings of  fact.   Fourth,  the
    judge's approach to the expert evidence was wrong.  In this respect, it
    was well established that the judge has to apply a "holistic"  approach
    to all the evidence.  This requires the judge to give good reasons  why
    he rejects expert opinion (see KV (Sri Lanka) [2017] EWCA Civ 119).

 5. It is also  well  established  that  a  Tribunal  cannot  make  adverse
    findings of credibility first and then dismiss an expert  report  after
    that (see M (DRC) [2003] UKIAT 00054).  However, the judge in this case
    had  proceeded  on  precisely  this  basis  (at  paragraph  36  of  the
    determination).  In addition, the judge  had  made  findings  that  the
    Appellant was  in  business.   He  had  referred  to  testimonies  from
    customers of the barber's shop that the Appellant had until April 2017.
     That appeared to suggest  that  the  Appellant's  business  was  still
    operating.  This was not the case.

 6. There was incontrovertible evidence (see page E1  of  the  Respondent's
    bundle)  which  showed  that  all  those  testimonies  were  filed  and
    predated, the Home Office cover letter of 27th April 2017.  It was  not
    clear what weight the judge gave to this evidence.  The  funds  to  pay
    the fine to avoid military service in October 2018 was  something  that
    needed to be assessed, and there had been a failure by the judge to  do
    so.

 7. Mr Bates also added that the judge had not made a  finding  on  whether
    the Appellant had actually been  detained.   When  the  judge  observes
    that, as a low level supporter of the PKK, the Appellant may be at risk
    on return, he refers to the Appellant having been detained, but  it  is
    not clear whether this is drawn from the refusal letter, or is actually
    a finding of the judge himself.

 8. In the circumstances, given  that  there  was  agreement  between  both
    parties that the judge had erred in law, I set aside  the  decision  of
    the original judge.

Notice of Decision

 9. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law such that it falls to be set aside (see Section 12(1)
    of TCEA 2007).  I set aside the decision of the original judge.  I  re-
    make the decision as follows.  This appeal  is  remitted  back  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal to be determined by a judge other than  Judge  A  J
    Parker, pursuant to Practice Statement 7.2(b).

10. No anonymity direction is made.

11. This appeal is allowed.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 25th April 2019

