
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/10944/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard by Skype for Business          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 24 March 2021                     |On 01 April 2021                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                              UT JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                  ABDUL [D]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr Harvey, Advocate, instructed by Latta & Co,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwyncz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan, born on 1 October 1994.   In
    the FtT, Judge Handley dismissed his appeal by a  decision  promulgated
    on 2 April 2020.  He sought  permission  to  appeal  to  the  UT  on  3
    grounds:

         (i)      applying AS (safety of Kabul) CG [2018] UKUIT 00118,  when
         relevant parts of that authority had been set aside in AS [2019]  1
         WLR 5345, [2019] EWCA Civ 873;

         (ii)     failure to consider the case put in terms of  humanitarian
         protection and the "Qualification Directive"; and

         (iii)     failure  to  consider  the  case  put  in  terms  of  the
         immigration  rules,   paragraph   276ADE(vi),   "very   significant
         obstacles to return".

 2. On 6 May 2020, FtT Judge Andrew  granted  permission  on  ground  (iii)
    only.

 3. On 28 July 2020, UT Judge Pitt granted permission also on  grounds  (i)
    and (ii).

 4. Both parties filed written submissions.  The respondent  accepted  that
    it was an error of law to apply guidance as it stood in 2018, but  said
    that was immaterial because the UT eventually, in  AS  CG  [2020]  UKUT
    00130, reached "substantially the same conclusions".

 5. In oral submissions, Mr Harvey expanded upon the arguments that the FtT
    made 3 plain legal errors, and that all were material.

 6. Mr Diwyncz was in some  difficulty  in  arguing  to  the  contrary,  in
    particular on ground (i).

 7. The FtT  failed  to  base  its  decision  on  the  law,  guidance,  and
    background evidence as it stood.  The difficulty  is  not  overcome  by
    reference to the guidance as later  formulated.   Mr  Harvey  specified
    amendments and additions to the guidance, at headnotes  (iv)  and  (v),
    bearing on the appellant's particular circumstances.  It cannot  safely
    be said that the outcome of this case must have been the same, whatever
    the state of the guidance from time to time.

 8. The FtT also erred by failing to decide on grounds (ii) and  (iii).   I
    am not entirely  persuaded  that  (ii),  without  more,  would  require
    setting aside.  On (iii), Mr Harvey drew support from MC [2016] CSOH 7,
    HAA [2017] CSOH 11, and SA (Afghanistan) [2019] EWCA  Civ  53  for  the
    proposition that separate treatment was required.

 9. It is unnecessary to resolve grounds (ii) and (iii) any  further.   The
    appellant has shown errors in law, such that the decision cannot stand.

10. The appellant seeks to update the evidence  of  his  state  of  health.
    Parties agreed that further procedure should be in the FtT.

11. The decision of the FtT is set aside, and the case is  remitted  for  a
    fresh hearing, not before Judge Handley.

12. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.




      Hugh Macleman


    25 March 2021
    UT Judge Macleman



                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS

1.    A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must  make
a written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any such application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:

2.    Where the person who appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).

3.    Where the person making the application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).

4.    Where the person who appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal  is  outside
the United Kingdom at the  time  that  the  application  for  permission  to
appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if  the
notice of decision is sent electronically).

5.    A "working  day"  means  any  day  except  a  Saturday  or  a  Sunday,
Christmas Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.

6.    The date when  the  decision  is  "sent'  is  that  appearing  on  the
covering letter or covering email.

