
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10227/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 28 October 2019                   |On 28 November 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                     OA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Khan, instructed by Bankfield Heath, solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. By a decision promulgated on 2 March 2019, I set aside the decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal. My reasons were as follows:

         "1.  The appellant, OA,  born  in  1981  is  a  female  citizen  of
         Nigeria.  By a decision promulgated 20 July  2018,  the  First-tier
         Tribunal (Judge O'Hanlon) allowed the  appellant's  appeal  against
         the decision of the respondent dated 28 September 2017 refusing her
         international protection.  The Secretary of State now appeals, with
         permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

         2.   I shall deal first with the scope of the grant of  permission.
         In addition to granting permission  on  those  grounds  which  were
         pleaded, Judge Scott-Baker has granted permission also  in  respect
         of what she considered to be a "Robinson" obvious point:

         Whilst not raised in the grounds the judge had allowed  the  appeal
         on asylum grounds but had found at [16] that [the appellant's] fear
         of the loan sharks was a "non-Convention reason" and arguably, on a
         Robinson obvious point, in allowing the appeal  on  asylum  grounds
         with these findings there is an arguable error of law.

         3.   A more thorough reading of the decision  would  have  revealed
         that the judge concluded that the appellant was at risk in  Nigeria
         from state (as opposed to non-state) agents, in that the loan shark
         she claimed to fear had power over General Intelligence  Department
         (GID) and Special Anti-Robbery Squad (SARS)  which  are  Government
         agencies in Nigeria.  It was claimed that the loan shark  would  be
         able to use  those  state  agencies  to  persecute  the  appellant.
         Secondly, it is unclear whether Judge Scott-Baker has had regard to
         the principles articulated in the case of AZ [2018] UKUT 245  (IAC)
         when granting permission on a matter which had not been pleaded.

         4.   I find that the first ground of  appeal  has  no  merit.   The
         judge had considered the evidence and accepted documentary evidence
         from the appellant's solicitor.   The  grounds  complain  that  the
         solicitor was not available  for  cross-examination  therefore  the
         evidence was untested.  The  apportionment  of  weight  to  various
         items of evidence was a matter for the judge.  There was no  reason
         why the judge should not apportion weight to a piece of documentary
         evidence which  had  not  been  tested  by  cross-examination.   As
         regards the  fact  that  the  judge  had  not  considered  how  the
         appellant could afford to get to the United Kingdom having been  in
         debt in Nigeria, it is not apparent  that  this  issue  was  raised
         before the judge at the hearing.  It is not open for  either  party
         to raise matters following a hearing  which  could  have  been  and
         should have been raised at the time of the hearing.

         5.   The second ground of appeal has more merit.  This concerns the
         question of internal relocation.   The  judge  considered  internal
         flight at [54].  The Secretary  of  State  had  proposed  that  the
         appellant could relocate to a different  part  of  Nigeria  outside
         Lagos.  However, the judge wrote that "the loan shark was  able  to
         exercise such influence over the GID  and  SARS  that  they  became
         involved in his business with the appellant.   I  find  that  there
         would still be a risk to  the  appellant  from  those  rogue  state
         agents in the event that the appellant were returned  to  Nigeria."
         Mrs Pettersen, who appeared for the Secretary of  State,  submitted
         that the judge's finding was not tenable.  The judge had failed  to
         explain how, several  years  after  the  event,  the  "rogue  state
         agents" would be aware that the appellant had returned  to  Nigeria
         and why the loan sharks under whose influence the judge found  they
         operated would still wish to persecute the appellant.

         6.   I agree that  the  judge's  analysis  of  internal  flight  is
         inadequate.  In addition to the points raised by Mrs  Pettersen,  I
         am concerned that the judge may have  applied  the  wrong  test  as
         regards internal flight.  At [54], the judge writes  that,  "having
         considered all the circumstances of the appellant in  the  round  I
         find it would be unreasonable to expect the appellant to return  to
         a different part of Nigeria that as part of the threat  to  her  is
         from police/Government Authorities, she would not be able to  avail
         herself of the protection of the state."  It is one thing to make a
         finding that a particular individual or loan shark has control over
         "rogue" elements in Government agencies but quite another  to  find
         that internal  flight  within  Nigeria  is  not  available  to  the
         appellant because of a threat from "police/Government Authorities."
          Further, the test for internal flight is that of undue  harshness,
         not reasonableness.

         7.   For the reasons I  have  given  above,  I  see  no  reason  to
         interfere with the judge's acceptance of  the  credibility  of  the
         appellant's account of past events.  I find that it was  also  open
         to the  judge  to  find  that  the  loan  shark  had  control  over
         particular  "rogue"  Government  officials.   I  am,  however,  not
         satisfied that it was open to the judge to find that the  appellant
         has a real risk of being detected upon return to Nigeria and whilst
         living anywhere within that country by Government agencies  or  the
         police or that those agencies would seek to harm the appellant.   I
         set aside the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal.   The  judge's
         finding that the appellant has a well-founded fear of ill-treatment
         at the hands of her husband are preserved.   The  judge's  findings
         that loan sharks who two years ago wished to cause  her  harm  were
         able to influence rogue elements in the  Government  agencies,  the
         GID and the SARS are preserved.  Otherwise, the judge's findings of
         fact are set aside.  The Upper Tribunal will  remake  the  decision
         following a resumed hearing on a date  to  be  fixed  at  Bradford.
         Both parties may adduce fresh evidence provided that copies of  any
         documents upon which they may respectively intend to rely are filed
         at the Upper Tribunal and served on the other party no  later  than
         ten days prior to the resumed hearing.

         Notice of Decision

         8.   The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  is  set  aside.   The
         Upper Tribunal  shall  remake  the  decision  following  a  resumed
         hearing before Upper Tribunal Judge Lane at Bradford on a  date  to
         be fixed."

 2. The burden of proof is on the appellant. In order  to  succeed  in  her
    appeal, the appellant must prove that there are substantial grounds for
    believing that to be a real risk that she would suffer ill treatment or
    persecution upon return to Nigeria. This appeal in the  Upper  Tribunal
    proceeded only on the basis that the Secretary of State  contends  that
    would not be unduly harsh for the appellant to relocate within Nigeria.
    In the light of the findings of the First-tier Tribunal  which  I  have
    preserved, the appellant does face a real risk of ill-treatment  should
    she return to her home area of Nigeria.

 3. The appellant gave  evidence  in  Yoruba  with  the  assistance  of  an
    interpreter. She was cross-examined by Mr Diwnycz who appeared for  the
    Secretary of State. I found her evidence to be credible and consistent.
    Nothing which she said in  response  to  cross-examination  led  me  to
    consider that she was seeking to provide the Tribunal with anything but
    a true and accurate account of past events; indeed, Mr Diwnycz did  not
    submit otherwise. I treated the  appellant  as  a  vulnerable  witness.
    During her evidence in chief, she broke down and there  was  a  lengthy
    break in the proceedings whilst she recovered  herself.  I  accept  the
    diagnosis which has been provided for her of  PTSD  and  depression.  I
    accept also that the appellant had  a  hysterectomy  operation  in  May
    2019. I have taken the appellant's medical condition  into  account  in
    making my assessment of her evidence.

 4. I accept that the appellant has continued to  receive  threatening  and
    abusive messages on WhatsApp and Facebook. These messages relate to  or
    emanate from those who have in the past threatened the  appellant  with
    ill-treatment. I accept, as the appellant claims, that interest in  her
    in Nigeria continues notwithstanding the lapse of time since  she  left
    that country. I accept also that the  appellant's  bank  accounts  have
    been blocked and that, without possession of her passport,  she  cannot
    change her name in Nigeria. Being unable to change her name or identity
    will make it easier for those who  seek  to  harm  her  to  locate  her
    anywhere in Nigeria through an extensive network of contacts. I  accept
    also that the appellant's father has died and that she has lost contact
    with her mother. If returned Nigeria, I find that she would return as a
    single  woman  with  two  small  children  with  no  obvious  means  of
    supporting her family. Beyond that, she will, as I accept her lawyer in
    Nigeria continues to insist, still be at risk from those  who  have  in
    the past threatened her. Having considered the evidence as a  totality,
    I accept the appellant's assertion that those who  seek  to  offer  her
    harm in Nigeria can, through their extensive contacts and by reason  of
    the red alerts placed on her bank accounts locate  her  within  Nigeria
    should she flee from her home area.

 5.  I  have  to   consider   whether   the   appellant,   possessing   the
    characteristics which I have identified in my findings of  fact  above,
    faces a real risk of ill-treatment contrary  to  Article  3  ECHR  upon
    return to any part of  Nigeria  to  which  she  and  her  children  may
    relocate. I have concluded that she does face a Nigeria-wide  risk.  In
    addition, her mental and physical ill health, together  the  fact  that
    she would be a single woman with children,  will  render  it  virtually
    impossible for her  to  find  employment,  take  steps  to  avoid  ill-
    treatment at the hands of those who seek to harm her and to sustain and
    accommodate her family. I conclude that it would be  unduly  harsh  for
    the appellant relocate outside her home area of  Nigeria.  Accordingly,
    her appeal is allowed.

    Notice of Decision

    The appellant's appeal against the decision of the Secretary  of  State
    to refuse her international protection  is  allowed  and  human  rights
    grounds (Article 3 ECHR)


Signed                              Date21 November 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Lane


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.
