
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10358/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 2 August 2017                       |On 29 November 2017                  |
|                                       |                                     |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE

                                   Between

                                Manmon Singh
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Brown, instructed by Legal Justice Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms R Pettersen, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, Manmon Singh, a male citizen of Afghanistan of the  Sikh
    religion, was born on 1 January 1966.  He arrived in the United Kingdom
    in March 2016 and claimed asylum.  By a  decision  dated  19  September
    2016, the respondent refused  the  appellant's  claim.   The  appellant
    appealed to the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Hillis) which, in a decision
    promulgated on 27 February 2017, dismissed the appeal.   The  appellant
    now appeals, with permission to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. There are three grounds of appeal.  First, the appellant challenges the
    judge's treatment of the expert evidence of Dr Giustozzi.   Central  to
    the appellant's account of events in Afghanistan was his claim that  is
    that an attempt had been made to abduct his 16 year old daughter.   The
    appellant claims to have kept  a  stall  selling  food.   His  daughter
    travelled on her own to the stall  to  buy  pakoras.   At  [34],  Judge
    Hillis  found  that  the  appellant's  account  was  "both  vague   and
    inconsistent with the expert report and  background  material."   Judge
    Hillis did not consider it likely that a 16 year old Sikh  woman  would
    travel out of the family home on her own  in  Afghanistan.   The  judge
    also criticised the appellant's account  whereby  he  claimed  to  have
    removed his daughter from the custody of men who sought to convert  her
    to Islam and to marry her.  The judge  noted  that  the  appellant  had
    given "no specific account of how he managed to  'prise'  his  daughter
    away from the men."  He noted that the account was  also  "inconsistent
    with his own claim [that] the Muslim majority  [take]  what  they  want
    from the  Sikhs  and  beating  them  with  impunity  and  risk  of  any
    repercussions (sic)".  The appellant asserts that the  judge  erred  by
    finding the account of the appellant to be inconsistent with the expert
    evidence.   Dr  Giustozzi  had  found  the  appellant's  claim  to   be
    "plausible".  Further, the appellant's daughter was a minor and  not  a
    "woman".

 3. I find that the judge's finding is sound.  It is  true  the  judge  has
    stated that the appellant's account was inconsistent  with  the  expert
    report but I observe also that the judge has said that the  appellant's
    account was not consistent with the  background  material  relating  to
    Afghanistan which does indicate that women are not seen  out  of  doors
    without the accompaniment of other women or a male  family  member.   I
    consider the expert report also  supports  the  judge's  findings.   Dr
    Giustozzi at [43] states that it is  "very  rare  for  Hindu  and  Sikh
    families to take their women out and particularly without the cover  of
    a burka or at least in central Kabul covering the hair and the rest  of
    the body except for the face."  The expert adds, "I have never  seen  a
    recognisable Hindu or Sikh woman" and goes on to say that "it would  be
    unthinkable today for a Hindu or Sikh man to let a female member of his
    family travel outside the family home alone."  The distinction made  in
    the grounds between a Sikh "woman" and a "girl" (i.e. a 16 year old) is
    not borne out by the expert's evidence.  Indeed, it is only older  Sikh
    women who the expert considers likely  to  travel  outside  the  family
    home.  The expert refers to "female members" of  a  Sikh's  family  but
    makes no distinction as between young and mature  women.   The  grounds
    also fail to address the judge's finding that the  appellant's  account
    was inconsistent with  the  appellant's  own  claim  that  "the  Muslim
    majority" take "what they want from Sikhs and  do  so  with  impunity".
    The judge's findings at [34] were open to him on the  evidence  and  he
    has supported his finding with adequate reasoning.

 4.  Secondly,  the  appellant  claimed  that,  following   the   attempted
    abduction, he reported the matter  to  the  police  in  Jalalabad.   He
    claimed that the police did not assist him.  The judge  at  [29]  found
    that the police did assist so far as they were able but could not  take
    the case any  further  because  of  lack  of  detail  provided  by  the
    appellant.  The  country  guidance  of  TG  and  Others  (Afghan  Sikhs
    persecuted) CG [2015] UKUT 595 claimed by the appellant to support  his
    assertion that the police will not assist Sikhs.

 5. I find the ground has no merit.  At [29], the judge  records  that  the
    appellant went twice to the police to "check what  was  being  done  in
    respect of the attempted abduction."  Not unreasonably, given the  lack
    of detail which the appellant was able  to  provide  them,  the  police
    "stated that they could not find the  people  [the  appellant]  claimed
    were responsible."  The appellant's daughter and the appellant did  not
    know or could not identify the men who  had  attempted  the  abduction.
    The judge also noted that the police had "patrolled the area with  some
    positive effect as the thieves ran off when they arrived."   I  do  not
    find Judge Hillis' observations and  findings  are  at  odds  with  the
    country guidance.

 6. Thirdly, the appellant asserts that the  judge  failed  to  assess  the
    position of the appellant's daughter who was 16 years old at  the  date
    of the hearing in the First-tier Tribunal and will  have  been  legally
    required to attend school.  The Tribunal in TG  found  that  access  to
    appropriate education for  children  in  the  light  of  discrimination
    against Sikh communities  indicated  that  there  was  "a  shortage  of
    adequate education facilities for them."  [119(iii)(d)].  The appellant
    asserts  the  judge  failed  properly  to   consider   the   daughter's
    difficulties  on  return  to  Afghanistan  in   accessing   appropriate
    education.  I disagree.  Access to  education  of  Sikh  girls  may  be
    problematic but the country guidance indicates there  is  "shortage  of
    adequate education facilities"; there is no evidence to suggest that no
    facilities whatever exist "no evidence to show  that  such  educational
    discrimination as the child might face is so serious or  widespread  in
    Afghanistan to justify granting her  asylum  together  with  the  other
    members of her family."  It would have been helpful if  the  judge  had
    addressed the point more thoroughly in his decision but his failure  to
    do so does not, in my opinion, vitiate that decision.

 7. In the circumstances and for the reasons which I have given above,  the
    appeal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

This appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.





Signed                              Date 30 October 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Lane
TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.






Signed                              Date 30 October 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Lane

