
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10988/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|on 10 January 2019                            |on 28 January 2019            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHAERF


                                   Between

                                     F S
                       (anonymity direction continued)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 Secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Bonavero of Counsel instructed by Howe & Co,
solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms S Cunha of the Specialist Appeals Team


                             Anonymity Direction

Unless and until a tribunal or court  directs  otherwise  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies to, amongst others, both the Appellant and the Respondent.   Failure
to comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings


                      ERROR OF LAW DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

 1. The Appellant is a Turk born in 1989: the Respondent did not accept his
    claimed Kurdish ethnicity.    He has completed  his  military  service.
    He has an older sister with leave to remain in the  United  Kingdom  by
    reason of her marriage.  He came to the United  Kingdom  in  the  early
    autumn of 2017 to visit her and returned to Turkey.

 2. On 14 November 2017 he arrived and claimed  asylum  because  he  feared
    persecution by the Turkish authorities on account of his membership  of
    the HDP, a Kurdish party and his Kurdish ethnicity.

The Respondent's decision

 3. On 4 September 2018, the Respondent refused the Appellant's application
    for international surrogate protection.  His claims to be  Kurdish  and
    to have been detained and tortured by the authorities on three separate
    occasions were not believed.  The Respondent relied on  the  background
    information contained in the US Department of State Report published in
    2015  which  noted  a  marked  decrease  in  the  official  censure  or
    harassment of Kurds and the Respondent's own  Country  Information  and
    Guidance that although Kurdish people may  be  the  most  discriminated
    ethnic minority in Turkey they are able fully to integrate into society
    in all spheres of social and political life and  that  a  great  number
    have successfully integrated  into  Turkish  society  and  adopted  the
    values and social organisation of the Republic: see paragraphs 61-63 of
    the Respondent's reasons for refusal letter of 4 September 2018.

 4. The Respondent considered the expert medical evidence presented by  the
    Appellant added little weight to his claim, partly because  the  expert
    had not found any of the Appellant's scars  were  "diagnostic  of"  the
    causes of them  claimed  by  the  Appellant  and  the  expert  had  not
    expressly ruled out the possibility of self-harm.

Proceedings in the First-tier Tribunal

 5. The Appellant appealed and by a decision promulgated on 31 October 2018
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Devittie found him not credible in all
    aspects of his claim other than his ethnicity and that he would not  be
    at risk on return to Turkey.  He dismissed the appeal.

 6. On 27 November 2018 Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Grant-Hutchison
    granted permission to appeal because it  was  arguable  the  Judge  had
    erred in the eight areas identified in the grant of permission.

The Upper Tribunal Proceedings

 7. The Respondent did not file a response pursuant to Procedure  Rule  24.
    The Appellant attended the hearing with his older sister.  Mr  Bonavero
    informed me the Appellant had very  little  English.   I  attempted  to
    explain to him the purpose of the  hearing  but  it  was  evident  that
    without an interpreter he could not understand.  He was able to confirm
    his current address.  His sister also had little English.

Submissions for the Appellant

8.   Mr Bonavero opened by  referring  to  paragraph  8(2)  of  the  Judge's
    decision.  The quotation from the expert medical  evidence  before  the
    Judge was inaccurate in two respects.  The first was that the quotation
    stated "the scars on the forehead are particular  of  blunt  instrument
    injuries" and the second was that it stated "this is consistent with  a
    cigarette burn".  Mr Bonavero accepted that this matter  had  not  been
    identified in the grounds for appeal.  He had raised it with  Ms  Cunha
    for the Respondent who had,  and  in  my  opinion  quite  properly,  no
    objection to it being raised at the hearing.

9.   The report to be found as item G of the  Respondent's  bundle  in  fact
    stated at paragraph 36 that the scars  were  judged  typical  of  blunt
    instrument injuries to that area" and at paragraph 37 the scar  on  the
    back of the left wrist was judged  "to  be  highly  consistent  with  a
    cigarette burn".  The emphases appear in the original report.

10.  Mr Bonavero submitted that these two mis-quotations were  material  and
    had a serious impact on the Judge's consideration  of  the  Appellant's
    scarring and the medical evidence.  Further, in view of the  references
    to "typical" and "highly consistent" in the medical evidence, the Judge
    had erred in paragraph 10 of his decision by failing to  give  adequate
    reasons to reject the medical evidence.  Mr  Bonavero also subsequently
    in further submissions argued that  a  consideration  of  paragraph  10
    showed the Judge had found certain aspects of the Appellant's  evidence
    to be so unsatisfactory as to support an extensive adverse  credibility
    finding.  Having made that finding, he had then used it to  reject  the
    medical evidence, falling into the error identified in Mibanga  v  SSHD
    [2005] EWCA Civ.367 of not assessing the evidence  holistically  before
    making a credibility finding.

11.  He noted that at paragraph 7 the  Judge  had  accepted  the  background
    evidence was not inconsistent  with  the  Appellant's  account  and  at
    paragraph 10 that the medical evidence and  Turkish  hospital  receipts
    produced by the Appellant supported his claims to  have  been  detained
    and tortured.  At paragraph 9(3) the Judge  had  accepted  that  "there
    have been persons arrested simply on account of being supporters of the
    HDP".

12.  At paragraph 9(2) the Judge had stated that "the circumstances  leading
    to his third detention that caused him to use the Visa to leave  Turkey
    does not suggest that he had done anything that would have brought  him
    to the attention of the authorities" but  the  Judge  had  gone  on  to
    record the Appellant's  evidence  that  immediately  before  the  third
    detention the Appellant  had  attended  a  meeting  at  the  local  HDP
    headquarters and that a friend had dropped him off at his  house  which
    the authorities raided shortly afterwards, that same night.   This  was
    precisely the type of situation which the Judge  had  accepted  in  his
    following paragraph 9(3) might happen.

13.  Further, in reaching his adverse credibility findings  on  this  aspect
    of the Appellant's account, the Judge  had  noted  that  there  was  no
    reference to and no specific allegations had been put to the  Appellant
    about what had become of the friend who took him home or other  friends
    with whom he associated  in  his  political  activity.   There  was  no
    indication the Appellant had actually been asked  about  such  matters.
    In any event, Mr Bonavero queried whether what  may  or  may  not  have
    happened to the Appellant's friend who  took  him  home  or  his  other
    friends, if any,  was  materially  relevant  to  the  Appellant's  core
    account.

14.  Addressing the Judge's comments at  paragraph  9(4)  he  submitted  the
    Judge had erred in drawing any inferences, and  in  particular  adverse
    inferences, from the Appellant's choice of  a  Turkish  rather  than  a
    Kurdish interpreter.   I  noted  that  when  screened  on  arrival  the
    Appellant had said his languages were first Kurdish  and  then  Turkish
    and  at  interview  reply  19  he  had  indicated  that  he  had  spent
    substantial periods of time in Istanbul.  He had of  course  served  in
    the military.  Mr Bonavero submitted that the chosen  language  for  an
    interpreter at a hearing was neither weight for nor reason to  make  an
    adverse credibility finding.

15.  The Judge had also used as grounds for his adverse credibility  finding
    the Appellant's inability to identify the year in  which  the  HDP  had
    been founded.  This was unreasonable having  regard  to  the  frequency
    with which the name of the principal Kurdish party in Turkish  politics
    re-formed with a changed name following  the  authorities'  pattern  of
    outlawing the party from time to time.

16.  These errors whether alone or in aggregate amounted to material  errors
    of law and the decision should be set aside.

Submissions for the Respondent

17.  Ms Cunha  submitted  the  Judge's  finding  at  paragraph  7  that  the
    background evidence was not inconsistent with the  Appellant's  account
    did not mean the Appellant's account was credible.

18.  The Appellant claimed to have come from  a  politically  active  family
    which spoke Kurdish recorded at paragraph  3(4)  of  the  decision  and
    paragraph 7 of his witness statement.  If so, the Judge was entitled to
    take this into account in assessing credibility in  the  light  of  the
    Appellant's ignorance of the foundation date of the HDP and his  choice
    to give evidence in Turkish rather than Kurdish.  He was also  entitled
    to consider notable that having  claimed  to  have  been  detained  and
    tortured on two previous  occasions  by  the  Turkish  authorities  the
    Appellant also claimed that he experienced no difficulties on return to
    Turkey in 2017.

19.  She referred to the medical report and submitted that the  substitution
    of "typical" with "particular" was a typographical,  voice  recognition
    program or proof-reading error and no weight should be attached to  it.
    Whether the Appellant's scars were "consistent" or "highly  consistent"
    with the claimed cause was of little importance because the  Judge  had
    found the Appellant had not  been  detained  and  tortured  as  he  had
    claimed.

20.  The Judge had  looked  at  the  evidence  holistically,  addressed  the
    medical  evidence  and  made  several  reasoned   adverse   credibility
    findings.  At paragraph 13 he  had  dealt  with  the  Appellant's  'sur
    place' claim.  His conclusions were sound and the  decision  should  be
    upheld.

Response for the Appellant

21.  Mr Bonavero  responded  that  the  Judge's  treatment  of  the  medical
    evidence fell into the error identified in  Mibanga  and  additionally,
    the errors in the quotation from the medical report at  paragraph  8(2)
    compounded the error.

22.  The Respondent had made no submissions  in  relation  to  the  apparent
    inconsistency in the decision between, on the one hand, paragraphs 9(2)
    and (3) about the Appellant attending the local  HDP  headquarters  and
    immediately thereafter being arrested with, on the other, the  accepted
    background evidence that being a supporter of the HDP was  on  occasion
    sufficient for the authorities to detain a person.   In  addition,  the
    Judge's treatment in respect of the Appellant's  friend  who  took  him
    home and his associates at the end of these two sub- paragraphs was, in
    the absence of evidence that any specific questions on  the  point  had
    been put to the Appellant, speculative.

Error of Law Consideration

23.  At the end of the hearing I stated that I found there  were  errors  of
    law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal for reasons which  would
    follow in this written decision and which I now give.

24.  At paragraph 9 of his decision, the  Judge  makes  no  direct  specific
    adverse finding but raises issues which go more to the plausibility  of
    the Appellant's evidence than its credibility.  The references  to  the
    lack of evidence about what happened to the Appellant's friend who took
    him home on the night of his last detention before leaving  Turkey  and
    the fate of any political friends are, particularly in the  absence  of
    evidence that the points were put to  the  Appellant  at  the  hearing,
    speculative.   The  comments  about  the  choice  of  interpreter   are
    inappropriate and certainly the choice is not a matter which  could  go
    to the credibility of this Appellant.

25.  At paragraphs 10 and 13 the Judge makes extensive  adverse  credibility
    findings but  the  reasoning  to  support  them  is  either  absent  or
    inadequate.  The findings are principally based  on  several  suggested
    implausibilities and not inconsistencies in the  evidence.   The  Judge
    does not address how he reaches an adverse credibility finding when  he
    has  accepted  that  the  account  given  by  the  Appellant   is   not
    inconsistent with the background evidence.  He appears to have  reached
    his credibility finding on these matters  and  then  has  given  little
    weight to the medical evidence which whether inadvertently or  not  has
    been mis-quoted. It would be wrong in the circumstances  to  find  that
    this could not have had  an  adverse  impact  on  the  Judge's  thought
    processes which led him to his conclusions. In addition, with reference
    to paragraph 10 of the decision in particular, the Judge has not looked
    at all the evidence in the round before reaching his conclusions.

26.  For these reasons, the decision contains material errors of law and  is
    unsafe.  It is set aside with no findings of fact preserved.

27.  Having regard to the nature and extent of the fact-finding  which  will
    be required at any re-hearing of the  appeal,  I  conclude  the  appeal
    should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for hearing afresh.

Anonymity

28.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  decision  contains  an  anonymity  direction
    although it gives no reason why it is proportionate  to  the  need  for
    transparency in the Tribunal's administration of justice and refers  to
    the 2005 Procedure Rules and not Rule 13 of the 2014  Procedure  Rules.
    There was no request to me for it to be  continued.   However,  in  the
    circumstances I propose to continue the anonymity direction  until  the
    next hearing when the Appellant should make  a  specific  and  reasoned
    request for it to be continued, failing which I see no reason  why  the
    direction should be continued.

SUMMARY OF DECISION

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains errors of law  is  set
    aside.

    The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  for  hearing  afresh
    with no findings preserved.

    Anonymity direction continued.

DIRECTION

There is no longer a copy of the Appellant's bundle  in  the  Tribunal  file
and the Appellant is directed to file  a  copy  not  later  than  two  weeks
before the next hearing date.


Signed/Official Crest                                          Date  15.  i.
2019


Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

