
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/10778/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House, London         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5 December 2019                   |On 11 December 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     S H
                         [Anonymity Direction Made]
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms J Hassan, Counsel instructed by Warnapala & Co

Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
An anonymity direction was  made  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge.  The
appeal involves a protection claim and a  vulnerable  person.   Accordingly,
it is appropriate to  make  an  anonymity  direction.  Unless  and  until  a
tribunal or court directs otherwise, the Appellant (as  he  was  before  the
First-tier Tribunal) is granted anonymity. No report  of  these  proceedings
shall directly or indirectly identify him or any member of his family.  This
direction applies both to the Appellant and to the Respondent.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    BACKGROUND

      1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of  State.   However,  there  is
         also a cross-appeal by [S H].  For ease of reference, therefore,  I
         refer to the parties as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.

      2. The Respondent appeals against the decision of First-tier  Tribunal
         Judge G A Black promulgated on 1 July 2019  ("the  Decision").   By
         the  Decision,  the  Judge  dismissed  the  Appellant's  appeal  on
         protection grounds but allowed it on human rights grounds  (Article
         8 ECHR) on the basis of the Appellant's private life formed in  the
         UK and his mental health problems.  I note at  this  juncture  that
         the Appellant is a foreign criminal and the Respondent's refusal of
         the Appellant's protection and human rights claims was made in  the
         context of a decision to deport the Appellant  to  Pakistan,  which
         decision  was  made  on  2  September  2014  and  confirmed  by   a
         deportation order signed on 29 September 2015.

      3. The Appellant is accepted  to  be  a  Shia  Muslim  from  Pakistan.
         However, he left Pakistan at the age of four years and lived in the
         UAE until he came to the UK on 29 December 2002 as a  student.   He
         had previously been issued with a multi-entry visit visa in  August
         2002 to February 2003 and was previously in the UK as a visitor  in
         September 2002.   The Appellant's student  visa  was  valid  to  16
         February 2004.  His in-time application to  extend  his  leave  was
         initially rejected but then granted on 24  March  2004  to  31  May
         2007.

      4. On 27 June 2006 the Appellant married [JS].  He divorced her on  26
         January 2007.  On 24 April 2007, he married [FL] and on 4 May  2007
         applied for leave to remain on the basis of  this  marriage.   That
         application was refused but his appeal against  that  decision  was
         allowed on 23 November 2007 and on 21 February 2008, he was granted
         leave to remain as a spouse and, later, on 16 June 2010 was granted
         indefinite leave to remain ("ILR").   [FL]  died  of  cancer  on  3
         September 2012.

      5. As previously noted, the Appellant was notified of his liability to
         deportation in September 2014. That arose from a conviction for the
         index offence of possession of a Class A drug (crack  cocaine)  and
         Class B drug with intent to supply.  The Appellant was sentenced to
         twenty-one months' imprisonment for each of those offences  to  run
         concurrently.  He was also convicted on that occasion for fraud and
         driving without insurance for which he was sentenced to six months'
         imprisonment for the fraud  to  run  concurrently  with  the  other
         offences and six  penalty  points  and  licence  endorsed  for  the
         driving offence.

      6. Between October 2006 and January 2009, the Appellant received three
         police cautions for possessing an offensive weapon, common  assault
         and possession of cannabis.  In 2009, 2012 and 2013, the  Appellant
         was also convicted of more minor driving and other  offences  (some
         relating to his drug addiction) but  no  custodial  sentences  were
         imposed.  The Magistrates Courts which dealt  with  these  offences
         did however impose a drug rehabilitation requirement with which the
         Appellant failed to comply. Following the index  offence,  in  2016
         and 2017, the Appellant was convicted of further  driving  offences
         but was not imprisoned for those offences.

      7. The  Appellant  raised  an  asylum  claim  in  September  2014  and
         following interviews, on 29 September 2015, a decision was made  to
         refuse the protection and human rights claims and the Appellant was
         served with the signed deportation order (which had the  effect  of
         bringing to an end his indefinite leave  to  remain).   The  claims
         were initially certified under section 94 Nationality,  Immigration
         and Asylum Act 2002 ("the 2002 Act").  A judicial review  challenge
         to certification failed.

      8. On 20 May 2016, the  Appellant  made  further  submissions  seeking
         protection on a different basis; he now claimed that he was at risk
         based on his sexuality.  Following interview, that claim  also  was
         rejected on  16  June  2016.   On  this  occasion,  the  claim  was
         certified under section 96 of the 2002 Act on  the  basis  that  it
         could and should have been made earlier.    However,  subsequently,
         both the 29 September 2015 and 16 June 2016 letters were  withdrawn
         and reconsidered leading to  the  Respondent's  decision  dated  11
         October 2017 which is that under appeal now.  It is worthy of  note
         that, in the covering letter to the decision, the  Respondent  made
         plain that the deportation order of 29 September 2015  remained  in
         place.

      9. I begin with the Appellant's cross-appeal.  The initial application
         for permission to appeal to the  First-tier  Tribunal  was  out  of
         time.  Permission to appeal  was  refused  by  First-tier  Tribunal
         Judge Povey on 14 August 2019 in the following  terms  (so  far  as
         relevant):

             "... 2.   The deadline for applying for permission  to  appeal
             was 15 July 2019.  The Appellant's application was received on
             5 August 2019, three weeks out of time.   No  explanation  was
             given for the delay.  The Appellant continues  to  be  legally
             represented.

             3.  In addition, the application for permission  disclosed  no
             arguable errors of law in the Judge's determination.   It  was
             alleged that the Judge had erred  in  her  assessment  of  the
             Appellant's evidence as  to  his  sexuality.   The  Judge  was
             entitled to have regard to the Appellant's  failure  to  raise
             his sexuality earlier, was entitled to reject the  Appellant's
             explanation for the delay (at [18])  and  afforded  the  delay
             appropriate weight.  She provided  adequate  reasons  for  her
             findings, which were open to her on the evidence  and  it  was
             not necessary for her to set out the Appellant's oral evidence
             with any greater detail within her determination.

             4.  The Appellant's delay is compounded by the fact  that  the
             Respondent's appeal is to be heard by the Upper Tribunal on 21
             August 2019.

             5.  For all those reasons, it  is  not  in  the  interests  of
             justice to extend time and the application for  permission  to
             appeal is refused."

     10. The Appellant renewed his application to the Upper Tribunal.  By  a
         decision dated 22 October 2019, Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek  did
         not  refuse  permission  on  the  basis  of  the  lateness  of  the
         application to the First-tier  Tribunal.   He  did  however  refuse
         permission on the merits in the following terms:

             "... Nevertheless the grounds have no arguable merit.   First-
             tier  Tribunal  Judge  G.A.  Black  ("the  FtJ")  undertook  a
             comprehensive assessment of the appellant's  claim  to  be  at
             risk on return to Pakistan on account of his sexuality.

             The grounds mischaracterise the FtJ's conclusions in terms  of
             the suggestion that she treated the  appellant's  evidence  of
             'reverting back' (per the grounds)  to  being  bisexual  (from
             being gay) as adverse to his  credibility.  The  FtJ  properly
             understood that the appellant's claim was that in detention he
             decided that he was gay, but then  reverted  to  his  previous
             account that he was bisexual.  At para  17  she  set  out  the
             appellant's  evidence  as  to  his  reasons  for  deciding  in
             detention that he was gay.  She did not find  this  aspect  of
             the  claim  to  be  credible.   She  gave  other  reasons  for
             concluding that his claim to be bisexual was not credible.

             There was no 'undue focus' on the lateness of the  appellant's
             reliance on his sexuality as a reason for his fear of  return.
             It was but one factor that the FtJ took into account.  She was
             entitled to attribute the weight that she did to that issue.

             The  FtJ  did  not  find  that  the   appellant's   being   in
             relationships  with  women  contradicted  his  claim   to   be
             bisexual.  She pointed out at para 19 that  the  evidence  was
             that up until 2016 the evidence was that he  was  married  and
             had relationships with women, and did not make  any  reference
             to having had any relationships with men.  That again, in  any
             event, was but one aspect of  the  FtJ's  adverse  credibility
             findings.

             There was sufficient reference in the FtJ's  decision  to  the
             significant features of the appellant's evidence, his  account
             having been referred to in various places in the course of the
             FtJ's findings.  There is no arguable legal error in  the  FtJ
             not having separately set out a  summary  of  the  appellant's
             oral evidence."

     11. Ms Hassan confirmed that  the  Appellant  has  not  challenged  the
         Decision dismissing the protection appeal  further.   She  did  not
         pursue any challenge before me.  I do not  therefore  need  to  say
         anything further about that.

     12. The Respondent challenged the Decision and the conclusion that  the
         appeal should be allowed on human rights grounds.  She  did  so  on
         the basis that the Judge had failed to have regard  to  certain  of
         the evidence about the Appellant's circumstances  in  Pakistan  and
         had failed to consider the Appellant's human rights  claim  through
         the lens of the Immigration Rules ("the Rules") and the  provisions
         of Section 117C of the 2002 Act ("Section  117C")  which  apply  in
         deportation cases.

     13. Permission to appeal  was  granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
         Saffer on 19 July 2019 in the following terms so far as relevant:

             "... 3.   It is arguable that the Judge  may  have  materially
             erred in her assessment of the risk to the Appellant through a
             deterioration of his mental health  if  returned  to  Pakistan
             given the jurisprudence, as it  is  arguable  that  inadequate
             reasons have been given for the findings of a lack of personal
             and medical support to ameliorate the consequences of a mental
             health relapse.  All grounds may be argued."

     14. The matter comes  before  me  to  determine  whether  the  Decision
         contains a material error of law and, if it does,  to  re-make  the
         decision or remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal to do so.

     15. For completeness, I note that, under cover of  a  letter  dated  27
         November 2019, the Appellant applies pursuant to rule 15(2A) of the
         Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 to adduce up-to-date
         evidence in relation to his mental health.  That cannot be relevant
         to whether there is any  error  in  the  Decision  but  may  become
         relevant if it becomes necessary to re-make the decision.

    DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS

     16. Mr Tarlow adopted the Respondent's pleaded grounds.  Those  are  in
         effect a challenge based on a failure to give adequate reasons  and
         a failure to have due regard to the public interest.

     17. I begin by setting out the relevant paragraphs of the  Decision  as
         follows:

             "21.      I now turn to the  issues  raised  on  human  rights
             grounds.  I conclude that the evidence failed to meet the high
             level or threshold required for Article  3  or  Article  8  on
             medical grounds and I rely on "N".   I  find  that  there  are
             compelling circumstances outside the rules such that Article 8
             private life is engaged by reason [of] length of residence and
             involvement with mental health services.  The  evidence  shows
             that since  2013  the  appellant  has  presented  with  mental
             illness  and  been  variously   diagnosed   with   depression,
             unspecified psychotic delusions, bi polar disorder and  mental
             and behavioural disorders because of drug misuse and substance
             abuse.  The records also show that on occasions  it  has  been
             concluded that he was malingering.   He  has  been  prescribed
             with anti-depressant medication and anti-psychotic medication.
              He is presently prescribed Olanzapine and Depakote.

             22. I rely on the independent expert report which provides  an
             overview  of  the  appellant's   conditions,   treatment   and
             diagnosis in 2018.  It was concluded that he suffered  from  a
             chronic, recurrent and long term mental illness.  He  had  not
             suffered from any major breakdown but had presented  for  help
             at times of crisis.  He had presented with  suicidal  ideation
             and there was evidence of suicide attempt and  self-harm.   In
             addition the appellant's condition was complicated by his drug
             misuse and  malingering.   At  the  time  of  the  report  the
             appellant was receiving primary care and had been offered  but
             refused treatment for drug misuse.  He was  found  to  have  a
             number of mental health risk factors as set out  in  paragraph
             49 of the report.

             23. I find that the appellant would suffer  a  crisis  in  his
             mental health  that  would  require  intervention  of  medical
             professionals and admission to hospital.  I am satisfied  that
             he would be able to access medication in Pakistan, but on  the
             evidence before me I find that he would be  rapidly  propelled
             into crisis on return to Pakistan such that he  would  not  be
             able to access the  required  medication.   I  find  that  the
             prospect of the move itself would be sufficient  to  create  a
             serious crisis and deterioration  in  his  mental  ill  health
             including  possible  attempted  suicide.   I  find  that   the
             appellant would have no one to go to for support  in  Pakistan
             for immediate help and there  are  few  psychiatric  hospitals
             providing treatment.

             24. I find that he has no family and no meaningful connections
             with Pakistan  and  as  a  vulnerable  person  he  would  need
             emotional, social and practical support together with reliable
             and accessible treatment for his mental health.  In addition I
             take into account that the appellant lived in the UK  lawfully
             for a significant period of time (16 years) and has not  lived
             in Pakistan since he was aged 4 years  old.   I  am  satisfied
             that he has established a strong private life  in  the  UK  by
             reason  of  his  long  lawful  residence  and  former   family
             relationships together with his  engagement  with  the  mental
             health services since 2012,  which  impacts  on  his  personal
             integrity.  His removal to Pakistan would amount to a  serious
             interference in his private life.

             25. Clearly there is a strong public interest  in  deportation
             for drug offending which is harmful in society and  for  those
             addicted to drugs.  Unfortunately  I  had  little  by  way  of
             information about the index offence and the sentencing remarks
             lacked any detail as to the amount or value of the drugs,  the
             appellant's role in the supply and  the  organisation  of  the
             supply.  The Judge found that the appellant  was  involved  in
             commercial supply and did not believe that it was for personal
             use.  The severity of the offence was marked by the  immediate
             custodial offence as opposed to a very lengthy sentence.   The
             appellant has previous convictions but has not offended  since
             2017.  He has only had one custodial sentence.  I am unable to
             find that he has addressed his drug habit given that a  recent
             conviction was for  driving  whilst  under  the  influence  of
             drugs.  His medical report dated March 2019 confirmed that  he
             was abstinent, but I have no more  recent  evidence.   I  find
             that he has taken some steps to rehabilitate and to tackle his
             drug abuse but there was no evidence to  show  that  this  has
             been sustained.  He has made some progress to the extent  that
             he is receiving  secondary  care  and  regularly  attends  for
             treatment and is compliant with his medication.

             26. I conclude that the  appellant  has  demonstrated  a  high
             level of vulnerability because of his mental  ill  health  and
             associated crises which is long term and continuing.  Together
             with his long lawful residence in the UK these factors  amount
             to very compelling circumstances such that the public interest
             is  outweighed  and  the  decision  to  deport  him   is   not
             proportionate.  In reaching my conclusion I  have  also  taken
             into account that the appellant may well suffer discrimination
             on return by reason of his religion and his mental ill  health
             as evidenced in the relevant CPINs.  It is my conclusion  that
             there would be very significant obstacles to  the  appellant's
             integration in Pakistan (Kamara v SSHD [2016]  EWCA  civ  813)
             and taken cumulatively with the other  factors,  I  allow  the
             appeal under Article 8 outside of the Rules."

     18. Ms Hassan began by observing that the Respondent had not challenged
         the Judge's underlying findings at [21] to [26]  of  the  Decision.
         That is not entirely correct since at [10] and [11] of the  grounds
         the Respondent says that the Judge has erred  by  failing  to  give
         adequate reasons for the finding that the Appellant would have  no-
         one to turn to in Pakistan as the  Respondent  points  to  numerous
         references in her decision  letter  about  family  members  in  the
         village of origin.  Ms Hassan accepted that the Appellant does have
         some distant family in his village of origin.  However, as she also
         pointed out, the Appellant has not lived in Pakistan since the  age
         of four years; he is now in his thirties.  His immediate family are
         in the UAE.  That finding is not challenged.  The Judge had  regard
         to the Appellant's time out of  Pakistan  and  that  his  immediate
         family were not living in that country (see [24] of the  Decision).
         That underpins her conclusion that the Appellant has "no meaningful
         connections" with his  country  of  origin.   The  time  which  the
         Appellant has spent out of Pakistan is  also  relevant  to  whether
         there would be "very  significant  obstacles"  to  the  Appellant's
         integration in Pakistan.  Since he left there as  a  child,  as  Ms
         Hassan pointed out, he would be unfamiliar with the way of life  in
         that country.  I accept the Appellant's submissions in response  to
         those criticisms.  The Judge was entitled to make those findings on
         the evidence.

     19. The Respondent's remaining grounds concern the Judge's approach  to
         the Article 8 issue and criticise her for failing to have regard to
         the Rules/ Section 117C and the public interest more generally.

     20. As I observed and I understood Ms Hassan to accept,  it  is  highly
         unusual to see a Judge's decision in a  deportation  case  fail  to
         make any mention of Section 117C or the exceptions which  apply  to
         an "under four years" case such as this.  There is not even a self-
         direction as to Section 117C.  Nonetheless, that failure  does  not
         automatically mean that there is a material error  of  law  in  the
         Decision provided that the Judge has approached the issue in a  way
         which is broadly consistent with the statutory framework.

     21. As Ms Hassan submitted, in this case the Appellant could  not  meet
         either of the two exceptions.  It is  not  suggested  that  he  has
         family in the UK; he has no partner or child here.   The  exception
         to be found in Section 117C (5) could not apply.   In  relation  to
         Section 117C (4), although the Appellant has been here for  sixteen
         years, largely lawfully, he could not satisfy  the  requirement  to
         have lived here lawfully for most of his  life,  due  to  his  age.
         Although I accept that there is no finding by the Judge  concerning
         social and cultural integration, that issue is likely to have  been
         finely balanced between the Appellant's reliance on medical support
         and his drugs misuse.  The Judge has made a finding at [26] of  the
         Decision that there are "very significant obstacles" to integration
         in Pakistan.  Whilst undoubtedly it would have been  preferable  if
         the Judge had made that finding at the start and not the end of the
         section in order to show that she  was  mindful  of  the  statutory
         framework, the Judge's references to that test as well  as  to  the
         length of lawful residence indicates that she was well aware of the
         factors which are relevant to the private life exception.

     22. As Ms Hassan submitted, and  I  accept,  the  Judge  has  proceeded
         directly therefore to considering  whether  there  are  "compelling
         circumstances outside  the  rules"  (see  [21]  of  the  Decision).
         Whilst I appreciate that, once again, it may have  been  preferable
         if the Judge had made some express reference to the statutory  test
         (which is whether there are "very compelling circumstances over and
         above" the exceptions), it is clear from that paragraph  read  with
         what follows that the Judge had regard  to  the  sorts  of  factors
         which are likely to tip the balance in this case.

     23. The Respondent contends that the Judge has failed to have regard to
         the strong public interest in the deportation of foreign criminals.
          I am unable to accept that submission.  The Judge  recognises  the
         strong public interest expressly at  [25]  of  the  Decision.   The
         level and extent of offending was clearly relevant  when  balancing
         the interference with the  Appellant's  private  life  against  the
         public interest.  The Judge had regard  to  relevant  risk  factors
         also at [25] of the Decision.  Nonetheless, she was entitled on the
         evidence also to have regard to the progress made by the  Appellant
         and lack of recent offending.

     24. As Ms Hassan pointed  out,  the  Supreme  Court  in  Hesham  Ali  v
         Secretary of State for the Home Department [2016] UKSC 60 advocated
         precisely the sort of balance sheet approach which  the  Judge  has
         utilised in this case (see [83] of the judgment in  the  speech  of
         Lord Thomas).

     25. I asked Ms Hassan to identify the factors which led  the  Judge  to
         reach the  finding  that  the  interference  with  the  Appellant's
         private life outweighs the public interest.  She  said  that  those
         were the length and lawfulness of the Appellant's residence in  the
         UK together with his engagement with medical help and  support  for
         his drugs and mental health problems ([24]).  In  relation  to  the
         position in Pakistan, although treatment  would  be  available  and
         therefore the health problems did not reach the high  threshold  to
         succeed on that account alone, the Judge found on the evidence that
         the Appellant would not be able to  access  treatment  due  to  his
         mental health problems and lack of necessary  support  in  Pakistan
         ([23]).  Furthermore, as a Shia Muslim, the  Appellant  would  face
         discrimination for that reason  and  also  because  of  his  mental
         health problems ([26]).  As Ms Hassan submitted and I  accept,  the
         Judge was bound to consider the case holistically.  The  conclusion
         is based on a combination of all the relevant factors.

     26. Although the Judge's findings do not follow the  approach  which  I
         would  expect  to  be  adopted  when  assessing  Article  8  in   a
         deportation case, when read as a whole, paragraphs [21] to [26]  of
         the Decision do provide reasons which are adequate to  justify  the
         Judge's conclusion that  deportation  of  the  Appellant  would  be
         disproportionate.

     27. For those reasons, I  am  satisfied  that  the  Decision  does  not
         contain a material error of law.

    CONCLUSION

     28. The Respondent has failed to make out her case  that  the  Decision
         contains a material  error  of  law.   Accordingly,  I  uphold  the
         Decision with the consequence that the appeal  remains  allowed  on
         human rights grounds (Article 8 ECHR) but dismissed  on  protection
         grounds.




DECISION

I am satisfied that the decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  G  A  Black
promulgated on 1 July 2019 does not disclose an  error  of  law.   I  uphold
that decision with the consequence that the appeal of  [SH]  is  allowed  on
human rights grounds (Article 8 ECHR) but remains  dismissed  on  protection
grounds.


[pic]
Signed:     Dated: 9 December 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Smith

