
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01551/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 28 July 2017                       |On 21 August 2017                     |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RAMSHAW

                                   Between

                                     y a
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:    Miss J Fisher, Counsel instructed by Barnes Harrild &
Dyer Solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr P Armstrong, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008


 1. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal
    or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any
    form of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  the
    original Appellant. This direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  all
    parties. Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise  to
    contempt of court proceedings.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan. He is minor with a  date  of
    birth assessed as 1 January  2002.   The  appellant  has  been  granted
    discretionary leave to remain in the United Kingdom as an unaccompanied
    minor asylum seeker.  He arrived in the  United  Kingdom  on  1  August
    2016, clandestinely, and claimed asylum the same day.  The  appellant's
    claim for asylum was based on a fear of persecution by the  Taliban  in
    Afghanistan.  The Secretary of State refused the asylum claim notifying
    the appellant of the  decision  on  30  January  2017.   The  appellant
    appealed against the respondent's decision refusing to recognise him as
    a refugee on the grounds of his imputed political opinion  and  on  the
    ground that he would be an unattended child.

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 3. In a decision promulgated on 20 April 2017 First-tier Tribunal Judge  A
    Monson dismissed the appellant's appeal.  The First-tier Tribunal found
    the appellant's account was not credible and therefore found  that  the
    appellant  did  not  qualify  for  recognition  as   a   refugee,   for
    humanitarian protection or  for  subsidiary  protection  under  Article
    15(c) of the Qualification Directive.  There was no substantive Article
    8 claim advanced.

 4. On 4 May 2017 the appellant applied  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for
    permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  against  the  decision  of
    Judge Monson.  On 16 May 2017 First-tier Tribunal Judge  Kelly  granted
    the appellant permission to appeal.  However, the grant  of  permission
    to appeal was limited only to the ground as set out in paragraph  8  of
    the grounds of  appeal.   Permission  to  appeal  was  refused  on  the
    remainder of the points set out in ground 1 and was refused in  respect
    of both grounds 2 and 3 in their entirety.

 5. On 21 June 2017 this matter was listed for  an  error  of  law  hearing
    before me.  At the commencement of that hearing I was handed a copy  of
    a fax that had been transmitted to the Tribunal earlier on the  morning
    of the hearing.  The appellant had submitted a renewed application  for
    permission to appeal against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal on
    the grounds that had been refused.

 6. I adjourned the case for a short period to enable me  to  consider  the
    renewed application for permission  to  appeal.   I  gave  my  decision
    orally indicating that full reasons in writing would follow.  I refused
    the renewed application for  permission  to  appeal.   My  decision  in
    writing was sent out to the parties on 30 June 2017.

 7. Subsequently the matter was listed for an error of law  hearing  on  28
    July 2017.





The Hearing before the Upper Tribunal

Preliminary issue


 8. At the  commencement  of  the  hearing  Miss  Fisher  raised  an  issue
    concerning information regarding the Red Cross.  She submitted that the
    Red Cross has confirmed in writing that are not  able  to  conduct  any
    tracing in Afghanistan at present.  It was not clear  to  me  how  that
    matter was relevant to the error of law hearing.  The letter  from  the
    Red Cross (of which I do not have a copy) was not before the First-tier
    Tribunal Judge.  When I asked Miss  Fisher  to  clarify  how  this  was
    relevant to the error of law she submitted that it is relevant  to  the
    protection element of the claim as the appellant would be returning  as
    an unattended child. She referred to paragraphs 39 and 40 of the First-
    tier Tribunal decision which sets  out  that  the  background  evidence
    demonstrates that unattached children returned to  Afghanistan  may  be
    exposed to risks of serious harm and that such risks will  have  to  be
    taken into account when addressing the question of whether return is in
    a child's best interests  when  determining  a  claim  to  humanitarian
    protection.

 9. When pressed to indicate where in the decision this would indicate that
    the First-tier Tribunal had erred in law, Miss Fisher  referred  me  to
    paragraph 59 of the decision and submitted that clearly the  First-tier
    Tribunal's  finding  at  paragraph  53  (that  the  appellant  had  not
    discharged the burden of providing  credible  evidence  of  efforts  to
    contact his family in Afghanistan with the assistance of the Red Cross)
    was quite clearly wrong.  As I indicated to Miss Fisher, in effect  she
    was attempting to re-open the grounds of appeal upon  which  permission
    to appeal had been refused. I do not consider,  despite  Miss  Fisher's
    valiant attempts, that she has made a sufficient connection between the
    letter from the Red Cross and any material error of  law.  Miss  Fisher
    advised that the Red Cross stopped conducting  tracing  in  Afghanistan
    from around February 2017. The appellant  has  been  in  the  UK  since
    August 2016. He made no efforts to contact the  Red  Cross  during  the
    period  when  they  were  undertaking  tracing.  Secondly,   and   more
    importantly the First-tier Tribunal did not accept that  the  appellant
    had lost contact with his family. The judge made  clear  findings  that
    there were no substantial grounds for believing  that  the  appellant's
    family have left the village where they lived  or  that  they  are  not
    contactable (paragraph 58).

The 'weapons training' ground of appeal

10. Permission to appeal had been granted purely on the argument set out in
    paragraph 8 of the grounds of appeal.  It is asserted that  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge wrongly suggested that the appellant had claimed to
    have been provided with weapons training.  It  is  submitted  that  the
    appellant's evidence, in keeping with the background material  referred
    to, was that his training  was  limited  to  running,  fetching  water,
    carrying and cleaning bullets.  At the hearing  Miss  Fisher  submitted
    that the judge has not given anxious scrutiny by  taking  into  account
    the age of the appellant when assessing credibility on this issue.  She
    submitted that there is no inconsistency in  the  appellant's  evidence
    when considered in light of the age of the appellant.  In the interview
    the appellant clarified what was said in his witness statement and made
    it clear that it was the older children who were given weapons training
    and he watched.   She  referred  to  paragraph  49  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision and  submitted  that  the  judge  made  an  adverse
    credibility finding against the appellant  because  of  inconsistencies
    which she submitted when read as a whole the witness statement and  the
    interview are not inconsistent.

11. Mr Armstrong submitted that there is no material error  in  the  First-
    tier Tribunal's decision.  The judge correctly refers to the  interview
    and the evidence of the answer of the appellant, i.e. that he was given
    training to fire weapons.  He  noted  that  there  is  nothing  in  the
    grounds to indicate that what was recorded in the witness statement  is
    incorrect.  Therefore, the judge's conclusion as to the inconsistencies
    and the finding that it was not credible that he would have embarked on
    weapons training at  such  a  young  age  are  correct.   Mr  Armstrong
    submitted that, in any event,  in  light  of  the  overall  credibility
    findings adverse to the appellant this is a minor element of that,  and
    even if it were an error of law it  would  not  amount  to  a  material
    error.

Discussion

12. The First-tier Tribunal Judge considered the evidence of the  appellant
    in some detail.  In respect of the narrow issue upon  which  permission
    to appeal has been granted the judge set out at paragraphs 49 and 50:

         "49. Moreover, the Appellant claims  that  the  process  of  forced
             recruitment began when he was as young as eight or  nine.   It
             is not  credible  that  he  would  have  embarked  on  weapons
             training at such a young age.

         50.  There are also internal  inconsistencies  in  the  Appellant's
             account.  In his witness statement, he said that he  had  been
             trained to fire weapons.  In his asylum interview he said that
             he had been given the training  to  fire  them,  but  had  not
             actually  been  'forced'  to  fire  a   round.    Of   greater
             materiality is the Appellant's  extreme  vagueness  about  the
             number of times when he had allegedly escaped from the Taliban
             base.  It is not in any  event  credible  that  the  Appellant
             would be repeatedly reassigned to sentry duty at the  base  if
             he was repeatedly using this as an occasion to escape."

13. The appellant in his witness  statement  dated  28  September  2016  at
    paragraph 6 stated:-

         "I was taken to the Joynaw base.  They started to show  me  how  to
         fire shots with a gun, they then made me wash their clothes, I  had
         to sweep their base and clean their bullets."

14. In the interview of 19 January 2016 the appellant was questioned  about
    the evidence in his witness statement and about  his  account  of  what
    happened in Afghanistan in respect of the Taliban.  At question  46  in
    answer to  a  question  about  when  his  problems  first  started  the
    appellant answered that he was made to fetch water, wash clothes, clean
    the bullets and that they also started to train him by  asking  him  to
    carry bullets from one place to another.  At question 69 he  was  asked
    "Earlier you said the Taliban started to train you,  can  you  tell  me
    what they trained you to do?"   In  answer  the  appellant  said  "They
    started by making us run and asking us  to  clean  the  bullets.   They
    started with these  little  things.   They  never  made  us  shoot  any
    rounds."  The next question, number 70, the  appellant  was  asked  "In
    your witness statement you said they showed you how to fire shots  with
    a gun".  In answer he said "Yes they did, they never made us fire, they
    just instructed us how to".

15. The appellant's representative had not sought to  clarify  anything  in
    his witness statement.  It is clear from paragraph  6  of  his  witness
    statement, as set out above, that the appellant's evidence was that the
    Taliban started to show him how to fire shots with a  gun.  The  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge was  entitled  to  conclude  that  the  appellant's
    evidence was that he had been provided with weapons training at a  very
    young age and that that was not  credible  and  that  the  evidence  in
    interview when he said he was never made to fire was inconsistent  with
    that evidence.   However, even if this were an error of  law  it  would
    not amount to  a  material  error  of  law.   This  was  not  the  most
    significant issue. The First-tier Tribunal Judge considered  a  greater
    materiality was the appellant's vagueness about the number of times  he
    had allegedly escaped from the Taliban base and that it was no credible
    that the appellant would be repeatedly reassigned to sentry duty if  he
    was repeatedly using that as an occasion to escape.

16. There was no material error of law in the Tribunal's findings.

Notice of Decision

17. I find that there was no  material  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision.  The appellant's appeal is dismissed.






Signed   P M Ramshaw                             Date19 August 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Ramshaw

