
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10904/2019 (v)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Cardiff Civil Justice Centre|Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|                                     |On 07 June 2021                      |
|Working Remotely by Skype            |                                     |
|On 20 May 2021                       |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                                     m r
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Lewis instructed by Latitude Law
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/2698) I  make  an  anonymity  order.   Unless  the  Upper
    Tribunal or court directs otherwise, no  report  of  these  proceedings
    shall directly or indirectly identify the  appellant.   This  direction
    applies to both the appellant and to the respondent and  a  failure  to
    comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Introduction

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh who was born  on  10  February
    1987.

 3. The appellant first came to the United Kingdom on 14 October 2006 as  a
    student after which the appellant was granted further leave on a number
    of occasions until 21 September 2015.  On  12  May  2015,  he  made  an
    application for further leave to remain based upon his family life  but
    this  was  rejected  on  25  August  2015.   He  then  made  a  further
    application under Art 8 of the ECHR on 2 September 2015 and that  again
    was rejected on 18 December 2015.  A final application for leave  based
    on his family life was made on 24 September  2015  and  refused  on  21
    December 2015.

 4. On 10 March 2016, the appellant claimed asylum.  That  application  was
    refused on 21 April 2016 and his subsequent appeal  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Frankish) was  dismissed  on  19  July  2017.   He  was
    subsequently refused  permission  to  appeal  by  both  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and the Upper Tribunal and became appeal rights  exhausted  on
    17 May 2018.

 5. On 14 February 2019, the appellant lodged further submissions but these
    were rejected on 28 March 2019.

 6. On 27 August 2019, the appellant  lodged  further  submissions.   In  a
    decision dated 23 October 2019, the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the
    appellant's claims for asylum, humanitarian protection  and  under  the
    European Convention on Human Rights.

 7. The  appellant  again  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   In  a
    determination sent on 15 January 2020,  Judge  Shergill  dismissed  the
    appellant's appeal on all grounds.  In particular, the  judge  made  an
    adverse credibility finding and rejected the appellant's claim to be at
    risk on  return  to  Bangladesh  because  of  his,  and  his  father's,
    political activities for the BNP.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 8. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal on  the
    basis that the judge had failed properly to consider an  expert  report
    prepared by Dr Inge Amundsen, a Senior Researcher based in Norway.

 9. Permission to appeal was initially refused by the  First-tier  Tribunal
    but, on 12 March 2020, the Upper Tribunal (UTJ O'Callaghan) granted the
    appellant permission to appeal on the basis  that  the  judge  arguably
    erred in law in his consideration and assessment of the evidence of  Dr
    Amundsen.

10. Following directions issued by the Upper Tribunal, both  the  appellant
    and respondent filed written submissions dated 19 May 2020 and  28  May
    2020  respectively.   The  appellant  also  filed  a  response  to  the
    respondent's written submissions dated 4 June 2020.

11. The appeal was listed for hearing at the Cardiff Civil  Justice  Centre
    sitting remotely.  I was based as the Cardiff Civil Justice Centre  and
    Mr Lewis, who represented the appellant, and Mr Bates, who  represented
    the Secretary of State, joined the hearing remotely by Skype.

12. Mr Lewis, on behalf of the appellant, relied upon  the  grounds  and  a
    further Skeleton Argument dated 19 May 2021 prepared for  the  hearing.
    I heard oral submissions from Mr Lewis and from Mr Bates.

The Submissions

13. In her decision, Judge Shergill  applied  the  decision  in  Devaseelan
    [2003] Imm AR 1.  The appellant's claim was materially the same as that
    which had been rejected by Judge Frankish in the earlier appeal.  Judge
    Frankish  had  made  an  adverse  credibility  finding.   Before  Judge
    Shergill, the appellant relied upon further documents  to  support  his
    claim.  In particular, in order to establish his claim that both he and
    his  father had  been  targeted  by  the  Awami  League,  as  political
    opponents, in Bangladesh.  The appellant relied upon a number of police
    or court documents, including an FIR, an Ejahar (a form of  complaint),
    remand request, order sheets, a charge sheet  and  an  arrest  warrant.
    The appellant relied upon Dr Amundsen's report  who  found  that  those
    documents were probably genuine.  In  addition,  Dr  Amundsen's  report
    sought to engage with criticisms made by  Judge  Frankish  (and  relied
    upon him) in concluding that the documents were not  genuine  documents
    in the earlier appeal.  For example, the fact that such documents, even
    if genuine, might be  "replete  with  anomalies",  be  lacking  various
    detail and may contain holy fabricated  trumped  up  charges.   In  her
    determination, Judge Shergill concluded that Dr  Amundsen  was  not  an
    expert in document verification and,  as  a  consequence,  attached  no
    weight to his expert evidence (see paras 7 - 18 of the  determination).



14. Mr Lewis submitted that the judge had erred  in-law  in  two  principal
    regards.

15. First, Mr Lewis submitted that the judge had wholly failed to take into
    account opinions in Dr Amundsen's report that fell within his  accepted
    expertise and which engaged with some of  the  issues  relied  upon  by
    Judge Frankish in the earlier appeal when the judge concluded that  the
    documents  were  not  genuine.   In  applying  Devaseelan,   Mr   Lewis
    submitted, the judge had failed to grapple with  this  expert  evidence
    and whether it was, therefore,  not  only  appropriate  to  take  Judge
    Frankish's findings as the "starting point" but also to  conclude,  for
    herself, that the  documents  could  not  be  relied  upon.   Mr  Lewis
    particularly developed this line of argument in  his  oral  submissions
    based upon his written Skeleton Argument  dated  19th  May  2021.   His
    argument is set out at paras 4 - 5 as follows:

         "4.  However, in addition to the document verification evidence, Dr
         Amundsen provided some important evidence as to the  general  state
         of court documents in Bangladesh  (Appellant's  Bundle  pages  D89-
         D90). He explained that Bangladeshi court documents  are  often  of
         poor quality and full of anomalies, and that the level of precision
         in these documents is often "astoundingly low". He  explained  that
         court documents of this kind were based on the "Ejahar" provided by
         the complainant and recorded by the police, and that the police and
         courts  were  politicised.  He  also  explained  that   trumped-up,
         politically motivated charges were  common  and  that  the  charges
         against the Appellant were consistent with that. The  picture  that
         emerged from Dr Amundsen's report, therefore, was  that  we  should
         not necessarily expect genuine police and  court  documents  to  be
         rigorous, factually accurate or  internally  consistent.  If  Judge
         Shergill considered this evidence not to be credible, he needed  to
         engage with it and to say why -  given  that  it  appears  that  he
         accepted that Dr Amundsen had  expertise  in  Bangladesh  generally
         ([8]-[9]).

         5.   It was incumbent on Judge Shergill,  in  deciding  whether  to
         depart  from  Judge  Frankish's  findings,  to  grapple  with   the
         potential relevance of Dr Amundsen's country evidence (as  distinct
         from his document verification evidence)  to  those  findings.  The
         principal reasons given by Judge Frankish were potentially undercut
         by Dr Amundsen's evidence:

               a. At [32] Judge Frankish relied on the fact that  the  court
                  documents did not reflect the Appellant's account of being
                  involved in a land dispute  or  bazaar  dispute.  However,
                  this was, on the face  of  it,  readily  explained  by  Dr
                  Amundsen's report - the court documents were based on  the
                  police report, inaccuracies were common in police reports,
                  and politically motivated, trumped-up charges were common.
                  Against this backdrop it was not surprising that the court
                  documents contained a fabricated story instead of the real
                  cause of the Appellant's problems.

               b. At [34] Judge Frankish relied on the poor quality  of  the
                  documents, saying that they are "replete  with  anomalies"
                  and missing various details. This was  squarely  explained
                  by  Dr  Amundsen's  evidence  that  it  was   common   for
                  Bangladeshi court documents to be "replete with anomalies"
                  and to have "astoundingly low" levels of precision.

               c. At [35] Judge Frankish claimed that the Appellant and  his
                  father were "the only two defendants  ever  to  receive  a
                  mention  in  the  court  orders  themselves".  It  is  not
                  entirely clear  what  Judge  Frankish  meant  here  -  the
                  judgment of the court sentencing  the  Appellant  and  his
                  father to life imprisonment  also  dealt  with  the  other
                  named defendants, with some receiving  life  imprisonment,
                  some receiving  7  years'  imprisonment,  and  some  being
                  acquitted for lack of evidence (Appellant's Bundle at D151-
                  152). It is open to the second tribunal to depart from the
                  first tribunal's determination where  the  first  tribunal
                  has misstated the evidence before it (this  was  precisely
                  the situation in BK (Afghanistan) [2019] EWCA Civ 1358  at
                  [42]-[50]). But even  if  Judge  Frankish  was  right,  Dr
                  Amundsen's evidence was capable  of  explaining  it.  This
                  could be explained by Dr  Amundsen's  evidence  about  the
                  poor quality and  lack  of  rigour  in  Bangladeshi  court
                  documents, coupled with the  likely  political  motivation
                  for the charges (in which the Appellant and his father may
                  have been the principal targets).

               d. At [36] Judge Frankish appears to be saying that the court
                  documents were inconsistent as to whether the  Appellant's
                  father [] had been an absconder. It was recorded  in  2011
                  that all the accused had absconded except [the appellant's
                  father], who had appeared before  the  Court  (Appellant's
                  Bundle at D142). Judge Frankish contrasts  this  with  the
                  2015 decision on  sentence,  which  records  "Whereas  the
                  convicted are absconded so that their punishment  will  be
                  effected form [sic] the  date  of  their  arrest  but  the
                  accused [the appellant's father]  presented  today  before
                  learned Court, thus sent him jail cusdoy [sic]  from  this
                  date" (Appellant's Bundle at D153). It is not wholly clear
                  why Judge Frankish regarded this  as  an  inconsistency  -
                  both appear  to  be  saying  the  same  thing  (albeit  in
                  infelicitous language), namely that all  the  accused  had
                  absconded except [the appellant's father]. But again, even
                  if  he  was  right,  it  was  squarely  explained  by   Dr
                  Amundsen's evidence that it is normal for court  documents
                  to be replete with anomalies."

16. In addition, Mr Lewis relied upon Dr Amundsen's report  to  demonstrate
    that Judge Shergill had been wrong at para 27 of her  determination  to
    consider that the appellant had given inconsistent evidence when he had
    said that the documents "are genuine, but contain  false  information".
    Dr Amundsen's evidence was that even genuine  documents  could  contain
    false allegations.

17. Secondly, although Mr Lewis did not specifically address in any  detail
    the original grounds in his oral submissions,  he  submitted  that  the
    judge had been wrong to conclude that Dr Amundsen was not an expert for
    the purposes of document verification.   Dr  Amundsen  had  engaged  in
    document verification in a number of other cases, he had been  accepted
    as an expert in that regard.  Judge Shergill had been wrong, as she was
    not in a position to do so, to question the methodology of Dr  Amundsen
    which was clearly set out in his report at pages 2 - 3 (pages 79  -  80
    of the appellant's bundle).

18. In response, Mr Bates submitted that whilst Dr  Amundsen  was  accepted
    (both by the respondent and the judge) as a country expert, he was  not
    an expert on document verification.  Further, Mr Bates pointed out that
    Dr Amundsen had only seen copies of the documents and not the  original
    documents.  The judge was, in those circumstances properly entitled  to
    give Dr Amundsen's opinion as  to  the  genuineness  of  the  documents
    "little weight".

19. Further, Mr Bates submitted that, in fact, the judge had given a number
    of reasons why the appellant was not credible and, taking the  evidence
    as a whole in the round, had applied Tanveer Ahmed, and had  reached  a
    sustainable finding that the appellant's account was not credible.

Discussion

20. It was accepted before the judge that Dr Amundsen was a country expert.
     It was not, however, accepted  that  he  was  an  expert  in  document
    verification.  His report, however, contained not only his  opinion  as
    to the genuineness of the documents relied upon to sustain an  argument
    that the appellant's credibility should be accepted but, on  the  basis
    of this new evidence, that Judge Frankish's earlier finding  should  be
    departed from.  In that regard, whether or not Dr  Amundsen  should  be
    considered to be an expert in document verification, he was  an  expert
    in relation to the background circumstances in  Bangladesh.   Mr  Lewis
    helpfully set out the argument in paras 4 - 5 of his  written  Skeleton
    Argument which I have set out above.  At pages 1  -  2  of  his  report
    (pages  78  -  79  of  the  appellant's  bundle)  under   the   heading
    "Background", Dr Amundsen sets out the following:

         "The very high level of corruption in Bangladesh seriously  weakens
         the integrity and credibility of any Bangladeshi document.   Plenty
         of forged documents are fabricated and, in practice,  any  document
         can be  produced  and  sold  by  a  'secretary'  in  many  a  Dhaka
         backstreet.   Some  notary   publics   also   certified   falsified
         documents, helped along by unscrupulous lawyers.  They can prepared
         forged deeds and prepare  documents  to  establish  their  client's
         claims.

         The high level  of  corruption  also  makes  it  possible  to  have
         fabricated  information  in  documents  issued   by   the   correct
         authorities using proper  official  paper,  genuine  certification,
         stamps, signatures, etc.  Therefore, please be aware that documents
         found to be genuine (that is,  properly  issued  by  the  purported
         author) can still have low credibility and include content that  is
         incorrect for instance,

             'Several human rights activists and lawyers are told the  FIDH
             that naming a person in an FIR is often a way  for  people  to
             strike  back  at  their  enemies  or  perpetuate   neighbourly
             squabbles.  This practise  of  false,  vengeful  reporting  is
             particularly common in acid throwing  cases  and  other  cases
             falling under the laws protecting women  and  children  [...].
             The nature of the FIR and their accompanying  improper  police
             practices allow citizens to 'manipulate'  the  justice  system
             and to involve it in private conflict.  (FIDH 210: 16).'"

21. At page 12 of his report  (page  89  of  the  appellant's  bundle),  Dr
    Amundsen states that:

         "Falsification.  A large number  of  false  accusations  originally
         made against the political opposition  and  rivals  in  Bangladesh.
         This is known from reports from several human rights  organisations
         and  international  observers.   I  believe  that  to  avoid   this
         politically sensitive and onerous  issue  to  be  further  exposed.
         Bangladeshi authority will sometimes try  to  hold  back  documents
         that lawyers and the accused individuals are entitled to."

22. The report continues:

         "The Charges

         In my experience  Bangladeshi  court  documents  are  based  on  an
         initial complaint or petition (Ejhar), that anybody can  file  with
         the police  against  anybody,  for  whatever  reason.   The  police
         officer receiving the complaint  formulises  in  typewriting.   The
         text is therefore often 'replete with anomalies' as  the  level  of
         knowledge of procedure  and  law  is  only  rudimentary  among  the
         broader public as well  as  among  lower  -  and  mid-level  police
         officers.  Even writing and reading skills can be rudimentary.

         The next step is the First Information Report (FIR), which is based
         on the Ejhar (by copying in the text describing  the  'crime'  with
         the 'action' that  the  police  has  taken  on  the  case  (witness
         statements, police  investigations,  collection  of  evidence)  and
         references to the presumably broken laws.  Again, the text is often
         'replete with anomalies' as the level of  knowledge  and  procedure
         and law is only rudimentary  amongst  the  lower  -  and  mid-level
         police officers.

         Thirdly, based on the previous, the  police  will  issue  a  Charge
         Sheet, which is a submission and preparation document for the court
         or Tribunal, and fourthly,  the court  or  Tribunal  will  issue  a
         Court Order and/or Arrest  Warrant,  which  orders  the  police  to
         arrest and detain the accused.  Usually,  the  final  core  verdict
         will be of somewhat better quality (with fewer 'anomalies').

         The level of precision in Bangladeshi court documents can therefore
         be astonishingly low.

         Dr Amundsen then goes on to state that the 'police and  courts  are
         politicised in  Bangladesh'  and  continues:  'thus,  making  false
         accusations a widely used political tool used  against  outside  as
         well as  inside  rivals.   Corruption  charges,  criminal  charges,
         charges   publishing   'false   information',   pornography,    and
         instigating violence and 'vandalism' are the most widely trumped-up
         charges used against political opponents.

         In my opinion, the charges as consistent with politically motivated
         charges in Bangladesh.'"

23. Dr Amundsen then, under  the  heading  'Summary'  and  based  upon  his
    application of the verification criteria at pages 3 - 11 of his report,
    concludes that the documents are most probably genuine.

24. I  accept  Mr  Lewis'  submissions  that  in  determining  whether  the
    documents relied upon by the appellant were reliable and, in particular
    whether Devaseelan applied to Judge Frankish's findings  in  regard  to
    the documents, the judge failed to  take  into  account  Dr  Amundsen's
    opinion falling, as was accepted before  me,  within  his  professional
    expertise concerning the circumstances in Bangladesh.

25. What the judge did in this appeal was conclude that Dr Amundsen was not
    an expert for the purposes of document verification and  then  for  all
    purposes concluded that he  would  give  "no  weight"  to  that  expert
    evidence.  In the matters to  which  I  have  referred  concerning  the
    background to the police and judicial process in  Bangladesh,  and  the
    context of documents produced by the authorities, unlike  before  Judge
    Frankish, there was evidence before Judge Shergill that was capable  of
    providing an explanation for anomalies which Judge Frankish  took  into
    account in concluding that the documents were not genuine and could not
    be relied  upon.   Before  following,  on  a  Devaseelan  basis,  Judge
    Frankish's findings, I accept Mr Lewis' submission that Judge  Shergill
    had to grapple with  the  evidence  of  Dr  Amundsen  relevant  to  the
    reliability of those documents.  That is the case even if the judge was
    entitled to disregard his expert evidence as a document verifier.

26. I do not accept Mr Bates' submission that the error was not material to
    the judge's adverse findings.  I accept that the judge did  give  other
    reasons why he did not accept the credibility of the appellant's claim.
     However, plainly his view as to the reliability of the  documents  was
    affected by his failure to grapple with the expert evidence  concerning
    their content and  the  "anomalies"  which  Judge  Frankish  had  found
    persuasive of their lacking authenticity.  Only  if  I  were  satisfied
    that the judge's finding would inevitably have been the same had he not
    fallen into legal error  by  failing  to  grapple  with  Dr  Amundsen's
    evidence, can I conclude that the error was immaterial.  Judge Shergill
    herself stated that:

         "The appellant's claims are overshadowed by the  previous  findings
         from which I do not consider there are very good reasons to  depart
         from."  (at [34]).

27. That, in my judgment, demonstrates that the application of  Devaseelan,
    which was flawed without consideration of Dr Amundsen's opinions, was a
    significant feature  in  Judge  Shergill's  reasoning  leading  to  her
    adverse credibility finding.

28. It follows, for that reason, that the judge materially erred in law  in
    reaching her adverse credibility finding.

29. Strictly, therefore, it is unnecessary to consider  whether  the  judge
    further erred in law in discounting Dr Amundsen's evidence as an expert
    in document verification.  The report  is,  however,  likely  to  be  a
    relevant part of the appellant's case when the decision  is  remade  by
    the First-tier Tribunal.  In the light of that, I will express my views
    and conclusion on the issue of whether Dr Amundsen's report should  be,
    in effect, disregarded on the issue of document verification.

30. It is important to note that in the context of proceedings in  the  IAC
    Chambers, unlike in the Criminal, Civil or Family  Courts,  whether  or
    not opinion is properly characterised  as  "expert  opinion"  does  not
    affect the admissibility of that evidence.  That  is  because  the  IAC
    Chambers are not bound by the strict rules  of  evidence.   Of  course,
    whether opinion is expressed by an expert,  on  a  matter  within  that
    individual's expertise, does go to the weight which a judge  is  likely
    to give that opinion.  The point was made in Kapella v SSHD [1998]  Imm
    AR 274 by the Immigration Appeal Tribunal at p.301 as follows:

         "The question whether  or  not  to  classify  Mr  Somerville  as  a
         'expert' is not in point: that is a question which arises  only  in
         proceedings bound  by  the  strict  rules  of  evidence,  where  an
         'expert' may give evidence (chiefly  here  say  an  opinion)  which
         would be inadmissible  if  it  came  from  anybody  else.   In  our
         proceedings the evidence is undoubtedly admissible.   The  question
         is whether, in the context of all the evidence in the case,  it  is
         this evidence which is to be preferred.  This must be a matter  for
         the individuals finders of facts".

    The point that expertise goes to 'weight' rather than admissibility was
    also made in AAW (expert evidence - weight)  Somalia  [2015]  UKUT  673
    (IAC) at [25].  What weight is appropriately  given  to  an  expert  or
    indeed any evidence is primarily a matter for the trial  judge  subject
    to perversity and irrationality (see SS (Sri Lanka) v SSHD [2012]  EWCA
    Civ 155 at [21]).

31. Of course, in this  appeal  Judge  Shergill  did  not  decide  that  Dr
    Amundsen's evidence  was  not  admissible  on  the  issue  of  document
    verification but rather that she should give it "no weight".

32. However, in my judgment Judge Shergill has focused exclusively upon the
    issue of "expertise" derived from formal training rather than excluding
    appropriate experience and, in addition, has engaged in  an  assessment
    of Dr Amundsen's methodology  which  the  judge  was  not  entitled  to
    conclude was "perverse".  The judge's reasoning is somewhat lengthy  at
    paras 8 - 14 where the judge said this:

         "8.  The appellant relies on a report from Dr  Amundsen,  based  in
             Norway.  The respondent  accepts  that  he  is  an  expert  on
             Bangladesh and has provided many reports in respect of  asylum
             claims.  I take no issue with that but I agree with the  point
             taken in para  20  that  he  has  no  specific  qualifications
             relating to him being an expert in  verifying  documents  from
             Bangladesh.

         9.   Whilst the expertise has been accepted by the respondent, I am
             not clear as to many case the expert has been put forward with
             regards to the specific  skill  set  of  being  an  expert  on
             Bangladeshi document  verification.   Being  an  expert  on  a
             country does not automatically qualify you to be held  out  as
             an expert on all aspects relating to that  country.    I  have
             set out my concerns about the skill set below and  I  find  it
             difficult to accept that my concerns are  novel.   If  he  had
             been put forward in IAT cases as a document expert before then
             the expert has failed to tell  me  how  many  cases  this  has
             happened in and any cases that he has not been accepted as  an
             expert in document verification.  The Tribunal was entitled to
             be informed of this as any adverse  treatment  may  have  been
             material to properly assess the report.

         10.  Self-taught expert: The expert says he is a registered Country
             of Origin Expert but there is nothing in his CV which suggests
             he  has  any  qualifications  in  legal  related  field.   His
             professional expertise is predominantly in political  science.
             He does not have any specific practical experience of judicial
             issues in Bangladesh (the two  projects  he  lists  relate  to
             politics).  His select publications list  as  they  relate  to
             Bangladesh are all of a political favour.   There  is  nothing
             obviously that indicates that he has formally been inducted or
             had professional expert experience on the ground when  dealing
             with  judicial  or  legal  matters  in  Bangladesh.   He   has
             indicated at page 95 that he is self-taught  in  the  area  of
             assessing the authenticity of documents.  I do not  know  what
             international  literacy   is   consulted   on   the   document
             authenticity  assessment  methods   or   whether   it   is   a
             satisfactory means  of  establishing  expertise.   He  has  no
             obvious academic or practical background to give a footing  in
             how to verify documents in  any  other  way  that  would  have
             allowed him to build on other relevant  knowledge.   There  is
             nothing  disclosed  in  his  expertise  that  gives   me   any
             confidence he was in a  position  to  treat  himself  document
             verification methodology to a satisfactory standard  he  could
             call himself an expert in this field.

         11.  Methodology: The verification methods he set out  at  page  79
             are devoid of any proper explanation as to how much of this is
             settled, internationally or professionally recognised practise
             in this area; or how much of it is  his  own  construct.   The
             footnotes do not assist me because  number  7  says  that  the
             information set out in the body of that part of the report 'is
             partly based on three listed documents.  I do  not  know  how,
             after consulting those documents, the expert  was  a  able  to
             partly base  his  assessment  methodology  on  those  sources.
             Particularly, as he has no  relevant  previous  background  in
             this field.  I do not know how he was able to  exercise  those
             parts he considered relevant for his methodology  and  why  he
             was in a position to evaluate those sources to  structure  his
             own methodology, absent any obvious professional or  practical
             foundation in document verification.  I had  similar  concerns
             as regards the other footnotes which are, as I understand  it,
             cited to give credibility to his methodology.  I do  not  find
             this methodology basis to be appropriate.

         12.  It is unclear why the expert claims that there are no  courses
             available in this field and why he considers himself an expert
             on  Bangladeshi  document  verification  absent  any  specific
             references  as  to  the  practical  professional   experience,
             courses or training.  I am aware that a Document  Verification
             Report prepared by the Respondent would contain  such  detail.
             Furthermore, I find his claimed methodology  relating  to  '3.
             authenticity verification'  and  '4.  content  assessment'  as
             questionable.  I do not know to what extent  this  methodology
             is  widely  accepted  by  document  verification  experts;  or
             whether any recognised standards  have  to  be  tempered  when
             dealing with countries with  high  levels  of  document  fraud
             (i.e. 'high  risk').   As  I  understand  it  the  expert  has
             confined  himself  to  open  sources  verification  and   also
             checking the content and narrative consistency with the asylum
             seeker's account.  I  have  no  idea  if  that  is  acceptable
             methodology which is widely recognised or whether  it  is  one
             that  comes  with  caveats.    This   sort   of   methodology,
             particularly  in  relation   to   high-risk   countries   like
             Bangladesh strikes he as perverse (see below).

         13.  I say perverse because the bullet points and the  verification
             criteria on page 11 (bar  the very first one  seemingly  falls
             under the first heading) all indicate open sources that  would
             be checked.  If the expert has based his assessment and report
             'on the above criteria' then it is of real concern.  Those six
             bullet points are all matters which could lead  to  a  genuine
             document  being  verified,  or  likewise  someone  wanting  to
             falsify a document to complete it  with  genuine  information.
             He cannot go beyond the wit of a moderately educated appellant
             or overseas based  fraudster  to  utilise  details  of  actual
             people, courts and events and any documents.  It is  difficult
             to understand that in a country with a high risk of fraud that
             these sorts of issues are not thought be forgers.  The use  of
             a news  article  saying  something  happened  and  spinning  a
             fabricated account off that may  be  more  persuasive  to  the
             lower standard; relatively easy to do.  If  it  was  not,  and
             this is an obvious point, the expert fails to explain  how  he
             is mitigated against simply being past  false  documents  with
             real information in them.  The risk of that happening is  only
             amplified in this case  because  the  appellant  is  a  highly
             educated individual and one who has already been  through  the
             hearing process with a bundle of documents found to be 'wholly
             fabricated to support his claim'.

         14.  I find it  extraordinary  that  the  expert  considers  simply
             checking off documents against  open  sources  as  a  reliable
             means of verification.  That is only made worse  by  Though  I
             note he seems to distance himself from the ability to approach
             this  through  '1.  authenticity  verification   by   forensic
             testing' or '2 authenticity verification  by  country  method'
             due to not having 'the technical and practical capacity' (page
             80).  I would have expected document verification  to  require
             some form of physical examination of the document and  to  the
             extent it is permissible  to  confirm  'authenticity'  without
             such physical examination,  then  the  expert  has  failed  to
             explain how  the  methodology  he  uses  could  be  viewed  as
             compared to other methods (for example the  margins  of  error
             and reliability of results  that  can  be  attained  by  using
             different methods etc).  That was a bearing on weight as well,
             particularly when contrary to what he appears to  set  out  at
             the start of his process at  page  80  (i.e.  not  undertaking
             forensic testing) he  goes  on  to  comment  on  a  number  of
             forensic  type  issues.   These  include  variously:  document
             format and yellowish paper; position of  text;  the  types  of
             stamp; the signature; lack of court stamp; standard format and
             official  document  identification,  marks  etc   on   various
             documents he refers to.  All of this  commented  upon  without
             ever physically examining the copy.   His  methodology  as  it
             relates to  a  high-risk  country,  and  in  particular,  this
             appellant given his background, strikes me as one that it open
             to abuse or manipulation.  I have seen nothing in  the  report
             which satisfies me that this risk has been properly identified
             or mitigated against."

33. The judge then went on in paras 15 - 16 to consider the contents of the
    documents and at para 17 the report's  conclusions  before  stating  in
    para 18 that:

         "I am not satisfied that Dr Amundsen has the requisite expertise to
         give an expert opinion on these documents and  his  methodology  is
         flawed.  There are serious omissions in the way this  material  has
         been assessed.  Therefore, given the serious  concerns  I  have,  I
         attach no weight to the expert evidence.  The report fails to rebut
         the related issues in the refusal.  The source documents  commented
         on by the expert will be considered, absent reliance on the  expert
         opinion, in the round with the other evidence in line with  Tanveer
         Ahmed."

34. Whilst there are aspects of  this  reasoning  which,  undoubtedly,  the
    judge was entitled to take into account in considering what  weight  to
    give the evidence - such as the fact that Dr Amundsen had not seen  the
    original documents - the judge's assessment of his methodology as being
    perverse was, in my judgment, unsustainable.  The judge became  focused
    on  establishing  whether  Dr  Amundsen  was  a  "expert"  in  document
    verification when Dr Amundsen has, as a country expert, expressed views
    concerning the likelihood of the documents being genuine  by  reference
    to assessment against 'open sources'.  In his report at pages 2 - 3, Dr
    Amundsen, as the judge recognised, specifically accepted  that  he  did
    not have the 'technical or practical capacity' to  engage  in  forensic
    testing of the documents (which might well reflect a  DVR  produced  by
    the respondent) or based upon "in-country  methods"  by  checking  with
    authorities in that country or through embassies and  high  commissions
    (which  again  might  well  be  reflected  in  DVR  produced   by   the
    respondent).  There was, however, no basis in my judgment for the judge
    simply to discount Dr Amundsen's evidence, whether  properly  described
    as the evidence of a document verification expert or  not,  based  upon
    his knowledge of Bangladesh and his experience of  assessing  documents
    against "open sources" and their contents.   What  weight  his  opinion
    should be given, whilst a matter for the judge, had to be  assessed  on
    its contents rather than by an a priori categorisation of him being  an
    expert  or  not.   Despite  what  the  judge  said,  Dr  Amundsen   was
    undoubtedly knowledgeable, and he gave examples of prior work  in  this
    field.  I accept that the judge did, in part, engage with the substance
    of Dr Amundsen's report and, for example, had regard to the  fact  that
    he had only seen copies of the report.




35. However, overall I am left with the impression that  the  judge  failed
    fully to engage with Dr Amundsen's opinions as to the  authenticity  of
    the documents significantly because the judge - without any  evidential
    basis for doing so - doubted his methodology  which,  although  perhaps
    not falling within the  most  rigorous  categories  which  Dr  Amundsen
    professed no expertise in, it  is  difficult  to  categorise  as  being
    improper and uninformed.


36. It will be for the judge remaking the decision to assess  more  broadly
    the views of Dr Amundsen, if his report continues to be relied upon  by
    the appellant, without focussing exclusively upon whether or not he  is
    an 'expert' in document verification  rather  than  an  expert  in  the
    background circumstances in Bangladesh including assessing  police  and
    court documents against background material within his knowledge.

37. For these reasons, therefore, the judge  materially  erred  in  law  in
    reaching her adverse credibility finding.  The decision to dismiss  the
    appellant's appeal involved the making of an error of  law  and  cannot
    stand.

Decision

38. For the above reasons, the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to
    dismiss the appellant's appeal involved the making of an error of  law.
    That decision cannot stand and is set aside.

39. It was common ground between the representatives that if  the  material
    error of law was established, the proper disposal of this appeal was to
    remit it to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh re-hearing.

40. I agree.  Having regard  to  the  nature  and  extent  of  fact-finding
    required, and having regard to  para  7.2  of  the  Senior  President's
    Practice Statement, the proper disposal of this appeal is to  remit  it
    to the First-tier Tribunal for a de novo re-hearing (not before  either
    Judge Frankish or Judge Shergill).  No findings of Judge  Shergill  are
    preserved.


                                                                      Signed

                                                                Andrew Grubb

                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                                                 25 May 2021

