
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10413/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 17 July 2020                      |On 8 September 2020                  |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                     EJH
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Cole, a solicitor with Parker Rhodes Hickmotts
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. On 30 April 2019, the Upper Tribunal set  aside  a  decision  of  the
       First-tier Tribunal having found a material error  of  law  and  gave
       directions for the matter to be reheard to enable the Upper  Tribunal
       to substitute a decision to either allow or dismiss the appeal.



Background

    2. The appellant is a citizen of Iraq  born  on  19  November  1996  who
       arrived in the UK on or around  14  February  2018.  The  appellant's
       application for asylum was refused by the Secretary of State  against
       which the appellant appealed. The  First-tier  Tribunal  allowed  the
       appeal and although that decision has  been  set  aside  the  adverse
       credibility  findings,  findings  in  relation  to  the   appellant's
       immigration history, findings in relation to his parents,  relatives,
       contacts in Iraq, and possession of  a  passport  are  all  preserved
       findings.

    3. The preserved findings can be summarised in the following terms:

         . The appellant lied about his sexuality.

         . The appellant's parents made a  concerted  effort  to  have  him
           brought to the UK because they knew that he would be safe here.

         . When asked about contact  with  his  family  the  appellant  was
           evasive and reluctant to give straightforward answers.

         . The appellant's claim not to have contact with  his  family  was
           rejected and found to lack credibility. The Judge finds "I  find
           it lacks credibility that a  young  man,  familiar  with  social
           media for several years would lack the  wherewithal  to  utilise
           the power of the Internet to keep in touch with his family".

         . The appellant's own evidence is that he  has  contacted  with  a
           friend in his home area in Iraq despite  initially  claiming  to
           have no such contact. The appellant stated he had contacted  his
           uncle in Kirkuk on one occasion too.

         . The appellant has fabricated his claim to be a gay man  and  has
           not been honest about his family circumstances in Iraq.

         . The appellant's evidence regarding documentation is inconsistent
           claiming he left Iraq on his own passport which was now with his
           parents but failing to explain why had stated in interview  that
           the passport was still in Iraq.

         . It is accepted the appellant originates from Tuz Khurmatu  which
           was part of the contested area.

Grounds and submissions

    4. The appellant asserts the key issues for determination in this appeal
       are:

        i. Is the Appellant at real risk of serious harm in Tuz Khurmato?

       ii. Is it reasonably likely that the Appellant will not be  able  to
           obtain a CSID/INID, either in the UK or  reasonably  soon  after
           arrival in Iraq?

      iii. If he is at real risk  of  serious  harm  in  Tuz,  then  is  it
           reasonably likely  that  the Appellant has no  external  support
           in  Baghdad,  thus  making  internal   relocation   to   Baghdad
           unreasonable?

       iv. If he is at real risk  of  serious  harm  in  Tuz,  then  is  it
           reasonably likely that the Appellant has no  viable  support  in
           the IKR and no ability to secure accommodation and employment in
           the  IKR,  thus  making   internal   relocation   to   the   IKR
           unreasonable?

Discussion

    5. Although the issue of the closure of airports in Iraq as a result  of
       the Covid-19 pandemic was mentioned at the hearing this  element  has
       not been factored into consideration of the merits of the  appeal  in
       light of the fact that it is not relevant to the legal issues in hand
       and the announcement that airports in Iraq are reopening from the  23
       July 2020.

    6. In relation to the first question  posed  by  the  appellant,  it  is
       submitted by the appellant that the country information  detailed  in
       SMO, KSP & IM (Article 15(c); identity documents) Iraq CG  [2019]UKUT
       00400 (IAC) is  such  to  justify  the  conclusion  that  he  has   a
       sufficiently  enhanced  risk  profile such that his  return  to   Tuz
       Khurmato would engage Article 15(c).

    7. This is not conceded by Mr Diwnycz who has provided an online map  in
       support of his  claim  showing  that  the  latest  picture  over  Tuz
       Khormatu at the  date  of  hearing  did  not  show  ongoing  military
       activity by any party or of ongoing violence in the  appellants  home
       area: https://iraq.liveuamap.com .

    8. The appellant relies upon a number of reference to his home  area  in
       SMO, KSP & IM (Iraq) set out  the  Mr  Cole's  skeleton  argument  as
       follows

           "... Tuz Khurmato is "the most violent, most  divided  place  in
           the country" due to their being "so many  layers  of  conflict".
           The situation in Tuz is considered to be very  unstable  due  to
           the presence of various  armed  groups  in  addition  to  ethno-
           sectarian violence." [ARHB -para 20, p37]

           "There were higher rates of violence after the removal of  ISIL,
           however, including abduction and killing and the destruction and
           deprivation of property.  This was  largely  attributed  to  the
           PMU." [ARHB -para 78, p49]

           "When the Kurds were expelled from Tuz Khurmato in the aftermath
           of the Referendum, the city was taken over by one  of  the  most
           senior commanders in the Badr  Organisation,  one  of  the  most
           powerful Shia militia. He has reportedly  developed  a  personal
           militia with the local Turkmen Shia, who are reportedly involved
           in  looting,  arms  and  drugs  trafficking.   Displacement  and
           civilian casualties  continue  to  occur  in  the  area  due  to
           conflict between armed  actors  in  the  region,  including  the
           comparatively recently formed White Flag  group."   [ARHB  -para
           79, p49]

           "Dr Fatah stated that Tuz Khurmato  was  said  to  be  the  most
           dangerous place. The Kurds  were  being  'kicked  out'  and  the
           insurgency was quite high." [ARHB -para 85, p50]

           "Dr Fatah confirmed that the population of Salah al Din  was  in
           the region of 1.6 million and that more than three quarters of a
           million people were recognised

           as being in need. He considered what was going on Salah  al  Din
           as revenge by the Shia militia against the Sunnis and the  Kurds
           ... The PMU was not like the police; they are not  educated  and
           are hard-line, sectarian people who had responded  to  a  fatwa.
           Iran relied on them and  had  trained  them.   They  had  narrow
           political and religious views. They had not forgiven the  Sunnis
           and they did not like the Kurds." [ARHB -para 89, p50]

           "Tuz Khurmato  saw  heavy  violence  in  the  aftermath  of  the
           Independence  Referendum  and  has  suffered   serious   damage.
           Violence continued into 2018. It is now ruled by a powerful Shia
           militia and, as Dr Fatah stated, the problems which  remain  are
           essentially of an ethnic nature, with Kurds in  that  area  more
           likely to face difficulty from the controlling PMU." [ARHB -para
           263, p88]

           It is thus submitted that, as a Sunni Kurd who fled  Tuz  on  or
           around 16 October 2017 because of Hashd al Shabi, the  appellant
           has a sufficiently enhanced risk profile such that he  would  be
           at real risk of serious harm in Tuz Khurmato.

    9. Mr Diwnycz did not adduce country information to dispel such concerns
       stating the respondent's policy at this time means the appellant will
       be returned to Baghdad.

   10. The county material provided supports the concerns the appellant  has
       regarding his personal safety if returned to his home area  to  live.
       The evidence considered in  SMO  refers  to  issues  such  as  ethnic
       related reprisals and violence for those targeted who  live  in  that
       area.  If the appellant cannot return to live in his  home  area  the
       issue becomes the reasonableness of internal relocation.

   11. The submissions made on the appellants  behalf  have  been  carefully
       considered and it noted they refer to an alleged bar on the appellant
       returning to his home area to live. What  is  not  made  out  in  the
       submissions is that there is a bar to the appellant visiting his home
       area and the local national identity card office opened  in  the  Tuz
       Khurmato district on  17  December  2017  to  provide  the  biometric
       information, such a Iris scan and  fingerprints,  which  need  to  be
       provided in person to obtain a New Iraqi Identity Card (INID). It  is
       not made out that his presence  on  a  visit  will  become  known  to
       individuals who may have a grievance against Kurds or want to  target
       the appellant in such circumstances; accepting he will need  to  have
       the required documents to enable him to travel  there  in  the  first
       place.

   12. In his second issue the  appellant  asserts  that  it  is  reasonably
       unlikely he will be able to obtain a replacement CSID/INID, either in
       the UK or reasonably soon after arrival in Iraq.

   13. The Upper  Tribunal in SMO, KSP & IM (Iraq) confirm that, as the INID
       programme continues to expand, more and more CSA offices will have an
       INID terminal making obtaining a CSID by proxy more  difficult:  "The
       likelihood of obtaining a replacement identity document by the use of
       a proxy,  whether  from  the  UK  or   on   return   to   Iraq,   has
       reduced  due  to  the introduction of the INID system.  In  order  to
       obtain an INID, an individual must attend their local CSA  office  in
       person to enrol their biometrics,  including  fingerprints  and  iris
       scans. The CSA offices in which INID terminals  have  been  installed
       are unlikely - as a result of the  phased  replacement  of  the  CSID
       system -to issue a CSID, whether to an individual in person or  to  a
       proxy."

   14. It is accepted the new form of Iraqi identity card (INID) can only be
       obtained in Iraq, but  the  country  information  provided  does  not
       support a  finding  that  no  other  form  of  identity  document  is
       available to  an  Iraqi  national  at  this  time.  Within  Iraq  the
       appellant's own  evidence  refers  to  the  percentage  of  biometric
       identity cards being issued but this is  clearly  not  the  universal
       picture. Urban areas in which the national identity card offices have
       been equipped with the means to capture the required data and produce
       the cards have a greater percentage uptake than those in rural areas.
       Whilst for Iraqi nationals outside Iraq there is no  facility  for  a
       INID to be issued the appellant has not established on  the  evidence
       that this means those outside Iraq have no  means  of  obtaining  any
       other form of identity document to confirm they are who they claim to
       be and an entitlement to be recognised as a national of Iraqi.

   15. A country report 'Kurdistan Region of Iraq (KRI) Report  on  issuance
       of the new Iraqi ID card' by the Danish Immigration  Services,  dated
       November 2018 in relation to possibility for issuance of new ID cards
       to Iraqis living abroad, record that when asked what  Iraqi  citizens
       abroad can do to either renew an old ID-card or to replace an ID-card
       that is lost, Director Azaz replied that  Iraqi  citizens,  who  live
       abroad, need to go to Iraq to obtain a new  national  ID  card.  When
       asked if it was possible for issuance  of  old  ID  cards  to  Iraqis
       living abroad he responded that an Iraqi citizen abroad, who wants to
       apply for an old ID card, an ID document that  is  still  in  use  in
       Iraq, must go to an Iraqi embassy to have their  fingerprints  taken.
       In addition, an applicant must bring a power  of  attorney,  and  the
       three main documents:  the  old/expiring  ID  card,  the  nationality
       certificate, and the  residency  card  (only  held  by  the  head  of
       household). The way to prove Iraqi nationality to the embassy is by a
       power of attorney. The embassy will forward the  application  to  the
       Ministry of Foreign Affairs and  the  Ministry  of  the  Interior  in
       Baghdad. The process is very long and can easily take from six months
       to a year. The source added that  there  are  many  problems  in  the
       procedure, and that the applicant must give proof of life.  When  the
       application is approved, the applicant will be issued an old ID  card
       - not the new national ID card.

   16. In relation to obtaining a replacement CSID  in  the  UK,  the  Upper
       Tribunal in SMO, KSP   &   IM   (Iraq)  at   paragraph   383  endorse
       paragraph  26  of AAH  (Iraqi  Kurds -internal  relocation)  Iraq  CG
        [2018] UKUT 00212 (IAC) which  details   the   numerous  and  varied
       documents  that are required in order to obtain a CSID from the Iraqi
       Embassy in the UK.  Paragraph 26 of AAH states: "If applying  through
       a consulate abroad the requirements are different.  Having  contacted
       the consulate in London, and checked on  the  website  of  the  Iraqi
       embassy in Sweden, Dr Fatah states that the authorities will  require
       the applicant to first make a statement explaining  why  he  needs  a
       CSID  and  attach  this  to  his  application   form,   which    must
       countersigned  by   the   head   of   the   applicant's  family   and
       stamped  by  the  consulate  or  embassy;  he   must   then   produce
       his Iraqi passport and proof of status in the  country  where  he  is
       applying, the name of a representative (proxy) in Iraq, an additional
       form completed by the head of the applicant's family  verifying  that
       the contents of his application form were true,  four  colour  copies
        of  his  INC,  and  10  colour  photographs. Crucially the applicant
       must be able to produce something which can establish the location of
       his family's details in the civil register.  This should be  a  CSID,
       an INC or birth certificate. If none of these are  available  to  the
       applicant he must supply the identity documents of his parents.  This
       evidence again accords with that  of  Landinfo  (December  2017)  who
       conclude that it can be difficult to obtain replacement ID  documents
       from an embassy abroad for the individual who is unable to verify his
       or her identity." The appellant submits  it  is  reasonably  unlikely
       that he will not be able to obtain a  replacement  CSID  in  the   UK
       as  he  does  not  have  access  to   the   required  documents,  but
       this not made out.

   17. As the advocates were advised at the start of the hearing a search of
       the website of the Republic  of  Iraq  Ministry  of  Foreign  Affairs
       website, re: acquisition of replacement CSID, checked on 15 July 2020
       states:

           The Consular Section organizes the papers to  obtain  the  Civil
           Status Card and send them to the General Directorate  of  Travel
           and Nationality / Directorate of Civil Status in accordance with
           the following steps : -

           1.     The citizen submits an application to the mission stating
                his or her need for the Civil Status Card.

           2.     The citizen attaches  with  the  application  form  (Form
                Annex 1) the original copy, not the  copied.  This  form  is
                used to obtain the Civil Status Card for the first  time  or
                to renew it or to get damaged or  lost  alternate  form  and
                stamp with the circular stamp of the consulate.

           3.     The form above filled in by the head  of  the  family  or
                family  housewife  or  the  owner  of  the  record,  or  the
                guardian, or the  legal  agent  signing  in  their  explicit
                signatures   as   the   contents   serve   as   a   personal
                acknowledgement of the correctness of what they stated.

                The form includes the following information: -

                The number  of  the  page,  the  record,  the  name  of  the
                directory and the governorate,  in  which  the  registration
                happened  according  to  the  census  of   1957   and   full
                descriptions and the names of those the applicant  wants  to
                give them a personal card. The applicant must sign and write
                his full name and address in the cell provided and the  form
                must be stamped by the consul.

           4.     Two 3 x 3 cm photos must be attached with  the  form  and
                two copies of each person attached one in the  box  provided
                to the photo of the applicants and the second photo attached
                to it.

           5.     In case of request a lost identity replacement the Consul
                should write down the statement of the applicant in the back
                of the form in addition to the  above.  The  statement  must
                include answering three questions,  namely,  (Where  do  you
                think the place of loss of the identity card,  when  do  you
                lost it and how do you  lost  it?)  The  statement  must  be
                signed by the applicant and install the full name  and  left
                thumb fingerprint and signed by the consul  and  stamped  by
                the stamp of the consulate and  sent  with  the  application
                form a copy of  the  lost  identity  card,  a  copy  of  the
                identity card of his father,  his  brother  or  non  married
                sister - certified by the consul being as a replica. In case
                of request damaged replacements  the  applicant  must  write
                down a statement signed by him and signed and stamped by the
                Consul and attach the damaged identity with  the  form.  The
                applicant  must  attach  with  the   application   of   lost
                replacement or damaged a recent photograph of him.

           6.      Any  official  document  must  be  attached   with   the
                application to support the personality of the applicant.

           7.     Amount of (750) dinars  is  met,  equivalent  in  foreign
                currency one dollar fee for the  issuance  of  identity  and
                under a receipt of accounting (37 A). (Consulate Letter  No.
                8 / 4 / 21/84715).

           8.     The embassy to send what is mentioned above in  a  letter
                to the General  Directorate  of  Travel  and  Nationality  /
                Directorate of Civil Status and a copy of it to the Consular
                Department for its  information  and  for  following-up  and
                accelerating the completion of the documents.

           9.     The citizen can authorize one of the citizens inside Iraq
                (private  authorization)  to  come  to  the  Civil   Affairs
                Department for the purpose of following-up.

           10.    The department of  Nationality  and  Civil  Status  holds
                competent of auditing the information and then organize  the
                Civil Status identity based on records in 1957 and  sent  to
                the Ministry of Foreign Affairs to send it to the embassy or
                the mission concerned for the purpose  of  delivery  to  its
                owner.

           Note: For the purpose of obtaining the Civil Status Card to  the
           children of Iraqi citizens abroad this  requires  the  following
           actions:

           1.     The citizen has to prove reality of his marriage  to  the
                Department of Civil Status of being married.

           2.     The citizen should mark the birth certificate of the new-
                born in the Department of Civil Status.

           3.     After Checking the items ( 1) and  (  2  )  above  ,  the
                citizen  can  apply  to  the  embassy  for  the  purpose  of
                obtaining the Civil Status Card to his children  within  the
                contexts the embassy informed by.

   18. The appellant further  submits  that  the  position  in  relation  to
       obtaining replacement documentation in the UK has moved on from  SMO,
       KSP & IM (Iraq) in that the  respondent's  latest  Country  Policy  &
       Information Note dated 30 June 2020 contains information at  Appendix
       I from the Respondent's Returns Logistics Department. This states the
       following:

           "CSID cards are being phased out  and  replaced  by  INID  (Iraq
           National Identification) cards. It is not currently possible  to
           apply for an INID card outside of Iraq. As  a result, the  Iraqi
           embassy in London are advising their  nationals  in  the  UK  to
           apply instead for a 'Registration Document(1957)' which they can
           use to apply for other documents such as passports  or  an  INID
           card once they have returned to Iraq." Thus, it appears that the
           Iraqi Embassy in London will not issue a CSID but  instead  will
           issue a 'Registration Document (1957)'  which  can  be  used  to
           apply for an INID in Iraq.   SMO, KSP & IM (Iraq) is very  clear
           that to safely pass through checkpoints in Iraq it is  necessary
           to show a CSID or an INID and other forms of  identity  document
           (even a passport) is not acceptable. It is  submitted  that  the
           appellant would be unable to travel safely across Iraq  even  if
           he were able to be issued with a 'Registration Document  (1957)'
           by the Iraqi Embassy in London. A copy of this document  appears
           at Annex A to this judgment.

   19. Although Mr Cole submitted it was not clear what the  effect  of  the
       Registration Document was it is clear this is  an  official  document
       issued by the authorities in Iraq as confirmation of an  individual's
       status as an Iraqi  national.  It  is  also  clear  that  the  stated
       intention of the Iraqi authorities  is  that  possession  of  such  a
       document is a  means  to  enable  an  individual  to  obtain  further
       identity documents required which, in light of the up-to-date country
       information must refer to the new Identity Document, when they do not
       have the means to obtain the same for themselves in Iraq.

   20. The appellant's argument has always been that he  could  not  contact
       any family in Iraq, including his paternal uncle, but his claim  with
       regard to such has been found  to  lack  credibility.  The  appellant
       further submits that even if he were able to  contact  his  uncle  in
       Kirkuk there is nothing to suggest that the uncle would  be  able  to
       obtain all of the documents required by paragraph 26 of AAH such that
       the appellant could be issued a CSID in the UK.  The  difficulty  for
       the appellant with such submission is that many things  that  he  has
       claimed have been shown not to be true. As he has not  contacted  his
       uncle, which the First-Tier Tribunal preserved findings show  is  not
       an unreasonable suggestion, the appellant cannot establish  that  the
       requisite documents could not be obtained. The  Paternal  uncles  own
       entry in the family book will enable the appellants family details to
       be traced.  It is  not  shown  the  application  form  could  not  be
       completed by the uncle as the appellants appointed agent or the uncle
       could not appoint a person approved for this purpose, if needed.

   21. The appellant also attended school  in  Iraq,  according  to  replies
       given by him in his  screening  and  asylum  interview,  where  there
       should also be required details concerning  his  CSID  number  and/or
       other  information  confirming   his   official   identification   in
       accordance with normal procedures. It is known that a valid  CSID  is
       required to enable an Iraqi to obtain access to education.

   22. The appellant has also not established that he does not  have  access
       to his own immediate family.  The  First-Tier  Tribunal  specifically
       records that when asked about contact with his family  the  appellant
       was 'evasive and reluctant to give straightforward answers' and it is
       a preserved finding that his claim to have no such  contact  was  not
       found credible. As it has not been shown the appellant does not  have
       contact with his family the requisite details could be obtained  from
       that source too.

   23. In relation to obtaining either his original or replacement  passport
       the First-Tier Tribunal found the evidence in relation  to  the  same
       inconsistent. The appellant claimed his passport was with his parents
       and, as it has been found his claim not  to  have  contact  with  his
       parents is not credible, the appellant could have the  passport  sent
       to him in the UK which the appellant could then provide to the  Iraqi
       embassy.

   24. As the appellant has not made out that he cannot be returned to  Iraq
       with an identity document issued by the Iraqi authorities and a valid
       passport he has not made out he will not be able to  be  returned  to
       Baghdad and, in light of  the  return  of  availability  of  internal
       flights  within  Iraq,  travel  to  the  IKR.  The  submissions  made
       regarding the need for documentation to pass  through  roadblocks  so
       far as they relate to travel  by  land  has  not  been  shown  to  be
       relevant although, if land travel was required, the  appellant  fails
       to establish that the documentation that he will possess, which  will
       not be removed from his possession on arrival at  the  airport,  will
       not be sufficient to enable him to travel internally.  The  appellant
       has also not established that as he has contact with both his  family
       and/or an uncle they cannot vouch for his identity if required.

   25. In the headnote of SMO it is recorded that 'P is unable  to  board  a
       domestic flight between Baghdad and the IKR without either a CSID, an
       INID or a valid passport. If  P  has  one  of  those  documents,  the
       journey from Baghdad to the IKR by land is affordable  and  practical
       and can be made without a  real  risk  of  P  suffering  persecution,
       serious harm, or Article 3 ill treatment nor would  any  difficulties
       on the journey make relocation unduly harsh.'

   26. It is not disputed that the appellant could not remain in Baghdad  as
       he has no family or other connections in Baghdad.

   27. In relation to the reasonableness of internal relocation to the  IKR,
       the appellant submits this is not viable and relies upon SMO,  KSP  &
       IM (Iraq) which specified the relevant factors for  consideration  in
       relation to the reasonableness of relocation to the IKR:

           "The UNHCR's stance is therefore that internal relocation within
           the  IKR  is  not  generally  available  as  a  result  of   the
           humanitarian situation. The  only  exceptions  to  that  general
           stance are where it can be established that the individual would
           have access to:

             i) Adequate shelter in the proposed area of relocation  in  the
                KR-I, noting that IDP camps or  informal  settlements  would
                not qualify as "adequate shelter";

            ii) Access  to  essential  services  in  the  proposed  area  of
                relocation  in  the  KR-I,  such  as   potable   water   and
                sanitation, electricity, health care and education; and

           iii) Livelihood opportunities; or in the case of  applicants  who
                cannot be expected to provide for their own livelihood  (for
                example  female-headed  households,  elderly  applicants  or
                applicants  with  disabilities),  proven   and   sustainable
                support to enable access to an adequate standard of living."

           "In respect of a Kurdish individual from the Formerly  Contested
           Areas, the UNHCR's stance essentially  replicates  the  guidance
           given in AAH (Iraq), albeit in a more compressed form.  Decision
           makers must consider whether a Kurdish  returnee  has  a  viable
           support network in accordance with that decision. In  the  event
           that  they  do  not,  consideration  must  be  given  to   their
           individual's specific circumstances with a view  to  determining
           their ability to secure accommodation and employment in the IKR.
           It will be unreasonable for a  Kurdish  individual  to  relocate
           from the Formerly Contested Areas to the IKR in the absence of a
           viable support network or the means to  find  accommodation  and
           employment in accordance with the guidance in  AAH  (Iraq),  the
           ongoing application of which is confirmed."

   28. The appellant claims he has no family in the IKR and that there is no
       evidence that he has any sort of viable support network in  the  IKR.
       He claims it is unlikely that he would be able to find  accommodation
       other than critical shelter arrangements.  It  is  claimed  the  high
       unemployment rates  (70%  for  IDPs)  and  the  appellant's  lack  of
       connections would make it unlikely  that  he  is  able  to  obtain  a
       regular income especially as he  has  no  particular  skills.   Thus,
       applying the factors detailed in SMO, KSP & IM (Iraq)  the  appellant
       claims he has no realistic prospect of securing a regular income,  or
       support by other means, and thus internal relocation to  the  IKR  is
       unduly harsh.

   29. What the submission relating to internal relocation options does  not
       refer to is the fact the  appellant  has  an  uncle  in  Kirkuk,  who
       assisted the family when they fled their home  area.   The  appellant
       claims this relative is unwilling to assist him as a  result  of  his
       sexuality and the reason he fled and claimed asylum, but that element
       of the appellants claim has been found not to be credible.

   30. The uncle lives in Kirkuk. It is now  the  case  that  the  level  of
       violence in this area is not sufficient to cross  the  Article  15(c)
       threshold.

   31. It is not made out on the evidence that the  appellant  would  become
       destitute in the short time he would have to spend in  Baghdad  while
       he made arrangements to re-join his paternal uncle in Kirkuk.

   32. I find the appellant has a patrilineal relative  living  near  Kirkuk
       who could assist him to obtain a replacement identity document  whist
       the appellant is the UK and after his return.  Even if the  appellant
       cannot remember the details of where his family information is to  be
       found, it is much more likely than not that his  paternal  uncle  has
       that information.  Also, as stated in AAH, the uncle would  be  under
       an obligation to assist the appellant.  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce in
       AAH found that:

           "3.    For an Iraqi national returnee (P) of Kurdish  origin  in
           possession of a valid CSID or Iraqi passport, the  journey  from
           Baghdad to the IKR, whether by air or land,  is  affordable  and
           practical and can be made without a real  risk  of  P  suffering
           persecution, serious harm, Article 3 ill treatment nor would any
           difficulties on the journey make relocation unduly harsh. ?

           8. If P has family members living  in  the  IKR  cultural  norms
           would  require  that  family   to   accommodate   P.   In   such
           circumstances P would, in general,  have  sufficient  assistance
           from the family so as to lead a 'relatively normal life',  which
           would not be unduly harsh.  It  is  nevertheless  important  for
           decision-makers to determine the extent of any assistance likely
           to be provided by P's family on a case by case basis."

   33. On the evidence before me, therefore, even if  there  is  an  Article
       15(c) risk in Tuz Khurmatu, the appellant could obtain a passport and
       identity document and be taken in by his paternal uncle in Kirkuk. He
       has a viable internal relocation option away from  Tuz  Khurmatu  and
       accordingly, the standard for international protection is not met and
       the appeal falls to be dismissed.

   34. Internal relocation with the Formerly Contest Area was considered  in
       SMO who published the following guidance:

           "Relocation within the Formerly Contested  Areas  (and  Disputed
           Territories)

           400.    As  a  result  of  the  respondent's  concession  in  AA
                (Iraq)(that situation in the Contested Areas, as  they  then
                were)  generally  reached  the  Art  15(c)  threshold,   the
                possibility of  relocation  within  the  Formerly  Contested
                Areas has not  previously  arisen  for  consideration  in  a
                country  guidance  decision.  That  concession  having  been
                withdrawn, however, the respondent  made  it  clear  in  her
                written submissions,  at  [148]-[149]  in  particular,  that
                relocation  within  the  Formerly  Contested  Areas  was   a
                possibility  upon  which  she  relied,   albeit   that   she
                recognised the 'particular  care'  which  was  necessary  in
                doing so.

           401.   The  UNHCR  urges  more  than  particular  care  in  this
                respect. Under the  sub-heading  'Areas  of  Iraq  where  an
                IFA/IRA  is  not  available',  the  UNHCR  straightforwardly
                discounts the possibility of relocation within the  Formerly
                Contested  Areas  or  the  Disputed  Territories   for   the
                following reasons: UNHCR considers that an  IFA/IRA  is  not
                available in areas formerly controlled by ISIS or  otherwise
                affected by conflict in  light  of  continued  human  rights
                violations  and  abuses  by  state  and  non-state   actors,
                continued  ISIS  presence  and  ongoing  anti-ISIS  military
                operations in these areas. UNHCR further considers  that  an
                IFA/IRA is not available in the disputed areas due to  these
                areas'  sensitive  security,   political   and   demographic
                dynamics and the risk of further destabilizing the situation
                through population movements, including in the Districts  of
                Kirkuk,  Khanaqin  (Diyala  Governorate)  and  Tuz  Khurmatu
                (Salah Al-Din Governorate).

           402.   Whilst we are required  to  attach  significance  to  the
                views of the UNHCR,  we  consider  these  statements  to  be
                somewhat too prescriptive and to apply too broad a brush  to
                the situation in the  areas  under  consideration.  We  have
                concluded that the situation in the formerly contested areas
                does not in general  (with  one  exception)  engage  Article
                15(c). And  we  do  not  consider  that  the  return  of  an
                individual to those areas would in general breach Article  3
                ECHR. In so concluding, however, we have recognised that the
                situation is different in each  of  the  governorates  under
                consideration and at a more localised  level.  For  example,
                although the situation in Western Mosul will  not  generally
                contravene  Article  3  ECHR,  it  might  be  thought   that
                relocation to an area with such badly damaged infrastructure
                and  other  such  problems  would   be   unduly   harsh   or
                unreasonable under Article 8 QD.  We  respectfully  disagree
                with the UNHCR's view that relocation  within  the  Formerly
                Contested Areas must be ruled out in all cases; there may be
                some  cases  in  which  an  individual  could   safely   and
                reasonably relocate within the Formerly Contested Areas.

           403.   All must depend on the  facts  and  there  must,  in  the
                context of Iraq, be an assessment of the three  factors.  As
                in any assessment of internal relocation under  the  Refugee
                Convention or the Qualification Directive, a decision  maker
                must assess whether a place of relocation would be safe  for
                the individual applicant and whether he  can  reasonably  be
                expected to stay in that part of  the  country.  Whether  as
                part  of  the  latter   enquiry   or   as   a   freestanding
                consideration, it will also be necessary to consider whether
                the individual can feasibly access and reside in  the  place
                of relocation. The UNHCR provides valuable guidance on  each
                of these issues (safety, feasibility,  and  reasonableness),
                and we rely significantly on that guidance in our analysis.

           404.   Safety. There is, as we  have  explained  at  length,  no
                general Article 15(c) or Article 3 ECHR risk throughout  the
                Formerly Contested Areas.  Where  an  individual  originates
                from that small part of  the  Formerly  Contested  Areas  in
                which there is a general Article 15(c) risk, or where it  is
                found as a result of the sliding  scale  analysis  that  the
                article  is  engaged  by  reference  to   their   particular
                circumstances,  relocation  within  the  Formerly  Contested
                Areas or the Disputed Territories may obviate  the  risk  to
                that individual. In the latter type  of  case,  a  decision-
                maker will be required  to  consider  whether  the  specific
                circumstances which engaged the sliding scale  in  the  home
                area  will  continue  to  be  relevant  in  the   place   of
                relocation. The  significance  of  ethno-religious  identity
                will vary from area to area, for example.

           405.   Feasibility.  On  25  April  2019,  the  UNHCR  issued  a
                position paper entitled Access and Residency Requirements in
                Iraq: Ability of Persons Originating from Formerly ISIS held
                or Conflict-Affected Areas to Legally Access and  Remain  in
                Proposed Areas of Relocation. It made clear that people from
                these  areas  (particularly  Sunni  Arabs)  were  likely  to
                require the following in order to settle in another area:  a
                sponsor,  a  recommendation  from  the  local  mukhtar   and
                security  clearance  from  the  relevant  agencies.   (These
                documents are over and above the  ordinary  requirement  for
                civil  status  documentation,  without  which   freedom   of
                movement and subsistence are impossible in  any  event).  In
                Diyala, these were known  to  be  the  requirements  but  in
                Khanaqin  District,  an  individual  would  be  required  to
                produce letters from National Security and  Intelligence  in
                addition.  In  Kirkuk,  sponsorship  requirements  had  been
                lifted but a support letter from the local  mukhtar  in  the
                proposed  areas  of  settlement  would  be   required.   The
                respondent's February  2019  CPIN  on  Internal  Relocation,
                civil documentation and returns serves, at 8.1.1 to  confirm
                that the situation regarding entry  to  Kirkuk  is  somewhat
                restrictive. The material cited therein is from  the  Danish
                Fact Finding Report. We  note  that  the  UNHCR's  May  2019
                guidance underlines the importance of considering whether an
                individual can take up residency and 'durably remain' in the
                area under consideration,  particularly  with  reference  to
                Sunni Arabs and Sunni Turkmen.

           406.   Viewed in context, we find these statements unsurprising.
                As we have demonstrated with reference  to  qualitative  and
                quantitative data, the situation in Iraq is incomparable  to
                how it was in the period 2014-2017. A  (massively  depleted)
                threat from  ISIL  and  other  security  challenges  remain,
                however,  and  it  is  clear  that  the  security   agencies
                including the PMU are rigorous about checking the identities
                of individuals who travel from one  area  to  another.  That
                they should  make  further  checks  in  the  event  that  an
                individual seeks not merely to travel, but to settle, is the
                understandable product of this environment, and particularly
                so in the Formerly Contested Areas. In  the  event  that  an
                individual  has  a  connection  with  a  proposed  place  of
                relocation in the Formerly Contested Areas, we see no reason
                why  they  would  be  unable   to   secure   the   necessary
                documentation in order to settle in such  an  area.  In  the
                event that there is no such connection, however, we consider
                it is unlikely to be feasible for a person from  within  the
                Formerly Contested Areas to relocate within that area.

           407.   Reasonableness. We record that we were not presented with
                extensive argument on the correct approach to this question.
                Insofar as the speeches in Januzi [2006] UKHL 5; [2006] 2 AC
                426and AH (Sudan) [2007] UKHL 49; [2008] 1  AC  678generated
                controversy which was considered at length  in  AAH  (Iraq),
                the argument has been settled by the decision of  the  Court
                of Appeal in AS  (Afghanistan)  [2019]  EWCA  Civ  873.  The
                dominant test is as expressed by Lord  Bingham  at  [21]  of
                Januzi: The decision maker, taking account of  all  relevant
                circumstances pertaining to the claimant and his country  of
                origin, must decide whether it is reasonable to  expect  the
                claimant to relocate or whether it would be unduly harsh  to
                expect him to do so.

           408.   We bear in mind, but shall not set  out,  the  additional
                guidance given by Underhill LJ (with whom King and Singh LJJ
                agreed) at [61]of AS (Afghanistan). In particular,  we  bear
                in mind the injunction that the assessment must be holistic,
                taking account of all  the  circumstances  of  the  proposed
                place of relocation and the circumstances of the  particular
                individual. It is in the context of that instruction that we
                hesitate before giving guidance which might be  thought  too
                prescriptive; what might be  unduly  harsh  or  unreasonable
                (these being two sides of the same coin) for one individual,
                might not be for another. We nevertheless consider that  the
                general position in respect of the Formerly Contested  Areas
                is as set out by the UNHCR. Given the multitudinous problems
                faced by those in  the  Formerly  Contested  Areas  and  the
                Disputed Territories, it will often be unreasonable  for  an
                individual  to  relocate  within  that  area.   Whilst   the
                conditions in those areas do not  cross  the  threshold  for
                Article 15(c) or Article 3 ECHR protection, the humanitarian
                considerations in those areas are such that it will often be
                unreasonable to expect an individual to resettle there.

           409.   The position in respect of those who are able to access a
                viable support network in a  proposed  place  of  relocation
                within  the  Formerly   Contested   Areas   is   potentially
                different. An individual who seeks to relocate, for example,
                from the mountainous area near  Baiji  in  which  ISIL  have
                doctrinal control could potentially relocate to  Baiji  city
                without undue hardship if he is found to have  a  supportive
                family network there. In any such case, decision-makers will
                need to undertake a holistic assessment, taking into account
                the personal characteristics of the individual  in  question
                and the situation in the area of proposed relocation. Whilst
                relocation within this area is likely to  be  the  exception
                rather than the rule, we agree with the respondent that  the
                assessment requires particular care, and disagree  with  the
                UNHCR's conclusion that it is to be ruled out altogether."

   35. In relation to the prospects of an internally displaced person  being
       able to obtain an INID Danish Immigration Services  report,  November
       2018:

           "Implementation of the new national ID card in Erbil

           15.    The Directorate of Nationality and Civil Status in  Erbil
                issued new national ID cards to 25 percent of the  citizens;
                while in Baghdad, 75 percent of the populations already  got
                their new national ID card.

           16.    With regard to IDPs in Erbil, they must go to their place
                of origin to apply for a new national ID card.  There  is  a
                plan to open an office for IDPs, but it might take more than
                one year to establish. Director Azaz further said that  when
                this office is established, and, for instance,  if  an  IDP,
                who is from Mosul, obtains an ID card from this  office,  it
                would appear on the ID card that  the  card  was  issued  in
                Mosul. This could  potentially  cause  a  problem  for  IDPs
                living and getting married in KRI.

           17.    For disabled or  very  old  people,  the  Directorate  of
                Nationality and Civil Status may  go  to  the  home  of  the
                person to register him or her there. The office will bring a
                mobile laptop and equipment to take the person's  biometrics
                in their home."

   36. The respondents latest CPIN on the issue of redocumentation states-

           Redocumentation

           6.1    Assistance

           6.1.1  The British Embassy Baghdad, in a letter dated 4 December
                2014, explained that given the long history of  displacement
                in Iraq, there were 'well  established'  procedures  whereby
                those not in  possession  of  their  civil  documents  could
                obtain replacement documents

           6.1.2  EASO stated in February 2019: 'In 2014, UNHCR  reportedly
                assisted  with  re-documentation  efforts,  supporting   the
                Ministry of Migration and Displacement and the  Ministry  of
                Interior with establishing re-documentation centres for IDPs
                who fled Mosul, Salah al Din, Diyala, Anbar, and Kirkuk,  as
                well as in Anbar. It assisted 7000  IDP  children  in  2015-
                2016,  many  of  whom  were  supported  in  acquiring  civil
                documentation. UNHCR reported that in the  course  of  2017,
                18600 "vulnerable Iraqis" had received legal  documents  and
                more than 23300 had received legal assistance in relation to
                documentation through its centres, mobile courts, or  mobile
                documentation teams. 'According to experiences described  by
                IDPs interviewed by MRG, there are "no standard registration
                of application requirements" that government offices follow,
                the process of applying for  reissuance  is  complex,  "non-
                standardized and fraught with allegations of corruption".

           6.1.3  On 1 November 2019, UNHCR published  a  report  on  civil
                documentation for IDPs. The report provided updates  on  the
                'Mobile Civil  Documentation  Project'  and  stated:  'Since
                April 2019, UNHCR has  collaborated  with  the  Ministry  of
                Interior (MoI) of the Government of Iraq to implement mobile
                missions to dispatch government  officials  to  issue  civil
                documentation to IDPs in camps  and  out-of-camp  locations.
                'By November 2019, with the collaboration of  the  Kurdistan
                Regional Government (KRG),  MoI  has  launched  missions  to
                issue  Civil  Status  IDs  (CSIDs)  and  Iraqi   Nationality
                Certificates  (INCs)  to  IDPs  in  three  camps  in   Erbil
                Governorate  (Baharka,  Harsham,  Debaga),  three  camps  in
                Ninewa Governorate (Hasansham U2 and U3, AlKhazir) and  five
                camps in Duhok Governorate (Chamishko, Darkar, Bersive 1 and
                2, Garmawa). As of the end of November, MoI issued  a  total
                of 7,123 CSIDs  and  11,226  INCs  to  IDPs.  'In  addition,
                between 26 October and 3 November, MoI piloted a mission  in
                a UNHCR-supported community centre in Kasnazan  sub-district
                in Erbil Governorate to issue Unified ID  Cards  (UNIDs)  to
                IDPs living in urban areas. As a result, MoI issued a  total
                of 471 UNIDs for  IDPs  displaced  from  Anbar  Governorate.
                During November, MoI also launched missions to  issue  UNIDs
                in camps in  Sulaymaniyah  Governorate  (Ashti)  and  Kirkuk
                Governorate (Laylan 1). 'Throughout the missions, UNHCR  and
                partners provided material and technical support to  MoI  by
                preparing applications, establishing  registration  centres,
                and  providing  necessary  equipment  such   as   computers,
                printers  and  office  supplies.  UNHCR  and  partners  will
                continue  to  work  with  MoI  to  expand  the  missions  to
                different governorates to facilitate IDPs' access  to  civil
                documentation.'

           6.1.4  UNHCR published a fact sheet of the documentation of IDPs
                in October 2019 and stated that 'As part of  its  effort  to
                help  IDPs  obtain  documentation,  since  2018,  UNHCR  has
                rehabilitated 2 offices  in  Kirkuk  Governorate  and  three
                offices in Ninewa Governorate and donated five  vehicles  to
                the Mosul Civil Affairs Directorate  Office.  Rehabilitation
                of 4 more offices in Ninewa is ongoing.'65 Furthermore,  'In
                November [2019], the Ninewa Directorate  of  Civil  Affairs,
                Passports and Residencies  inaugurated  the  first  national
                identification card centre in  Ninewa.  UNHCR  rehabilitated
                the building and provided furniture and devices.

   37. The appellant as an IDP fails to make out he would  not  be  eligible
       for assistance from the UNHCR  to  assist  with  the  redocumentation
       process including obtaining a New  identity  document  in  accordance
       with the above guidance if unable to return to his home area.

   38. This is an appeal in which all the claim adverse to  the  appellant's
       case  made  before  the  First-Tier  Tribunal  were  found  to   lack
       credibility. It is also a case in which  the  appellant  relies  upon
       case law and country evidence to support his claim to  be  unable  to
       obtain the necessary documentation to enable him to  live  reasonably
       in Iraq but the ability or otherwise to do so is fact  specific.  The
       appellant has not helped his case by relying on what  the  First-tier
       Tribunal effectively found are lies. The factual matrix as found does
       not support the appellant's claim that  when  applying  the  guidance
       contained in SMO and country information he is entitled to a grant of
       international protection. The appellant is  no  more  than  a  failed
       asylum seeker who has not established even  to  the  lower  standards
       applicable in an asylum appeal that he cannot  obtain  a  replacement
       passport, officially  issued  identity  document,  does  not  have  a
       support network available to him on  return  to  Iraq,  or  has  lost
       contact with his family. The evidence clearly supports a finding that
       it is the opposite of what the appellant is claiming that is the true
       position.



Decision

   39. I remake the decision as follows. This appeal is dismissed.

Anonymity.

   40. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to  rule  45(4)(i)  of
       the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.

       I make such order pursuant to  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
       (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.


Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 20 July 2020

                                   Annex A

    Annex I: Information obtained from the Home Office's Returns  Logistics
    Department - April 2020.

    Failed Asylum Seekers (FAS) Laissez Passers (LPs)

      1) Please can you describe the process of obtaining a  Laissez  Passer
         for a failed asylum seeker from the Iraqi Embassy in London  in  as
         much detail as possible (please include details of  what  documents
         are required, if they have  to  undergo  an  interview,  timescales
         etc).

             For the enforced  return  of  a  FAS  there  is  no  interview
             requirement. However, they will need to hold at least  one  of
             the following (copy or original, valid, or expired)  in  order
             for the Iraqi Embassy to issue a Laissez Passer:

             .    Passport

             .    Birth Certificate

             .    Marriage Certificate

             .    Civil Status ID (CSID)

             .    Iraqi Nationality Certificate (INC)

             .    Iraq National Identity Card (INID)

             .    Iraq residency card

             .    Registration Document (1957)

             The embassy verification process tends to take 10-14 days.

             We only currently have agreement  to  enforce  the  return  of
             single males.  All  categories  of  voluntary  cases  will  be
             considered (including those without documents) but  they  will
             usually require an interview face to face or by phone.

      2) Can an individual obtain LPs for the rest  of  their  family  (i.e.
         spouses, children etc)?

             Voluntary cases only. For enforced cases see answer to Q1.

      3) What documents do family members in Iraq have  to  present  to  the
         Ministry  of  Foreign  Affairs  in  order  to   prove   the   FAS's
         nationality?

             Any from the list in response to Q1. Phone numbers  or  signed
             affidavits from family members in Iraq are also useful to  the
             verification process.

      4) What happens once a FAS's nationality is verified by  the  Ministry
         of Foreign Affairs in Iraq? i.e. does this verification get sent to
         the Iraqi Embassy in London to issue a LP?

             Yes but most of the straight forward verification of documents
             can be done locally by the embassy.

      5) How long does this verification take?

             10-14 days locally, up to 30 days+ if enquiries  are  required
             in-country.

      6) Are these processes the same for individuals who originate  in  the
         Kurdistan Region of Iraq?

             Yes

    Civil Status Identity Cards (CSIDs)

      1) Please can you describe the process of  obtaining  a  Civil  Status
         Identity Card for a failed asylum seeker from the Iraqi Embassy  in
         London in as much detail as possible  (please  include  details  of
         what documents or information are required, timescales etc).

             CSID cards are being phased out and  replaced  by  INID  (Iraq
             National Identification) cards. It is not  currently  possible
             to apply for an INID card outside of Iraq. As  a  result,  the
             Iraqi embassy in London are advising their nationals in the UK
             to apply instead for a 'Registration  Document  (1957)'  which
             they can use to apply for other documents such as passports or
             an INID card once they have returned to Iraq. The registration
             document (1957) must be applied for on the applicant's  behalf
             by a nominated representative in Iraq. In order to  start  the
             application,  the  individual  requiring  documentation  would
             normally provide at least one  copy  of  a  national  identity
             document (see above list Q1, FAS)  and  complete  a  power  of
             attorney (to nominate a representative in Iraq) at  the  Iraqi
             embassy along with the embassy issued  application  forms.  If
             they have no copies of identity documents they also would need
             to complete a British power of attorney validated by  the  FCO
             and provide parents' names, place, and date of birth to  their
             nominated representative in Iraq. Once  issued  the  nominated
             representative will send the registration document  (1957)  to
             the applicant in the UK. The process takes 1-2 months. The  HO
             cannot apply for documentation other than Laissez  Passers  on
             someone's behalf but the embassy is willing to check to see if
             the individual already holds documents and provide  copies  if
             necessary.

      2) Can an individual obtain CSIDs for the rest of their  family  (i.e.
         spouses, children etc)?

             See answer to Q1 CSID cards. The male head of  the  family  in
             the UK will apply on their behalf.

      3) Please can you describe the process of obtaining a CSID via a proxy
         in Iraq in as much detail as possible  including  what  information
         would be required, what government department issue the replacement
         CSID, timescales etc.

             See above answer to Q1 (CSIDs).

      4) What people in Iraq can act as a  proxy  for  a  FAS  (i.e.  is  it
         strictly family members or can it be friends, Mukhtars in the  FAS'
         village etc.

             See response to Q1 (CSID cards). They need to obtain  a  power
             of attorney from the embassy (and a British one  validated  by
             the FCO is applicable) for a representative in Iraq to act  on
             their behalf. It is just a nominated representative  of  their
             choice.

      5) Would it be possible for the Iraqi Embassy in London to  produce  a
         CSID for the FAS while they are  still  in  the  UK  based  on  the
         information provided by the proxy in Iraq?

             Yes. See answer to Q1 above. The embassy just operates a 'post
             box service' for the Ministry of Interior who process them.

      6) Are these processes the same for individuals who originate  in  the
         Kurdistan Region of Iraq?

             Yes
