
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                   Appeal Number:
PA/10395/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                      | Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 13th May 2019                       | On 22nd May 2019                     |
|                                       |                                      |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR

                                   Between

                                     AR
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs Chowdhury of Counsel instructed by Hasan
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is the appellant's appeal against the  decision  of  Judge  Graham
    made following a hearing at Birmingham on 7th January 2018.  The  judge
    dismissed the appellant's appeal against the  respondent's  refusal  to
    grant him asylum on the grounds that he would be persecuted on a return
    to Iran as a Christian convert.

 2. Both parties agreed that this appeal has to be reheard.

 3. First, the judge stated that the weight to be attached to the  evidence
    of the Reverend M was reduced  by  his  non-attendance  at  the  appeal
    hearing.  However, the judge refused to adjourn the appeal in order  to
    allow the Reverend M to attend,  wrongly  stating  that  there  was  no
    supporting evidence before her that he had had a stroke  when  in  fact
    there was such evidence.

 4. Second, the judge stated  that  the  other  witness  had  accepted  the
    appellant's account without question when in fact his evidence was that
    he was aware that individuals could  use  the  church  as  a  means  to
    bolster their asylum claim and he explained why he did not believe this
    to be the case with the appellant.

 5. The judge  erred  in  law  in  failing  to  take  account  of  material
    evidence.  Her decision is set aside.  It will have to be re-made by  a
    judge other than Judge Graham at Bradford in  order  for  comprehensive
    credibility findings to be re-made.

 6. An anonymity direction is made.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


[pic]



Signed                              Date 21 May 2019


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor

