
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/10294/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard by Remote Skype at Field House         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 3rd November 2020                         |On 14th December 2020         |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON

                                   Between

                                     HR
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms E Rutherford, instructed by Halliday Reeves Law
                    Firm
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


The appellant is a citizen of Iran of Kurdish ethnic origin and was granted
permission to appeal the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Broe, who in
a decision promulgated on 30th January 2020 dismissed the appellant's
appeal against the Secretary of State's decision to refuse his application
for leave to remain on protection and human rights grounds.  The appeal
related to the appellant's claimed involvement in smuggling and the
distribution of anti-government propaganda as well as posts on Facebook.

The grounds for permission to appeal asserted the judge erred in law at
paragraphs 36 to 41 by failing to apply correctly, if at all, the findings
of HB (Kurds) Iran CG [2018] UKUT 00430.  It was submitted that the judge
erred in finding that the appellant's Facebook posts would not come to the
attention of the authorities.  Rather than applying the findings in
HB(Kurds) Iran CG to the applicant's Facebook evidence, the judge relied
instead on the finding in AB and Others (internet activity - state of
evidence) Iran [2015] UKUT 00257.  Applying the findings in HB(Kurds) Iran
CG, which is a country guidance case, it could be seen that much of the
judge's findings were unsustainable despite his assertion that the findings
in HB(Kurds) Iran CG had been adopted.

It could be seen that for someone who would be returned to Iran without a
passport the likelihood is that the appellant's Facebook profile would be
viewed by the authorities as part of their investigation into him.  Whether
his posts were private was immaterial as he would be forced to show his
account.  From the Facebook posts submitted it was the appellant in the
profile picture despite the profile being named H H.  It could be seen from
the imagery despite the lack of any translation that the posts are likely
to be inflammatory.  They contain the KDPI logo and Kolbar (smugglers)
news.  The assertion that the applicant could avoid persecution by deleting
his Facebook posts was contrary to HJ (Iran) [2010] UKSC 31 principles.
The applicant could not be expected to hide his political opinions to avoid
persecution.

Initially the application for permission was refused by First-tier Tribunal
Judge Saffer, who stated that the grounds did not engage with the evidence-
based findings of fact that the Facebook post was not in the appellant's
name and therefore no risk that the Iranian authorities would detect it.

The grounds were renewed, stating that the findings in HB (Kurds) Iran CG
[2018] UKUT 00430 (IAC) would mean that the appellant as part of the
screening process on return would be forced to provide details of his
Facebook account.  Although not in his name, H H rather than H R, the
profile picture was clearly that of the appellant.  It would therefore be
clear to the Iranian authorities that the Facebook profile was that of the
appellant when he was forced to show them at the point of return his
Facebook profile.  The imagery contained in those posts was very similar to
the imagery cited on HB (Iran) Iran CG.

Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Keith on the basis
that Judge Broe arguably failed to consider paragraph 114 of HB (Iran) Iran
CG in relation to questioning about Facebook, instead adopting analysis
from paragraphs 38 to 40 which suggested that Facebook activity may not be
investigated or discovered (permission was granted on all grounds).





Submissions

Neither party had submitted further documentation.  At the hearing Ms
Rutherford relied on the grounds of appeal.  She accepted that there was no
challenge to the findings of fact, but the challenge was on the
authorities' perception of the Facebook entries by the appellant on his
return.  The judge had stated at paragraph 36 that the appellant would not
come to the attention of the authorities but in the light of HB the pinch
point would be that the appellant did not have a passport and that he had
said he left illegally.  At the pinch point there was a real possibility
that the Facebook posts would come to the attention of the authorities.

Ms Rutherford when questioned about the credibility findings on the
appellant's political claims stated that he would not be expected to lie on
return, and she referred to the 'Danian' point.

Mr Clarke in response stated that the political claim was found not to be
credible and the judge in the relevant paragraphs at 36 and 37 found the
appellant could delete the entries in Facebook.  There was nothing unlawful
if he did not delete his Facebook and he should not be permitted to rely on
a deliberate lie.  The appellant was intending to rely on non-genuine
documents to place himself at risk.  On his political profile the appellant
was not at risk on return.

Analysis

As held in YB (Eritrea) v SSHD [2008] EWCA Civ 360 (the 'Danian' point),
even if an opportunistic claim for asylum is made, there is still a need to
evaluate the risk which arises as the result of political activities whilst
in this country.

On a careful reading, the Judge Broe did evaluate that risk. As can be
gleaned from the decision the judge made the following findings.  He
accepted that the appellant was Iranian of Kurdish ethnic origin but
rejected the remainder of the appellant's account and made comprehensive
adverse credibility findings against him, not least because he had given
contradictory and inconsistent accounts.  Those findings were not
challenged.  For example, the judge reasoned "I do not find it credible
that he would take the risk of flagging down a strange vehicle when in
possession of political material".  In relation to his asylum claim in
Italy, the judge found that "this is not the behaviour of a person in
genuine need of protection and that his credibility is further undermined"
and the judge at paragraphs 36 and 37 found the following

    "36. When he gave notice of appeal the appellant said that he had
    engaged in sur place activities in the form of Facebook posts
    supportive of the KDP.  He provided copies in his bundle.  These are
    undated and untranslated.  They are in the name of H H and the entries
    are private.  The appellant's evidence was that he did not understand
    how to use Facebook which he used to watch video recordings.  I can see
    no reason to conclude that they would come to the attention of the
    Iranian authorities or that the appellant could be identified from
    them.  I am satisfied that the appellant, probably with help, created
    these pages with a view to bolstering his claim.  No credit attaches to
    him for that.  The appellant spoke of his faith in interview but says
    that does not form the basis of a protection claim.

    37. In summary the Appellant is an Iranian citizen of Kurdish ethnic
    origin.  I accept that he may have bee[n] involved in smuggling but not
    that he has as a consequence come to the attention of the authorities.
    I do not accept that he was involved in an incident with border guards.
     I do not accept that he was involved in the distribution of political
    leaflets or that he came to the attention of ettelaat.  I do not accept
    that the Iranian authorities would have any knowledge of the Facebook
    entries.  It is open to the appellant to delete them in any event.  It
    is against that background that I have considered what risk he might
    face on return to Iran'.




The Judge cited HB (Kurds) Iran CG [2018] UKUT 00430 and also cited AB and
Others (internet activity - state of evidence) Iran [2015] UKUT 0257 and
was clearly aware of and applied both authorities.

The grounds of appeal specifically stated that the appellant would be
detained because he had no passport.  However, at paragraph 10 the judge
found that the appellant stated in his screening interview specifically
that he would be able to "provide his passport and vaccination
certificate".  There was no challenge to those factual findings.  The
appellant's account was comprehensively dismissed on credibility grounds.

It was open to the judge to find, which he did, that a risk could arise at
what is described as the "pinch point" which occurs when a person is
returning to Iran but the authority HB(Kurds) Iran CG refers to Iranian
nationals returned without their own passports who would be questioned and
could be asked to provide information enabling the authorities to gain
access to their Facebook page.

At paragraph 114 to 116 in HB (Kurds) Iran CG the Upper Tribunal concluded
as follows:

"114. However, we noted at [97] above that it is not disputed that a
returnee without a passport is likely to be questioned on return, confirmed
in the expert evidence before us and recognised in existing current country
guidance, for example, SSH and HR.  Ms Enayat's evidence was that it is
part of the routine process to look at an internet profile, Facebook and
emails of a returnee.  A person would be asked whether they had a Facebook
page and that would be checked.  When the person returns they will be asked
to log onto their Facebook and email accounts.  That is also the effect of
her evidence given in AB and Others which was accepted by the Tribunal in
that case (see [457]).

115.  Mr Metcalfe accepted that the material posted by the appellant on
Facebook, if it became known to the authorities, would expose him to
prosecution with a risk of imprisonment and that this would result in a
real risk of ill-treatment.  It was also accepted that the appellant's
Facebook page is currently visible to the public at large.

116.  We are satisfied that the content of the appellant's Facebook page
would become known to the authorities on return as part of the process of
investigation of his background.  That is the effect of the expert and
background evidence before us. It is then, no step at all to the conclusion
that this would involve a real risk of persecution and Article 3 ill-
treatment in his case, by reason of detention and ill-treatment and likely
prosecution.  His Facebook posts would reveal not only his support for
Kurdish rights but also his having insulted the Iranian regime and leading
figures in it.  This is reasonably likely to be regarded not only as having
'crossed the line' in terms of political views or activity, but also in
terms of religious dissent."




HB (Kurds) Iran CG did not hold that illegal exit combined even without a
valid passport would create a risk of persecution or Article 3 ill-
treatment and having dismissed the appellant's credibility in relation to
his account, it is not maintained that he even left illegally.  In sum, the
appellant had access to a passport and thus paragraph 114 of HB (Kurds)
Iran CG, referring as it does to a returnee without a passport being likely
to be questioned on return, does not assist this appellant.  It was not the
appellant's case that his passport had expired or that he had even left
Iran without a passport.

The judge clearly considered the appellant's "sur place activities in the
form of Facebook posts supportive of the KDP".  It was open to the judge to
find that the posts were undated and untranslated and further that they
were in the name of someone other than the appellant and that the entries
were private.  The judge was entitled to conclude that there was "no reason
to conclude that they would come to the attention of the Iranian
authorities or that the appellant could be identified from them".

In paragraph 36 the judge states that he was satisfied that the appellant,
probably with help, because the appellant had stated that he was not
familiar with Facebook, "created these pages with a view to bolstering his
claim" and that "the appellant spoke of his faith in interview but says
that does not form the basis of a protection claim".

In HB (Kurds) Iran CG there were clearly translations of the documents but
moreover, in this instance, albeit that the appellant maintains his
reliance on sur place activities, he would not be expected to lie on return
to Iran because the judge found the appellant was merely bolstering his
claim and was not credible.  As pointed out in RT (Zimbabwe) [2012] UKSC 38
an appellant is not expected to lie but, this appellant would not be
expected to lie, but merely tell the truth.  The appellant has a different
name from that on his Facebook and it was open to the judge to find that
this would not alert the authorities. (The photograph is almost
indistinguishable and identifying an appellant from a photograph on
Facebook was not a finding in HB).  The judge was also entitled to rely on
the fact that the posts relied upon and what was written was untranslated.
The judge specifically stated that he did not accept that the appellant was
involved in the distribution of political leaflets or that he had come to
the attention of the authorities. In the circumstances, the Danian point as
Ms Rutherford relied on would not arise because it was open to the
appellant to delete entries which the judge found he had, with help,
created to bolster his claim.  The appellant would be expected to tell the
truth on return and not rely, as Mr Clarke pointed out, on lying to the
authorities or provide documents which were not genuine.

As the judge cogently found, it is open to the appellant to delete those
posts because they do not represent his genuine beliefs.  It was against
that background that the judge found that the Iranian authorities would not
have any knowledge of the Facebook entries.  This is not a case where an
appellant, in a cynical sur place claim, posts information on the internet
which cannot be retracted.  As the judge found, these posts were private
and can be removed.

As such, as the judge stated at the close of paragraph 37, "it is against
that background that I have considered what risk he might face on return to
Iran".  That background included the fact that the appellant had a passport
and was able to delete entries and posts on a Facebook account which was
not even in his name.  The decision accordingly does not offend the
principles in HJ (Iran) [2010] UKSC 31.

I therefore find no material error of law in the decision and the decision
of the First-tier Tribunal will stand.

Notice of Decision

The appeal remains dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed      Helen Rimington       Date 4th December 2020


Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington

