
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10349/2017
                                                               PA/10398/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 19 December 2018                           |On 28 January 2019            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN


                                   Between

                                     ZA
                                     BB
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr G Lee, Counsel instructed by Dean Manson
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms H Aboni, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants are citizens of Mauritius.  The first appellant was born
    on 7 February 1995.  The second appellant is her daughter, who was born
    on 4 January 2017.  The first appellant has a second  child,  who  was
    born on 30 July 2018.


 2. The first appellant, who is Muslim, entered the UK in  March  2015  and
    claimed asylum on 8 February 2017 on the  basis  that  she  fears  ill
    treatment from her family because she had a relationship with a man who
    is a Hindu (whom I shall refer to as RB) and has had a child  with  him
    out of wedlock.

 3.  Following  refusal  of  their  application  by  the  respondent,   the
    appellants appealed to the First-tier Tribunal where their  appeal  was
    heard by Judge Pears.  In a decision promulgated on 21 September  2018,
    the judge dismissed the  appeal.   The  appellants  are  now  appealing
    against that decision.

Background

 4. The first appellant's claim, in summary, is that when her  father,  who
    is a religious and traditional Muslim, became aware of her relationship
    with RB (which commenced in Mauritius in 2014) he beat her  and  (along
    with her oldest brother) threatened to kill  her  if  the  relationship
    continued.  The first appellant claims that she maintained contact with
    RB despite the threat from her family and that when this was discovered
    her father went to RB's family home, resulting in a fight  between  the
    families.  The first appellant then, according to her account, went  to
    a friend's house for two weeks, following which she travelled to the UK
    (via France) with RB.  The first appellant claims her relationship with
    RB ended in around January 2017.

 5. The appellants  obtained  an  expert  report  from  an  anthropologist,
    Professor Boswell.  In her  report,  Professor  Boswell  described  the
    first appellant's family as being very influential with her uncle being
    a senior officer in the police/coast guard.  She described Mauritius as
    a multi-cultural and multi-religion island that is gender conservative.
     She described an organisation called SOS Femmes  which  provides  some
    (time limited) protection to women who  experience  domestic  violence.
    Professor Boswell stated that it is possible the  first  appellant  may
    face degrading and humiliating circumstances in Mauritius and that  she
    would be unlikely to be able to create  a  viable  livelihood  for  her
    child.  She also stated that, amongst other  things,  that  many  women
    have children out of wedlock in Mauritius and society provides  support
    to women who struggle to make ends meet; that the first appellant could
    avail herself of police protection and could access assistance from SOS
    Femmes for a limited time; and that  the  law  recognises  illegitimate
    children.

Decision of the Respondent

 6. The respondent rejected the first appellant's asylum  application.  Her
    account of events in Mauritius was  not  accepted.   In  addition,  the
    respondent stated that even if the events transpired  as  described  by
    the  first  appellant,  the  authorities  in  Mauritius  would  provide
    sufficient protection and/or she could relocate internally.

 7. The respondent considered whether removing the first appellant would be
    contrary to Article 8 ECHR  and  concluded  that  it  would  not.   The
    respondent was satisfied that  she  would  not  face  very  significant
    obstacles reintegrating into Mauritius; that the best interests of  the
    second appellant were to return to Mauritius with her mother, and  that
    there were not exceptional circumstances to warrant a  grant  of  leave
    outside the Immigration Rules under Article 8 ECHR.

Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 8. The judge did not find the first appellant's account credible.   Whilst
    he accepted she entered into a relationship with a Hindu man, he  found
    her claim to have been threatened and at risk from  her  family  to  be
    "exaggerated and without foundation".  The reasons the judge  gave  for
    finding the first appellant's account lacked credibility include:

      a) The judge reached the conclusion that the first appellant  was  not
         honest about when her relationship with RB ended.  He  found  there
         to be significant discrepancies in her account of when she last had
         contact with RB, and incongruous that she obtained evidence from  a
         friend of RB after she purportedly no longer had contact with  him.



      b) The judge described as a "significant discrepancy" that  the  first
         appellant gave varying accounts of the frequency  of  the  violence
         she suffered from her family.

      c) The judge found damaging to the first appellant's credibility  that
         she did not mention a broken nose before the hearing  and  did  not
         get medical attention when staying at a friend's home in Mauritius.



      d) The first appellant  adduced  letters  between  her  and  a  friend
         discussing the risk she would face in Mauritius.  The judge  stated
         that he did not accept the first appellant's claim that  they  were
         not prepared to assist the asylum claim.

      e) The judge found it inconsistent with the  first  appellant's  claim
         that even though her parents went "wild" when the relationship  was
         discovered she was able to leave home, live with a friend  who  was
         known to her  parents  and  leave  Mauritius  by  air  on  her  own
         passport.

      f) The judge found the first appellant's claim that  her  family  were
         still looking for her in Mauritius "unconvincing"  given  what  she
         said about the island  being  very  small  and  that  if  she  were
         returned it would soon be known about.

 9. The judge concluded, after rejecting  the  first  appellant's  account,
    that  her  parents  only  disapproved  or  did  not  agree   with   the
    relationship with a Hindu man.

10. The judge recognised that the appellants might be at risk even  if  the
    first appellant's  account  was  rejected.   At  paragraph  66  of  the
    decision the judge stated that:

         "Whether or not she is credible [the first appellant]  is  still  a
         single Muslim woman with two illegitimate children,  one  aged  one
         and the other less than one year old and there  is  no  doubt  that
         those bare facts might cause significant issues for her should  she
         return and I find on the basis of the expert's report that she as a
         sole woman with illegitimate children would be  part  of  a  social
         group in Mauritius."

11. The judge found, on the basis  of  the  expert  report  and  background
    evidence, that the first appellant would be able to  avail  herself  of
    adequate state protection.  The judge also found that she would be able
    to benefit from organisations such as SOS Femmes who provide shelter to
    victims  of  violence.   The  judge  also  found  that  the  status  of
    illegitimate children is recognised in Mauritius and that Mauritius  is
    a multi-cultural and multi-religion island.

12. Having rejected the appellant's protection claim, the  judge  proceeded
    to consider whether removal of the appellant from the UK  would  breach
    Article 8 ECHR.

13. At paragraph 72 the judge stated:

         "I have rejected the first appellant's claim  to  be  at  risk  and
         therefore she  has  not  met  the  requirements  of  paragraph  276
         ADE(1)(vi) of the Immigration Rules and shown that there  would  be
         very significant obstacles to her integration into Mauritius.

14. With respect to the first appellant's children, the  judge  found  that
    they have only been in the UK for a short period of time,  are  not  at
    school or nursery, have no health issues,  and  it  is  in  their  best
    interests to remain with their mother and go to Mauritius with her.

Grounds of Appeal and Submission

15. Mr Lee, on behalf of the appellants, advanced three  arguments  in  the
    grounds of appeal and in oral submission.

16. Firstly, he submitted that the judge  erred  in  his  approach  to  the
    assessment of the first appellant's credibility.   He  maintained  that
    the judge erred because he rejected the respondent's  reasons  for  not
    finding the first  appellant  credible  but  still  found  against  the
    appellant.  He also argued that the judge  erred  because  he  posed  a
    series of rhetorical questions that were not put to the first appellant
    at the hearing.  A further argument in the grounds is  that  the  judge
    erred by finding it inconsistent that the first appellant  stayed  with
    friends and left Mauritius on her own passport  when  it  was  not  the
    first appellant's case that her parents  had  sufficient  influence  to
    prevent her leaving the country or locate her at a  friend's  home.  Mr
    Lee also argued that the judge misconstrued  the  appellant's  evidence
    about the frequency of beatings and properly understood  there  was  no
    inconsistency.

17. The second ground of appeal argues that the judge failed to engage with
    the expert report and its findings  as  to  risk  on  return.   Mr  Lee
    highlighted references in  the  report  to  difficulties  in  obtaining
    support, cultural norms that mean women like the  first  appellant  are
    vulnerable to violence, and  that  the  first  appellant  would  be  an
    outcast from her religious community.

18. The third ground of appeal argues that the  judge  conflated  the  test
    under Paragraph 276 ADE(1)(vi) (very significant  obstacles)  with  the
    test for persecution under the Refugee Convention and Article 3 ECHR by
    giving as his reason for concluding that Paragraph 276  ADE(1)(vi)  was
    not satisfied that the appellant's claim to be at  risk  was  rejected.
    Mr Lee contended that the judge  also  erred  by  failing  to  consider
    whether the difficulties the appellant would face in  Mauritius  amount
    to very significant obstacles, even if the threshold for persecution is
    not met.

19. Ms Aboni argued that the judge gave adequate  reasons  to  support  his
    credibility findings and his conclusion as to risk on return.  She also
    argued that the judge considered the claim at  its  highest  and  still
    rejected it.  She also argued that the judge adequately considered  the
    expert report which, properly read, does not support a conclusion  that
    women are persecuted or that there is insufficient state protection  in
    Mauritius.

Analysis

20. I will consider each of the three grounds of appeal in turn.

Credibility

21. In a detailed and comprehensive decision the judge, after comparing the
    first  appellant's  asylum  interview,  written  statement   and   oral
    evidence, identified several discrepancies in,  and  issues  with,  her
    account which he found undermined her credibility.

22. For example, one of the reasons the judge gave for  not  believing  the
    first appellant was that she gave different dates for when she last saw
    RB.  These differences were significant  because  in  one  version  she
    would have seen RB after the second appellant was born and in the other
    she would  not.   The  judge  was  entitled  to  give  weight  to  this
    discrepancy given, in particular, the centrality of  RB  to  the  first
    appellant's asylum claim.

23. Another reason the judge did not believe the first appellant  was  that
    he thought she was lying about letters from a friend which talked about
    the danger she would face from her family.  The first appellant  stated
    under cross examination that these letters were not written to  further
    the asylum case.  The judge found this  to  be  untrue  given,  amongst
    other things,  that  they  were  written  in  English  when  the  first
    appellant had only limited English and accepted that she spoke  to  the
    author of the letters in Creole and French.  The judge did  not  accept
    her explanation that  she  and  her  friend  write  simple  letters  in
    English.  Mr Lee argued that there is nothing wrong with  a  friend  of
    the appellant submitting letters of support explaining  the  risks  she
    would face.  This is correct.  However, the  issue  identified  by  the
    judge - and the reason these letters were found to undermine the  first
    appellant's claim - is that  the  first  appellant  insisted  that  the
    letters were not written to support the claim.   The judge was entitled
    to find this implausible and give this weight in assessing credibility.



24. Mr Lee is critical of the judge finding it  inconsistent  that  despite
    her parents being "wild" when the relationship with RB was  discovered,
    the first appellant was able to live with a friend and leave  Mauritius
    on her own passport without her family  preventing  her.   However,  in
    Professor Boswell's report it is  stated  that  the  first  appellant's
    family are very  influential  and  include  a  senior  officer  in  the
    police/coast guard.  Given these family circumstances, this finding  by
    the judge is not unreasonable.

25. Mr Lee questioned the judge's credibility findings because they are not
    the same reasons given by the respondent in  the  reasons  for  refusal
    letter.  I do not consider this argument to have merit.  It was for the
    judge to determine for  himself,  and  based  on  his  own  assessment,
    whether to accept the first appellant's account and he was not  limited
    to evaluating the issues raised by the respondent in  the  reasons  for
    refusal letter.

26. Likewise, I do not find merit in the contention that  the  judge  erred
    because he posed rhetorical questions.  In my view,  this  is  no  more
    than a criticism of the writing style adopted by the  judge.   Although
    some of the findings in paragraphs 59-62 of the decision are framed  as
    questions, it is clear, even from a cursory reading  of  the  decision,
    that the judge has made findings  (not  asked  questions)  relevant  to
    credibility.

27. A proper understanding  of  the  findings  on  credibility  requires  a
    reading  of  paragraphs  22-45  (under  the  heading  "The   Evidence")
    alongside the section dealing  with  "Findings".   Read  together,  and
    considering the decision as a whole, I am satisfied that the judge  has
    carefully  explored  the  evidence  before  reaching  an  adequate  and
    sustainable conclusion about the truthfulness of the first  appellant's
    claim to fear violence from her family.

Expert Report

28. The report of Professor Boswell provides a  mixed  picture  as  to  the
    challenges faced by unmarried women with children (and women  who  have
    faced domestic violence)  in  Mauritius.   Although  Professor  Boswell
    concludes  that  the  first   appellant   may   face   very   difficult
    circumstances, the report describes a society  where  children  out  of
    wedlock are not uncommon and where support  is  available.  The  report
    also describes support from non-governmental  organisations  for  women
    facing violence and the availability of police protection.

29. It is clear from the judge's analysis of the  report  in  the  decision
    that he has considered and understood its contents. I therefore do  not
    agree that the judge has failed to  properly  engage  with  the  expert
    report. The challenge to the decision on this basis is not sustainable.



Paragraph 276 ADE(1)(vi)

30.  In  order  to  satisfy  the  'private  life'  requirements  under  the
    Immigration Rules the first appellant was required to show  that  there
    would be very significant obstacles to her integration into  Mauritius.
    I agree with Mr Lee that at paragraph 72 the judge  equated  the  "very
    significant  obstacles"  test  in  the  Immigration  Rules   with   the
    'persecution' test under the Refugee Convention.  This  was  an  error.
    However, I agree with Miss Aboni that the error was not material.

31. The first appellant  has  spent  the  vast  majority  of  her  life  in
    Mauritius and is familiar with the culture and society.   Although  she
    would,  as  a  single  woman  with  two  children,   face   substantial
    challenges, the evidence of Professor Boswell, as explained  above,  is
    that Mauritius is a society where single women  are  not  uncommon  and
    illegitimate children are recognised by law.   In  these  circumstances
    the judge was entitled to find that,  in  the  absence  of  a  risk  of
    violence from their family, the obstacles the appellants would face  on
    return to Mauritius do not  meet  the  threshold  of  very  significant
    obstacles.

Conclusion

32. For the reasons given above, the judge was entitled to reject the first
    appellant's claim to be at risk from her family.  He was also  entitled
    to find, based on the substance of the  expert  evidence  of  Professor
    Boswell, that the first appellant, as a single woman with  illegitimate
    children, would not face challenges in Mauritius that meet  either  the
    very significant obstacle threshold under Paragraph 276  ADE(1)(vi)  or
    the persecution threshold under the Refugee Convention.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain a material error
of law.
|                                     |

|                                     |                                     |
|Signed                               |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan |Dated: 14 January 2019               |



