
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10303/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford IAC                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 15 September 2021                 |On 21 September 2021                 |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

                                     M R
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms M. Cleghorn, instructed on behalf of the
Appellant.
For the Respondent:    Mr M. Diwnycz, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


    Introduction:
    Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
    Anonymity was granted at an earlier stage of  the  proceedings  because
    the case involves protection issues. I find that it is  appropriate  to
    continue the order. Unless  and  until  a  tribunal  or  court  directs
    otherwise, the appellant is  granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these
    proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify him.  This  direction
    applies both to the appellant and to the respondent. Failure to  comply
    with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Introduction:

      1. In a decision promulgated on 14 July 2021 I  gave  my  reasons  for
         reaching the decision that there was a material error of law in the
         decision of the FtTJ promulgated on 30 November 2020.

      2. At a hearing on 9 July 2021 Ms Everett, Senior Presenting  Officer,
         conceded on behalf of the respondent that the decision of the  FtTJ
         disclosed the making of an error on a point of  law  and  that  the
         decision should be set aside. In a decision promulgated on 14  July
         I set out why I agreed with the concession made by the  respondent.
         The relevant part of my decision is replicated below.

             "34. Having had the opportunity to  discuss  the  issues,  the
                  parties were able to reach agreement and as set out in the
                  Rule 24 response it was conceded that there was a material
                  error of law in the FtTJ's decision on the basis that  the
                  judge gave  no  reasons  or  inadequate  reasons  for  not
                  accepting the appellant's claim that he would be  at  risk
                  of harm from the paternal uncles and the  family  members.
                  Ms Everett referred to the acceptance by the  judge  of  a
                  large part of the appellant's claim which he had found  to
                  be credible but that in  reaching  his  decision  had  not
                  taken into account the nuances of honour-based  crime  and
                  the risk from the family members and that this  error  fed
                  into the factual assessment also in terms of relocation in
                  the IKR. Whilst the judge referred to the cousins  in  the
                  IKR they appeared to be paternal cousins.

              35. Having considered the submissions of the parties including
                  the written representations, I am satisfied that the  FtTJ
                  erred in law  in  the  way  set  out  in  the  grounds  of
                  challenge and the submissions of the advocates.

              36. The FtTJ had accepted a  large  part  of  the  appellant's
                  claim concerning the events in Iraq and which had  at  its
                  core the land dispute involving the named Arab  tribe  and
                  his family relatives. Whilst the FtTJ accepted  the  death
                  of the appellant's father and cousin at the hands  of  the
                  tribe and accepted that there was  a  dispute  which  fell
                  within a blood feud ( at [23] )  he  did  not  accept  the
                  other part of the feud  concerning  his  family   and  his
                  claim to not wish to fight.  Both advocates agree that the
                  FtTJ did not give any reasons for reaching this conclusion
                  other than he would have expected him  to  have  contacted
                  his maternal uncle. The FtTJ considered that  his  failure
                  to contact the red cross for  five  years  undermined  his
                  factual account. However the appellant's evidence was that
                  he had not been in contact with his uncle since  2016  and
                  had arrived in the  UK  in  2018  an  therefore  FtTJ  was
                  incorrect about the period of time, and this affected  the
                  credibility assessment of this part of his claim.

              37. The grounds also set  out  other  issues  that  relate  to
                  internal relocation; it has been accepted by the FtTJ that
                  there would be an insufficiency of protection for  him  in
                  Mosul. In light of the error relating to the assessment of
                  risk from family members (and those who were  said  to  be
                  resident in the IKR) the advocates agree  that  the  error
                  also affected the consideration of this issue.

              38. For those reasons the decision of the  FtTJ  involved  the
                  making of an error on a point of law and the  decision  is
                  set aside.

              39.  For the avoidance of doubt the factual findings  made  by
                  the FtTJ in respect of the core of his factual claim  were
                  not challenged by the respondent.  Therefore  the  factual
                  findings of the FtTJ shall remain as  preserved  findings.
                  Both advocates agreed that the  following  facts  will  be
                  preserved.

              40. They are as follows:

                   1.  the  appellant  is  an  Iraqi  national  of  Kurdish
                      ethnicity from Mosul.

                   2. The appellant left Iraq in 2008 because of a  dispute
                      over some land  with  an  Arab  family  and  returned
                      voluntarily to Iraq because his  family  had  reached
                      agreement with the Arab family that he could keep the
                      land (at [15)).

                   3. The appellant was involved in a land dispute with the
                      Delam tribe who were supported by Daesh (at [17]).

                   4. A meeting took place to resolve the dispute  and  the
                      mechanism was mediation with elders (at [17]).

                   5. On 18 May 2015 the appellant's father and cousin were
                      shot by clan members and was told this by  his  uncle
                      and cousins.

                   6. There is insufficiency of protection in  Mosul  (  at
                      [26])."

      3. This is the remaking of the  decision  concerning  the  appellant's
         appeal against the respondent's decision  dated  10  October  2019,
         refusing his protection and human rights claims.

The background:

      4. The appellant is a national of Iraq of Kurdish ethnicity from Mosul
         who claimed asylum in the United Kingdom  on  18  May  2018.He  had
         first left Iraq in September 2008 and travelled to Norway where  he
         claimed asylum. His claim was refused, and he remained there for  4
         years before being deported back to Iraq.

      5. The appellant left Iraq for a  2nd  time  on  25  August  2015  via
         Germany and France before arriving in the UK  on  9  May  2018.  He
         claimed asylum on 18 May 2018 with his wife and two children as his
         dependents.

      6. The basis of his claim concerned a land  dispute.  The  appellant's
         father and  3  brothers  inherited  a  piece  of  land  from  their
         grandfather and at  the  beginning  of  July  2015,  an  Arab  clan
         supporting Daesh took possession of the land.

      7. Following talks and negotiations with the clan so that  they  could
         claim the land back, but they were not able to do so.

      8. In 2015 the appellant's father and cousin was shot  and  killed  by
         the Arab clan. Following the funeral the appellant's uncles  called
         a meeting and stated that the appellant needed to take up arms  and
         fight for the land and take revenge for the killing of  his  father
         and cousin. 3 days after the funeral the appellant's  cousins  went
         to the shops and members of the Arab clan shot at him.  His  cousin
         was driving, and he was able to escape by vehicle.

      9. The appellant claimed that he was at risk from his  family  because
         his uncle had stated anyone who refused to fight would  be  killed.
         The appellant refused to take up arms and left the area  travelling
         to his maternal uncle's house. After 3 days  his  maternal  uncle's
         friend helped him leave Iraq.

     10. Therefore the basis of his claim was that he would be killed by the
         Arab clan as a result of the land dispute, and he also  feared  the
         paternal uncles and family would kill him  because  he  refused  to
         take up arms and fight.

     11. In a decision letter dated 10 October 2019 the  respondent  refused
         his claim. It was accepted that he was an Iraqi national of Kurdish
         ethnicity, but  his  factual  claim  was  refused.  The  respondent
         rejected the appellant's account of their being a land dispute  and
         any subsequent problems that he had with the Arab clan or with  his
         family relatives. The respondent also considered  that  taking  the
         claim at its highest, he would not be at  risk  on  return  because
         there was sufficient protection provided by the authorities in Iraq
         (at [49]) but in  the  alternative  would  be  able  to  internally
         relocate.

     12. The respondent gave consideration to AA (article 15 (c  )  Iraq  CG
         [2015] UKUT 544 as amended by the Court of Appeal in the case of AA
         (Iraq) v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 944 and the CG decision in AAH (Iraqi
         Kurds- internal relocation) Iraq CG UKUT 00212 which was set out in
         the decision letter from paragraph 50.

     13. At paragraph 68 consideration was given to the CPIN Iraq:  internal
         relocation, civil documentation,  returns  version  dated  February
         2019.

     14. Based on the CG decision and the CPIN the  respondent  stated  that
         the appellant would be able to approach  the  appropriate  agencies
         and have the assistance needed to have  the  documentation  renewed
         and that  in any event as his factual claim had not been  accepted,
         he could return to his home area.

     15. In the alternative the issue of internal relocation was set out  at
         paragraphs 66 - 80 and that noted that his fear  was  returning  to
         Mosul but that he had not expressed a  fear  of  other  regions  in
         Iraq.

     16. Thus it was considered if unable to return  to  his  home  area  he
         could relocate to Erbil or Sulaymaniyah. This was on the basis that
         the family members and the Arab clan did not  have  the  power  and
         influence to locate the appellant; he spoke Kurdish Sorani and  had
         skills that  he  could  utilise  and  gain  lawful  employment.  He
         demonstrated an ability to adapt by attempting to establish  a  new
         life in the UK. Furthermore to mitigate any hardship  he  would  be
         eligible on return to a voluntary payment if he decided  to  return
         to Iraq voluntarily. It was not unreasonable  or  unduly  harsh  to
         expect him to return to the IKR.  His claim was therefore  refused.
         The appeal came before the FtT on 6 November 2020.

     17. The factual findings made by the FtTJ are set out at paragraphs  23
         - 34. They can be summarised as follows.  The  judge  accepted  his
         account concerning the events in 2008 that he  left  because  of  a
         dispute over some land within the family and that he had  travelled
         to Norway where he remained for 4 years and that his claim had been
         rejected. The judge accepted that he had  returned  voluntarily  to
         Iraq because his family had reached agreement with the Arab  family
         that he could keep the land.

     18. As to the dispute between the appellant and  the  Arab  tribe,  the
         judge found that it was  plausible  that  meetings  took  place  to
         resolve the dispute and that it was usual for such disputes  to  be
         mediated by the elders. The judge found that  that  was  consistent
         with the external evidence of the  2020  CPIN,  Iraq,  blood  feuds
         which described the reconciliation processes. The judge found  that
         was also consistent  with  the  resolution  of  the  previous  land
         dispute in 2008. The judge therefore  accepted  that  part  of  the
         appellant's case.

     19. The judge also accepted that the account  given  by  the  appellant
         about the land dispute was plausible in the context of the  lawless
         situation in Mosul. In the light of the lack of  challenge  to  the
         appellant's evidence concerning the death of his father and cousin,
         the judge accepted that his claim that his father  and  cousin  was
         shot and killed by clan members was credible (at [18]).

     20. The judge therefore concluded  that  he  accepted  the  appellant's
         claim about the land dispute with his family members of  the  tribe
         and that was consistent with falling within  the  definition  of  a
         blood feud as referenced in  the  respondent's  CPIN  at  paragraph
         4.1.2 but that he had not established this is a  Convention  ground
         but that it was sufficient to engage articles 2 and 3 (  at  [23  -
         24].

     21. As to the appellant's fear of the tribe, the judge found that  they
         were nonstate actors and that by reference to the country materials
         and applying the principles in Horvath, there would be insufficient
         protection for the appellant because of the  local  nature  of  the
         dispute and the involvement of the large Arab tribe.

     22. The FtTJ did not accept that he would be at risk  from  his  family
         relatives and having considered the country background material  in
         light of the CG decisions, reached the  conclusion  that  he  could
         internally relocate to the IKR.

     23. The FtTJ dismissed his appeal.

     24. The  appellant  sought  permission  to  appeal  that  decision  and
         permission was granted by FtTJ Grant on 18  December  2020.   In  a
         decision promulgated on 14 July 2021, it was conceded on behalf the
         respondent the decision of the FTT J involve the making of an error
         in point of law. The reasons given for that decision  are  set  out
         earlier.

The remaking of the decision:

     25. The hearing took place on 17 September 2021, by means of a face-to-
         face hearing with the  appellant  giving  oral  evidence  with  the
         assistance of a Kurdish Sorani interpreter. I am satisfied that the
         interpreter and the appellant were both  able  to  understand  each
         other and no problems relating to interpretation  of  the  evidence
         was identified by any party at the hearing.

The evidence:

     26. I heard oral  evidence  from  the  appellant.  In  addition  I  was
         provided with a copy of the appellant's bundle which  consisted  of
         the documents relied upon for the purposes of  the  hearing.  There
         was also a supplementary bundle of documentation provided prior  to
         the hearing by electronic means and a paper  copy  was  also  sent.
         This included in it a witness statement on behalf of the  appellant
         and also an expert report from Dr Fatah. I also had a copy  of  the
         respondent's bundle .

     27. At the outset of his evidence the appellant stated that the witness
         statement in the bundle dated 17/8/21 and signed by  him  contained
         errors. When asked about this by his counsel he stated  that  there
         must have been something wrong with the interpretation. As a result
         Ms Cleghorn read the witness statement to him in its entirety.  The
         appellant indicated the areas where there were errors.  Firstly  at
         paragraph 2 that  he  wished  to  amend  the  place  the  CSID  was
         registered stating it should read "old Mosul  and  Al-Raesel  Qwr".
         The 2nd alteration was at paragraph 14 where he wished  to  add  in
         "France". Save for those 2 amendments  the  appellant  adopted  his
         witness statement as his evidence in chief. There  was  no  further
         questions asked of the appellant.

     28. In cross-examination, he was asked about the request  made  to  the
         German authorities for his CSID (page 22 of the bundle).  He  could
         not say when the request had been made by his solicitors  but  that
         his solicitor had said that  this  had  been  sent  to  the  German
         authorities.

     29. It was suggested to him that the information in the email contained
         insufficient information  in  it  for  the  German  authorities  to
         identify the documents stating that it only had his name  and  that
         of his wife, but no other details had been provided.

     30. When  asked  if  there  had  been  any  response  from  the  German
         authorities, the appellant stated that there had been no reply.

     31. When asked if he could remember details of the information  in  his
         CSID the appellant stated that he could not  remember  any  of  the
         details only his name and date of  birth  and  that  the  reference
         numbers on the document were "very long numbers" and he  could  not
         remember them.

     32. When asked if the German authorities had given him  a  receipt  for
         the documents taken by them, the appellant stated that they did not
         and that he did not remain in Germany but left  and  then  went  to
         France.

     33. As to contact with relatives and friends since he  arrived  in  the
         UK, the appellant stated that he had no contact with any family  in
         Iraq. He confirmed that the Red Cross had provided no results since
         his picture had been placed on the database in 2020.

     34. No further questions were asked in cross-examination.

     35. By way of clarification, the appellant was asked about what he  had
         said in interview (question 59) that he had a copy of his  CSID  in
         the UK. The appellant said that he had a copy of his CSID and  that
         he was told that when he came back to provide his  fingerprints  he
         should hand over the photocopy of the  CSID  to  the  Home  Office.
         Therefore 2 days after the interview and when he attended  to  give
         fingerprints he handed over those documents to the Home Office.

     36. He was asked about the Delam tribe and if they lived  in  the  IKR?
         The appellant stated that they live almost everywhere that  but  as
         he had never been to the IKR he did not know. When asked which clan
         he feared from the Delam tribe the appellant stated,  "I  fear  the
         Delam tribe". When  asked  which  particular  clan,  the  appellant
         stated, "they only have one name Delam tribe, that's it."

     37. When asked about the occupations of his paternal uncles he said  he
         had 3; the 1st 1 sold cars, 2nd 1 bought houses in the  3rd  1  was
         mechanically repaired cars.

     38. When asked to provide details of his wife's family,  he  said  that
         they lived in Mosul. He did not know they were still  there  as  he
         did not have contact with them because since they  left  there  had
         been "big trouble" and the only contact that he'd had was  in  2016
         with his maternal uncle. He said his wife  did  not  speak  to  her
         family members because after they left Daesh invaded Mosul  by  the
         time that happened they had lost contact with the family relatives.

     39. Both advocates were  given  the  opportunity  to  ask  any  further
         questions arising out of  those  clarification  questions,  but  no
         further questions were asked of the appellant.

     40. That completed the oral evidence.

The submissions:

     41. I then heard submissions from each of the advocates.

     42. Mr Diwnycz, in behalf of the respondent submitted that the decision
         letter was now of some age although some of the matters  raised  in
         it were still current.

     43. He identified 2 areas of the evidence. Firstly, he submitted  there
         was a paucity of information provided to the German authorities  as
         set out in the email at page 22. The email had  no  details  as  to
         when  it  was  sent,  and  the  details  provided  to  the   German
         authorities would not assist them to ascertain whether they had the
         CSID of the appellant  and  his  wife.  Given  the  lack  of  vital
         information that they had provided to  the  German  authorities  in
         that email it is not  surprising  that  it  did  not  take  matters
         further. It was a half-hearted approach and does not appear to have
         been followed up. Therefore little weight could be given to this as
         an effective or dispositive enquiry of the German authorities.

     44. The 2nd point he wished to make referred to the report of Dr Fatah,
         and that at section 7 at paragraph 75, Dr Fatah had confirmed  that
         there were facilities for issuing INID's but that CSID's may  still
         be  issued.  It  was  therefore  submitted  that  the   appellant's
         relatives and the maternal side or his wife's relatives could  send
         documents to enable  the  appellant  and  his  wife  to  redocument
         themselves.

     45. As to the appellant's evidence  and  his  lack  of  recall  of  the
         details on his CSID, Mr Diwnycz submitted that SMO was  still  good
         law and that most Iraqis will still remember those  details  absent
         any special reasons and as there were no special  reasons  provided
         by this appellant, it could be taken that he would  remember  those
         relevant details.

     46. As to risk of harm from the from the Delam  tribe he  referred  the
         tribunal to  Paragraph 80 of the expert report and  that  Dr  Fatah
         was of the view that it would not be accurate to present the entire
         tribe, which has millions of members, is  pursuing  the  appellant,
         rather one or more clans within the tribe may  wish  to  seek  upon
         him. It was submitted that that was a "conditional conclusion" that
         they "may wish to seek him" and as such was a mere possibility  and
         did not amount to a reasonable likelihood.

     47. Dealing with the issue of internal relocation, Mr Diwnycz submitted
         that it would be open to the appellant and his  family  members  to
         relocate outside of Mosul  to  the  IKR.  However,  this  would  be
         contingent on the appellant having  documentation  (see  CPIN  June
         2020). He confirmed that it was still the  position  that  enforced
         returns would be to Baghdad airport.

     48. Ms Cleghorn on behalf of the appellant submitted that  in  relation
         to the enquiry made with the German authorities, , by reference  to
         a decision MJ v SSHD (2013) 799, the Home Office  were  obliged  to
         verify and authenticate documents and that  once  the  Home  Office
         have information they have a duty to undertake  enquiries.  In  the
         alternative,  in  a  case  where  the  Secretary  of  State  had  a
         relationship with the other European  governments,  they  have  the
         ability to make those enquiries themselves.  The Secretary of State
         therefore could have undertaken those  enquiries  with  the  German
         authorities given that they had the right information but  had  not
         done so.

     49. Ms Cleghorn referred the tribunal to the preserved findings of fact
         (as set out earlier in the decision).  It  was  accepted  that  the
         appellant was from Mosul and that his account of being in  fear  of
         the Delam tribe had been accepted by the FtTJ and  it  was  further
         accepted  that  there  was  insufficiency  of  protection  for  the
         appellant in Mosul. Thus she submitted that the appellant had  been
         found credible and plausible in all respects save upon the issue of
         whether the paternal family members  would  turn  on  him  for  not
         assisting them following the death of the family relatives.

     50. In this context Ms Cleghorn submitted that the country  information
         set out in the respondent's CPIN relating  to  blood  feuds  (dated
         February 2020) provided some background to the appellant's claim as
         it gave a history of  how  blood  feuds  start.  She  referred  the
         tribunal to paragraphs 1.2.1, 2.4.2 and 2.4.3  in  support  of  her
         submission that the appellant if he did not avenge the  blood  feud
         would be at risk of an honour-based killing. She submitted that the
         appellant would become a target from his  own  family  members  for
         honour-based reasons. Reference was then made  to  the  CPIN  dated
         March  2021  dealing  with  honour-based  violence  and  particular
         reference made to paragraphs 1.2.1, 2.4.3 and  2.5.2.  Ms  Cleghorn
         submitted that the appellant's evidence which was that  he  refused
         to take part with any further revenge for the murder of his  family
         relatives and had run away supported the risk of harm from  honour-
         based violence. She therefore submitted that he would be at risk of
         harm in Mosul not only from the  Delam  tribe  but  also  from  the
         family relatives.

     51. Ms Cleghorn then dealt with the issue of  internal  relocation.  In
         this context she submitted the only realistic option would be  that
         of the IKR. She submitted that the appellant and his family members
         made a journey across Europe at a time when his wife was  sick  and
         that it is not reasonably likely that he would persisted with  such
         a journey if he could have relocated  elsewhere.  She  invited  the
         tribunal to accept that he had no family that he could  contact  on
         the paternal side and that the  issue  of  documentation  indicates
         that it is patrilineal. Whilst he had a maternal uncle he would not
         be able to assist in documentation and in any event he has  had  no
         contact with the appellant. She submitted that that was  consistent
         with the country material dealing with the events in Mosul in  2016
         where Daesh had been fighting in that area.

     52. Ms Cleghorn referred the tribunal  to  the  decision  of  AAH.  The
         following points were made:

          1) The appellant has no current documentation.

          2) The civil registry is in an area formerly held by ISIS.

          3) The appellant cannot return to Mosul as he would  be  at  risk
             and therefore any period in that area would place him and  his
             family members at risk.

          4) He has no contact with any male members of his family.

          5) He has no education (see question 19 of the interview).

          6) The appellant would not be able to board a flight from Baghdad
             without documentation and the nationality certificate  he  had
             was left in Mosul.

          7) The CSID is in Germany.

          8) The decision in AAH makes it  clear  that  without  assistance
             from family in the IKR options are  limited  and  here  it  is
             unlikely that the family would be able  to  find  anywhere  to
             live given that they have 2 children and have no funds to rent
             and where there is a high  unemployment  rate.  The  appellant
             cannot work without a CSID, and nepotism is  found  to  be  an
             important factor for employment.

          9) Suspicion would be raise as he comes to an area formerly  held
             by ISI S.

         10) The appellant's wife has some mental health problems, and  the
             appellant has a problem with his back.

     53. Ms Cleghorn submitted that the CG decision of AAH  recognised  that
         the appellant could not live in the IKR  without  registration  and
         therefore it would be unduly harsh for him to relocate to  the  IKR
         taking into account that he has  2  children  and  the  duty  under
         section 55 but also on the documentation position alone.

     54. As to the tribe, while she accepted that it was a big  tribe,  Iraq
         is a tribal society and that it is possible that at some point  the
         Delam tribe may find out where the appellant would be.

     55. Lastly she submitted, the June 2020 CPIN  made  it  clear  that  it
         would not be possible for the appellant to obtain an  INID  outside
         Iraq and that he would not be  able  to  go  to  Mosul  as  it  was
         accepted he would be at risk there. Equally he would not be able to
         obtain a CSID in Mosul for the same reason. Ms  Cleghorn  therefore
         invited me to allow the appeal.

     56. At the conclusion of the submissions I reserved my decision.  I  am
         grateful to the careful submissions made by each of the advocates.

Analysis of the evidence:

     57. In reaching my assessment, I bear  in  mind  that  it  is  for  the
         appellant to establish his claim under Art 3 of the ECHR  or  under
         Art 15(b) of the Qualification Directive. In order  to  do  so,  he
         must establish that there are  substantial  grounds  for  believing
         that there is a real risk of serious harm on return. The  appellant
         bears the  burden  of  substantiating  the  primary  facts  of  his
         protection  claim.  The  standard  is  a   reasonable   degree   of
         likelihood. The burden and standard of proof applies to the factual
         matters in issue in this appeal.

     58. I begin my assessment from the findings of fact that were preserved
         from the decision of the FtTJ.

     59. The appellant is a national of Iraq and is of Kurdish ethnicity. In
         2008, the appellant bought a piece of  land.  Following  this,  the
         appellant was threatened by an Arab family on the basis that he had
         no right to the land. The appellant left Iraq and claimed asylum in
         Norway where the claim was refused. He then returned to Iraq.

     60. On a  later  date,  the  appellant's  father  and  his  3  brothers
         inherited a piece of land in Mosul from  his  grandfather.  At  the
         beginning of 2015 the Delam tribe took possession of the land.  The
         appellant's father and 3 brothers tried to negotiate with the  Arab
         tribe to claim back the land however they would not return it.  The
         FtTJ found that whilst the turmoil in Mosul may  have  strengthened
         the tribe's position, it was plausible that the meeting took  place
         to resolve the  dispute.  This  was  consistent  with  the  country
         background evidence set out in the 2020 CPIN; Iraq blood feuds  and
         the reconciliation process described.

     61. Following this, when checking the land the appellant's  father  and
         family members found that the tribe had begun building on it.

     62. On 18 August 2015 the appellant's father and cousin  were  shot  by
         members of the Delam tribe. The judge accepted that this had  taken
         place.

     63. Therefore in light of those preserved  findings,  it  was  accepted
         that the appellant had been involved in a dispute  concerning  land
         between members of his family and members of the Delam tribe  which
         was consistent with the country background evidence (at  [23]).  In
         this context also the judge found that in Mosul the appellant would
         not have any sufficiency of protection because of the local  nature
         of the dispute and the involvement of the Delam tribe.

     64. It has not been disputed by  Mr  Diwnycz  that  in  light  of  that
         factual assessment that the appellant has demonstrated a reasonable
         likelihood that he would be at risk of serious harm if he  returned
         to his home area in Iraq.

     65. The final issue that remains is that  relating  to  the  risk  from
         family relatives. The appellant's evidence is  that  following  the
         funeral, the appellant's paternal uncles called a meeting, and  the
         appellant was told he needed to take up arms and fight for the land
         and take revenge for the killings of his  father  and  cousin.  The
         appellant's evidence was  that  his  uncle  said  that  anyone  who
         refused to fight would be killed and it was due to  this  that  the
         appellant left Iraq as he did not take up arms and fight.

     66. It is plain from the appellant's oral evidence given  in  interview
         that the appellant was  not  personally  threatened  by  his  uncle
         because the appellant had not told them that he would not fight  (I
         refer to the interview questions at Q130, Q132,Q134).

     67. I have therefore considered the appellant's claim in the context of
         the country background  evidence.  Ms  Cleghorn  has  referred  the
         tribunal to various passages in 2 particular  CPIN  documents;  one
         dealing with blood feuds and the other concerning honour  violence.
         She submits that the appellant's evidence, which  was  accepted  by
         the FtTJ as to the existent of blood feuds is consistent  with  the
         country materials.

     68. At paragraph 1.2.1 blood feud is described as  a  "form  of  tribal
         dispute. For the purposes of this note a blood feud  is  a  dispute
         between 2 families or tribes with a cycle of  retaliatory  violence
         in which each group fights or murders members of  the  other  group
         according to an ancient code of honour and behaviour." At paragraph
         2.4.2 the country  material  refers  to  those  being  involved  in
         conflict with members of different  tribes  over  matters  such  as
         disputes over land and that disputes can go on for many  years  and
         tribe members can inherit historic disputes. Finally  at  paragraph
         2.4.3 it is stated that if a tribe member is murdered  or  injured,
         the males of the victims  tribe  are  obliged  to  avenge  this  by
         killing someone in the perpetrators tribe triggering a blood feud.

     69. Ms Cleghorn further submits that as a result of the blood feud, the
         appellant has an  obligation  to  avenge  the  killing  by  killing
         someone in the perpetrators  tribe  relying  upon  paragraph  2.4.3
         above and that as the appellant had fled Iraq not wanting  to  take
         part in the blood feud, it would put the appellant at  risk  of  an
         honour-based killing. In support of  this  submission  Ms  Cleghorn
         relies upon the CPIN: "honour" crimes version 2.0 dated March 2021.
         She has referred the tribunal to paragraph 1.2.1 which describes an
         honour crime as "an act of violence or  abuse,  including  killing,
         which has been or may be committed to protect or defend the  honour
         of an individual, family and/or community for alleged or  perceived
         breaches of the family and/or community's code of behaviour."

     70. I observe that whilst reliance is placed upon this particular  CPIN
         and that it refers to "honour" crimes may be committed against both
         men and women, the  note  that  she  relies  upon  is  confined  to
         "honour" crimes against women. Furthermore the information in  this
         particular document does not refer  or  relate  to  the  particular
         facts and circumstances of the  appellant's  claim.  In  particular
         paragraph 2.4.3 which was the paragraph  Ms  Cleghorn  relied  upon
         only provides generalised support in the sense that an honour crime
         might be committed by a relative as a punishment for family  member
         because "they  have  gone  against  social  or  cultural  norms  or
         perceived  to  have  damaged  the  family's  reputation  by   their
         actions". The offences described do not refer to  this  appellant's
         circumstances although I accept this was not an exclusive list.  At
         paragraph 2.5.2 reference is made  to  the  Iraqi  Penal  Code  and
         Article 409 that permits "honour" as a  mitigation  for  crimes  of
         violence committed against family members and the code  allows  for
         lenient  punishments  for  "honour  killings"  on  the  grounds  of
         provocation or if the  accused had "honourable motives".  No  other
         passages in the CPIN's were brought to the tribunal's attention  or
         reference made to the country materials in the appellant's bundle.

     71. Having considered the passages relied upon and as set out above,  I
         am not satisfied that there is a  reasonable  likelihood  that  the
         appellant would be at risk of harm from his paternal  relatives  as
         an honour killing. Whilst his account has is  generally  consistent
         with the country background evidence concerning the description  of
         blood feuds and how they are carried out that does not mean that he
         is at risk of an honour killing.  The appellant's evidence is  that
         he had not told his family directly that he would  not  fight,  and
         when he left his home he remained  at  his  maternal  uncle's  home
         before leaving Iraq. If the paternal side of the family had  wanted
         to cause harm to the extent that would kill him,  they  would  have
         been able to do so when he was at his maternal uncle's home.

     72. Having considered the evidence it its totality I am  not  satisfied
         that there is a reasonable likelihood that when the appellant  left
         Iraq he did so in circumstances where he would be  at  risk  of  an
         honour killing. For the reasons set out, it is  accepted  from  the
         FtTJ's preserved finding that he would be at risk  from  the  Delam
         tribe in his home area.

     73. I now turn to the  factual  findings  as  to  contact  with  family
         members in Iraq. The appellant's evidence is that he has  not  been
         in contact with his family since he left Iraq and the last  contact
         was with his maternal uncle in 2016. When assessing the evidence of
         attempts made by the appellant to contact family  members,  it  has
         taken a number of years to make enquiries with the Red Cross having
         only initiated this in 2020. I take  that  as  an  adverse  factor.
         However the present evidence is that there has been no response  to
         those tracing enquiries undertaken. Whilst I do not accept that  he
         was at risk of an honour killing, the appellant left  his  paternal
         relatives to deal with the blood feud and I would  not  expect  the
         appellant to be in contact with the paternal  side  of  the  family
         given the circumstances in which he left Iraq.

     74. I have therefore set the appellant's account of losing contact with
         his family members in light of the country background evidence that
         relates to his home area of Mosul.  In  SMO  the  circumstances  of
         Mosul (in the Ninewa governorate) are described between  paragraphs
         51 - 76. Mosul was taken by ISIS  in  June  2014  and  the  attacks
         displaced nearly 1 million  people  in  the  following  months.  It
         remained the capital of ISI S from July 2014 until July  2017  when
         Mosul was taken from ISIS by the ISF and the  coalition  forces  in
         July  2017.  The  battle  of  Western  Mosul   was   described   as
         "particularly fierce" and much of the city was destroyed. Mosul was
         described as being "razed to the ground" (at paragraph 61 of  SMO).
         Additionally Mosul was described as having  been  mostly  destroyed
         and that structures in the city were either not standing or  unsafe
         (paragraph 66 SMO). In paragraph 258 the Upper  Tribunal  concluded
         that the majority of the city's population of 1.5 million had  left
         and not returned.

     75. There has been little or  no  real  challenge  to  the  appellant's
         evidence concerning his account of having  lost  contact  with  his
         family members. Having considered the issue in  the  light  of  the
         country materials and the appellant's evidence and  having  weighed
         in the balance as an adverse factor against him that his efforts to
         re-establish contact were taken at a late stage, I consider that in
         the light of the circumstances described above and the displacement
         of the inhabitants of the city that it is  reasonably  likely  that
         the appellant has lost  touch  with  his  maternal  relatives.  His
         evidence is consistent with what is known of the  circumstances  of
         his home area. This would also apply to his paternal relatives.

     76. I now turn to the issue of documentation. The  appellant  presently
         does not have any  of  his  relevant  documentation.  The  evidence
         before  the  FtTJ  and  this  tribunal  has   not   been   entirely
         satisfactory. As to the appellant's CSID, initially  the  appellant
         stated in an interview that his CSID had been  taken  from  him  in
         Germany (see question 55) but that he had copies of  his  CSID  and
         that of his wife (see  question  59).  Before  the  FTT  the  judge
         recorded the  appellant's  evidence  at  paragraph  [32]  that  the
         appellant had given a copy to his  solicitors.  However  the  judge
         recorded  "Ms  Cleghorn  made  enquiries  of  the  solicitors  were
         informed that they did not have the  document."  Before  the  Upper
         Tribunal, the appellant was asked to clarify what had happened.  He
         stated that following the  interview  he  was  told  that  when  he
         returned to give his fingerprints et cetera he should hand over the
         photocopy of the CSID to the Home Office. He said that he  returned
         2 days later after the interview and gave them the photocopy of the
         CSID.

     77. Thus the appellant said that he had given the copy of the CSID's to
         his solicitor before the FtTJ, but it is said now that he had given
         them to the Home Office. Whilst this appeared to be  contradictory,
         Ms Cleghorn provided an explanation of the  state  of  affairs  and
         that what was set out at paragraph [32] of the FtTJ's decision  was
         correct and that the solicitors did not have  it.  Furthermore  she
         recalled that the solicitors said that the appellant had told  them
         that he had given it to the Home  Office,  but  no  contemporaneous
         note been made and therefore she could not provide any evidence  of
         this.

     78. Mr Diwnycz checked the electronic  file  could  find  no  trace  or
         mention of it and no  one  has  been  able  to  identify  what  had
         happened to the copy documents, where they are or even if  they  do
         remain in existence.

     79. I would have expected that the  Home  Office  would  have  provided
         copies of those documents in their bundle. All that is recorded  in
         the decision letter is that set out at  paragraph  [52],  but  that
         does not refer to the document's whereabouts.

     80. I therefore reach the conclusion of the present evidence that there
         are no copy documents available for the appellant and his wife.

     81. I now turn to the factual findings relating to  the  original  CSID
         document. The appellant's evidence is that this was retained by the
         German authorities a number of years ago. The  decision  letter  at
         paragraph [52] refers to the appellant  having  previously  held  a
         CSID which he stated the German authorities had taken from him.  It
         is not suggested by the respondent that the appellant could  obtain
         it from the authorities but that "there are options  available  for
         you to have your CSID reissued" (at paragraph [52]).  The  evidence
         before the FtTJ was that he had not asked for  it  to  be  returned
         since his arrival in the UK.

     82. Since the hearing the appellant's solicitors have provided evidence
         that they have contacted the German authorities by  email  for  the
         return of the document and exhibited a copy of the email at page 22
         of the appellant's bundle. The  content  of  the  email  gives  the
         appellant's name and that of his wife and that they claimed  asylum
         and that when they had  claimed  their  CSID  Iraq  documents  were
         taken. The evidence before me is that there has been  no  reply  to
         that email.

     83. As Mr Diwnycz submitted, that is not surprising given the  lack  of
         information in the email. Beyond the names of the appellant and his
         wife there is no other information for the  German  authorities  to
         identify  them  or  to  provide  any  evidential   background   for
         determining whether they have the documents. Their dates  of  birth
         and other  relevant  information  is  not  included  in  the  email
         including the date they applied for asylum and the circumstances of
         the claim. The date of the email is also not given. Ms Cleghorn did
         not realistically seek to challenge that description of the  email.
         However she submitted that there was an onus on the  respondent  to
         authenticate the document.  No  legal  authority  was  provided  to
         support that submission other than an oral reference to a  decision
         of MJ (2013)  and  in  any  event  the  factual  circumstances  are
         entirely different. This is not a case of authenticating a document
         or  asking  for  verification  of  a  particular  document  but  to
         ascertain the documents whereabouts. The burden is on the appellant
         to demonstrate the factual basis of  his  claim.  However  I  would
         accept that there is likely to be a level  of  cooperation  between
         the UK and its counterparts in Germany and the respondent  has  not
         sought to make any enquiries either.

     84. I find the evidence before me to be unsatisfactory but on the basis
         of the present evidence I am not able to find that the  appellant's
         CSID is available to him given the length of time since he last had
         the document and that its whereabouts have not been ascertained.

     85. The last factual issue I required to determine relates  to  whether
         he would retain the necessary information necessary to reissue  any
         relevant documentation. Mr Diwnycz places reliance on paragraph 391
         - 392 of SMO and the level of knowledge that Iraqi  citizens  would
         have concerning  the  contents  of  their  CSID.   However  as   Ms
         Cleghorn points out pursuant to consent  order  dated  16  February
         2021 the decision of the Court of Appeal was to remit SMO, KSP & IM
         (Article 15(c); identity documents) Iraq CG [2019] UKUT  400  (IAC)
         to the UT to reconsider the finding at headnote 13 that most  Iraqi
         citizens would recall the family book information,  and  any  other
         findings in the light of  developments  in  Iraq.  The  appellant's
         evidence is that he is not seen his CSID since it was left with the
         German authorities, and  he  described  there  being  a  number  of
         lengthy  digits  which  he   could   not   remember.    Given   the
         circumstances of the consent order and the appellant's evidence,  I
         am prepared to accept that he is not able to recall  that  relevant
         information contained in his CSID.

Conclusions:

     86. Having made those factual findings I now consider the issue of risk
         and have done so in light of the country back ground  evidence  and
         the relevant CG decisions including SMO, KSP & IM  (Article  15(c);
         identity documents) Iraq CG [2019] UKUT 400 (IAC) .In light of  the
         factual findings I conclude that there is a  reasonable  likelihood
         the appellant will be at risk in his home area from the Delam tribe
         although not from the paternal relatives for  the  reasons  that  I
         have set out. The FtTJ determined that there was no sufficiency  of
         protection in Mosul, and this was a preserved finding. I  therefore
         conclude that the appellant and his family members will be at  risk
         of serious harm on return to their home area of Mosul.

     87. Whilst there is a reasonable likelihood of risk of serious harm for
         which there is no protection from the Delam tribe in the home area,
         there is no evidence the appellant will be at  risk  of  harm  from
         them in another area of relocation. The expert report of  Dr  Fatah
         states that it is not accurate to believe  that  the  entire  tribe
         which has millions of members would seek to attack  the  appellant.
         He further states that it is more likely that  a  clan  within  the
         tribe would pursue him (see paragraphs 68 and 80). However Dr Fatah
         does not make it clear whether this is confined to the home area or
         beyond that. I also observe that when the appellant  was  asked  to
         identify what particular  clan  he  feared,  he  was  not  able  to
         identify any particular clan but referred to the "Delam" only.

     88. In light of the factual findings of the FtTJ which were  preserved,
         the blood feud arose out of the local area. There is no evidence of
         any cogency to demonstrate that any  members  of  the  Delam  tribe
         would seek to find the appellant wherever he lived in Iraq or would
         seek to do so. Whilst Dr Fatah referred to a characteristic of  the
         tribe as living in different geographical areas (at paragraph 70 of
         his report) that does not provide any proper evidential  basis  for
         reaching the conclusion that  in  the  context  of  this  localised
         dispute the appellant will be sought by members of the Delam  tribe
         outside that area. Consequently I conclude that there  is  no  real
         risk of harm from the Delam tribe in any place of relocation.

     89. The issue of documentation  applies  in  the  context  of  internal
         relocation. The appellant and his family members will not  be  able
         to relocate to  the  IKR,  which  was  the  only  realistic  option
         identified by the respondent, without the requisite documentation.

     90. I have found that the  appellant  does  not  have  access  to  that
         documentation and also that he has lost contact with  his  maternal
         relatives. I also have found that this is likely to be the same for
         his paternal relatives.

     91. Mr Diwnycz  accepted  that  without  any  Iraqi  documentation  the
         appellant would not be able to obtain  replacement  documents  from
         within the  UK.  That  is  consistent  with  the  respondent's  own
         document CPIN  June  2020  at  paragraph  2.6  .16.  The  appellant
         therefore cannot redocument in the UK. The alternative posed in the
         CPIN relates to what is described as the "1957  document".  However
         in the light of the factual assessment that he has no contact  with
         his relatives who would be able to provide him with  the  necessary
         additional information that will be required for the 1957 document,
         it has not been demonstrated that that would be  available  to  him
         and his family members.

     92. Given that the enforced route of return is to Baghdad, and that  in
         light of the assessment he would not be able to leave  the  airport
         without such document, it follows that the  appellant  will  be  in
         Baghdad with no form of support and thus the  risk  of  destitution
         applies. This is the factual assessment made by  the  Secretary  of
         State in the country guidance decisions when addressing Article  15
         (b).

     93. I accept the submission made on behalf of the  appellant  that  the
         material demonstrates that the appellant  and  his  family  members
         would not be able to leave the airport at Baghdad without a CSID or
         valid INID. The Upper Tribunal recorded  the  evidence  which  they
         describe as "uncontested" that a failure to produce a CSID  or,  in
         the environs of the airport a valid passport, will be likely result
         in detention  until  the  authorities  could  be  satisfied  of  an
         individual's identity.

     94. The appellant cannot obtain replacement identity documentation once
         removed to Baghdad the reasons set out in SMO headnote 15 and  that
         the safety of onward travel could not be undertaken to the area  of
         relocation in the IKR without such documentation (see  headnote  23
         of SMO).

     95. Furthermore, in the preceding country guidance case of  AAH  (Iraqi
         Kurds) [2018] UKUT 212 it was held at paragraph  98  as  an  ethnic
         Kurd without a CSID and no family  members  in  Baghdad  could  not
         reasonably be expected to relocate there. I do  not  consider  that
         the position is changed from SMO although I  would  accept  that  a
         slightly different list of factors are set out. In  any  event,  it
         was not argued that the appellant and  his  family  members  should
         relocate to Baghdad.

     96. I have also considered what type of document  the  appellant  would
         require. The evidence before the UT in SMO appeared to  state  that
         Mosul had rolled  out  the  new  INID  system  which  requires  the
         appellant's presence to enable the biometric  information  required
         for such a document. However the expert report of Dr Fatah provided
         on behalf of the appellant gives a different picture which is  that
         in March 2021 his associate was informed that there is currently  a
         shortage of INID cards  due  to  payment  issues  with  the  German
         company  that  manufactures  them.  The  process  has  not  stopped
         completely but as fewer cards available newly married  couples  are
         being prioritised over other individuals who merely wish  to  renew
         the documentation. In urgent cases where no  INIDs  are  available,
         individuals may also apply  to  renew  their  CSID's  for  official
         purposes such as selling land. Dr Fatah states at paragraph 75 that
         as Mosul is a city it is likely that the  offices  there  have  the
         facilities for issuing INID cards. However, as elsewhere, there may
         be a delay in issuing of INID's due to the shortage and CSID's  may
         still be issued for people who need renewed documents urgently.

     97. In light of the more recent evidence of Dr Fatah  it  appears  that
         CSID's are still being issued however in the light of the  lack  of
         contact  with  family  relatives  and  access  to   the   necessary
         information  to  obtain  such  a  document,   the   appellant   has
         demonstrated  that  he  would  not  be  able  to  obtain  a   CSID.
         Consequently  without  the   necessary   CSID   or   identification
         documentation, the country background evidence  considered  in  the
         light of the CG decisions demonstrate that the appellant  would  be
         at risk of serious harm in Iraq on return.

     98. Given that assessment, it is not necessary to consider the issue of
         internal relocation further as the appellant is entitled to succeed
         on the basis that as he will be unable to reside  in  Iraq  without
         coming to a real risk of serious harm as he has an absence  of  the
         necessary documentation.

     99.  If I were to assess internal relocation, the relevant CG  decision
         is AAH (Iraqi Kurds - internal relocation) Iraq CG [2018] UKUT  212
         (IAC). It sets out as follows:

             Section E of Country Guidance annexed to the Court of Appeal's
             decision in AA (Iraq) v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
             Department [2017] Imm AR 1440; [2017] EWCA Civ 944 is replaced
             with the following guidance:

             2.   There are currently no international flights to the Iraqi
             Kurdish Region (IKR). All returns from the United Kingdom  are
             to Baghdad.

             3.   For an Iraqi national returnee (P) of Kurdish  origin  in
             possession of a valid CSID or Iraqi passport, the journey from
             Baghdad to the IKR, whether by air or land, is affordable  and
             practical and can be made without a real risk of  P  suffering
             persecution, serious harm, Article 3 ill treatment  nor  would
             any difficulties on the journey make relocation unduly harsh.

             4.   P is unable to board a domestic  flight  between  Baghdad
             and the IKR without either a CSID or a valid passport.

             5.   P will face considerable difficulty in making the journey
             between Baghdad and the IKR by land without a  CSID  or  valid
             passport. There are numerous checkpoints en  route,  including
             two checkpoints in the immediate vicinity of the airport. If P
             has neither a CSID nor a valid passport there is a  real  risk
             of P being detained at a checkpoint until  such  time  as  the
             security personnel are able to verify P's identity. It is  not
             reasonable to require P to travel between Baghdad and  IKR  by
             land absent the ability of P  to  verify  his  identity  at  a
             checkpoint. This normally requires the attendance  of  a  male
             family member and production of P's identity documents but may
             also be achieved by calling upon "connections"  higher  up  in
             the chain of command.

             6.   Once at the IKR border (land or air) P would normally  be
             granted entry to the territory. Subject to security screening,
             and registering presence with the local mukhtar,  P  would  be
             permitted to enter and reside in the IKR with no further legal
             impediments  or  requirements.   There   is   no   sponsorship
             requirement for Kurds.

             7.   Whether P would be at particular  risk  of  ill-treatment
             during the security screening process must be  assessed  on  a
             case-by-case basis. Additional factors that may increase  risk
             include: (i) coming from a family  with  a  known  association
             with ISIL, (ii) coming from an area associated with  ISIL  and
             (iii) being a single male of fighting age. P is likely  to  be
             able to evidence the fact of recent arrival from the UK, which
             would dispel any suggestion of having  arrived  directly  from
             ISIL territory.

             8.   If P has family members living in the IKR cultural  norms
             would  require  that  family  to  accommodate   P.   In   such
             circumstances P would, in general, have sufficient  assistance
             from the family so as to  lead  a  'relatively  normal  life',
             which would not be unduly harsh. It is nevertheless  important
             for decision-makers to determine the extent of any  assistance
             likely to be provided by P's family on a case by case basis.

             9.   For those without the assistance of family in the IKR the
             accommodation options are limited:

                  (i)  Absent special circumstances  it  is  not  reasonably
                  likely that P will be able to gain access to  one  of  the
                  refugee  camps  in  the  IKR;  these  camps  are   already
                  extremely overcrowded and are closed to newcomers. 64%  of
                  IDPs are accommodated in private settings  with  the  vast
                  majority living with family members;

                  (ii) If P cannot live with a family member, apartments  in
                  a modern block in a new neighbourhood  are  available  for
                  rent at a cost of between $300 and $400 per month;

                  (iii)     P  could   resort   to   a   'critical   shelter
                  arrangement',  living  in  an  unfinished   or   abandoned
                  structure, makeshift  shelter,  tent,  mosque,  church  or
                  squatting in a government building.  It  would  be  unduly
                  harsh to require P to relocate to the IKR if P  will  live
                  in a critical housing  shelter  without  access  to  basic
                  necessities such as food, clean water and clothing;

                  (iv) In considering whether P  would  be  able  to  access
                  basic necessities, account must be taken of the fact  that
                  failed asylum seekers are entitled to apply  for  a  grant
                  under the Voluntary Returns Scheme,  which  could  give  P
                  access to 1500. Consideration should  also  be  given  to
                  whether P can obtain financial support from other  sources
                  such as (a) employment,  (b)  remittances  from  relatives
                  abroad, (c) the availability of ad hoc charity or by being
                  able to access PDS rations.

             10.  Whether P is able to secure employment must  be  assessed
             on a case-by-case basis  taking  the  following  matters  into
             account:

                  (i)  Gender. Lone women are very unlikely to  be  able  to
                  secure legitimate employment;

                  (ii) The unemployment rate for Iraqi IDPs  living  in  the
                  IKR is 70%;

                  (iii)    P cannot work without a CSID;

                  (iv) Patronage  and  nepotism  continue  to  be  important
                  factors in securing employment.  A  returnee  with  family
                  connections  to  the  region  will  have   a   significant
                  advantage in that he would ordinarily be able to call upon
                  those  contacts  to  make  introductions  to   prospective
                  employers and to vouch for him;

                  (v)  Skills, education and experience.  Unskilled  workers
                  are at the greatest disadvantage, with the decline in  the
                  construction industry reducing  the  number  of  labouring
                  jobs available;

                  (vi) If P is from an area with a marked  association  with
                  ISIL, that may deter prospective employers.

    100. Having considered the relevant factors, and in  the  light  of  the
         evidence, I do not consider that the appellant would be at risk  of
         ill-treatment at any screening process that would be undertaken  as
         he will be able to evidence the fact that he has arrived in the UK.
         However, when looking at the  circumstances  of  the  appellant  he
         would be returning with his family members which include  his  wife
         and 2 young children. There are no family members in the IKR and in
         the light of the factual findings made, he is not in  contact  with
         any of his family members in Iraq. Thus the  family  cannot  obtain
         assistance from anyone in the IKR or outside the IKR. In  addition,
         the accommodation options are likely to be very limited  indeed  in
         their circumstances. The appellant has no education  (see  question
         21) nor work history. In addition the appellant's wife has a mental
         health problems. The medical  report  at  page  52  refers  to  her
         suffering from severe anxiety and moderate  to  severe  depression.
         She has panic attacks and is  undergoing  counselling.  It  appears
         that a traumatic incident occurred when in  Finland  which  is  not
         explained further in the  documentary  evidence.  Therefore  taking
         into account all of those factors I  have  reached  the  conclusion
         that it is been demonstrated that  it  would  be  unduly  harsh  or
         unreasonable for the appellant and his family members  relocate  to
         the IKR.

    101. The decision of the FtTJ made it plain that the appellant  had  not
         demonstrated a risk of persecution in Iraq based  on  a  Convention
         reason and nor has one properly been evidenced during the course of
         this hearing. Thus to return the appellant  to  Iraq  would  be  in
         breach of Article 3 of the ECHR and Article 15  ( b).

    102. I therefore remake the appeal by allowing the appeal.



Decision:

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the making of  an  error
on a point of law and the decision is set aside; the  appeal  is  remade  as
follows:

The appeal is allowed on Article 3 and Article 15(b) grounds.





Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or his family members. This direction  applies  both
to the Appellant and  to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply  with  this
direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed
     Date: 16/09/2021
Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds
