
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10365/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 18 September 2020                 |On 14 October 2020                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN


                                   Between

                                     AAM
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Rogers, Counsel instructed by Immigration
                    Advice Centre Ltd (Middlesbrough)
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

This has been a remote hearing which has been consented to by
the parties. The form of remote hearing was video by Skype (V). A face to
face hearing was not held because it was not practicable and all issues
could be determined in a remote hearing. I did not experience any
difficulties and neither party expressed any concern with the process.


                            DECISION AND REASONS


Background and Immigration History

The appellant is a Kurdish citizen of Iraq born in  December  1991.   He  is
appealing against a decision of Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Atkinson
promulgated on 10 March 2020.

In 2008 the appellant entered the UK and claimed asylum.   He  claimed  that
his father was kidnapped and killed; and that a  substantial  sum  of  money
was demanded from his  family.  The  asylum  application  was  refused.  His
subsequent appeal was heard by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Baker.   In
a decision promulgated in May 2009 Judge Baker  dismissed  the  appeal.   He
found that the appellant had  been  dishonest.   Amongst  other  things,  he
found, on the basis of a forged  document  report  (which  he  described  as
being  "utterly  compelling"),  that  the  appellant's  Iraqi  ID  card  was
counterfeit.

In March 2011 the appellant was removed from the UK.

In November 2011 the appellant returned to the  UK  and  claimed  asylum  on
arrival.  The claim was  refused.   He  subsequently  made  several  further
submissions the most  recent  of  which  was  in  July  2019.   The  further
submissions have all been refused.

The  appellant's  appeal  came  before  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
Atkinson (hereafter "the judge") at Bradford on  18  February  2020.   In  a
decision promulgated on 10 March 2020 Judge Atkinson dismissed  the  appeal.
The appellant is now appealing against that decision.

The Decision of Judge Atkinson

At the hearing, the appellant gave the same  account  of  his  father  being
kidnapped and killed, and of his family receiving a  demand  for  money,  as
previously. In addition, he claimed that he no longer has family in Iraq.

He also claimed that in 2011, when he was returned  to  Iraq,  his  identity
card was taken from him but he still managed to make his  way  home  to  his
village, where he lived for seven months before returning to the UK.

The judge found that the appellant's case, and  the  evidence  relied  upon,
was  materially  the  same  as  in  the  previous  decision  and  therefore,
following Devaseelan (Second Appeals - ECHR - Extra-Territorial Effect)  Sri
Lanka * [2002] UKIAT 00702, he accepted the previous findings  and  rejected
the asylum claim.

The judge rejected the appellant's contention that  the  fact  he  had  been
returned to Iraq previously showed that his identity  card  was  genuine  as
otherwise he would not have been allowed to return.   At  paragraph  42  the
judge addressed  the  issue  of  the  appellant's  previous  identity  card,
stating:

"I do not find that to be a matter  that  supports  the  appellant's  claim.
That is because there is  no  documentary  evidence  before  me  as  to  the
arrangements that  were  made  for  the  appellant's  return  to  Iraq.   In
addition, the appellant in oral evidence before me said that  on  return  to
Iraq his identity card had been retained by  United  Kingdom  officials  but
nevertheless he had been able to return to his  home  area  without  his  ID
card.  However, the background materials and the analysis in  SMO  show  the
difficulties in making such a journey to  an  extent  that  is  inconsistent
with the appellant's account of return to his home area.  I find this to  be
a further matter that tends to undermine the credibility of his account."

Applying SMO, KSP & IM (Article 15(c); identity documents)  Iraq  CG  [2019]
UKUT 00400 (IAC), the judge found:

      a) The appellant could reasonably be expected to obtain a CSID through
         consular facilities.  The judge found it to be reasonably likely he
         recalls the volume and page number of the entry in the Family  Book
         in Iraq and that if he does  not,  he  could  obtain  the  required
         information from family members.

      b) The appellant could return to his home area where he would not face
         a real risk of being subjected to indiscriminate violence amounting
         to serious harm within the scope  of  Article  15(c)  Qualification
         Directive.

      c) Alternatively, he could relocate to Kirkuk as doing so would not be
         unreasonable and unduly harsh.

Grounds of Appeal and Submissions

The  grounds  of  appeal  argue  that  the  judge's  reasoning   about   the
appellant's ID card was contradictory because if the  card  facilitated  his
return to Iraq and travel to his home area it followed  that  the  card  was
genuine.  It is also argued in the alternative  that  the  judge  failed  to
make findings on the evidence used to facilitate the appellant's return  and
how he was able to be returned without an ID card.

Ms Rogers on behalf of the appellant stated that she relied on  the  grounds
and reiterated that  there  is  a  contradiction  in  paragraph  42  of  the
decision about whether or not the ID card was a forgery and how he was  able
to return to his home area if it was.  She added that it is unclear  whether
it is being said that a different ID card was used  and  that  there  is  an
absence of a finding on this  important  point.   She  further  stated  that
there is an error in paragraph 42 because the appellant's evidence  was  not
that his ID card was retained by UK officials but that it  was  retained  by
Iraqi officials.

Mr Walker accepted that paragraph  42  is  on  its  face  contradictory  but
argued that this is not material because the judge made clear findings  that
the appellant could obtain an ID card and safely return to Iraq.

Ms Rogers argued that the error is material because it goes to the  question
of whether the appellant has been truthful, which in  turn  is  relevant  to
whether he is credible and the issue  of  credibility  is  material  to  the
question of whether he can obtain a CSID card at the present time.

Analysis

The judge considered the extant and recent country guidance case SMO on  the
question of obtaining a replacement CSID.  At paragraph 13 of  the  headnote
to that decision it is stated:

"Notwithstanding the phased transition to the INID within Iraq,  replacement
CSIDs remain  available  through  Iraqi  consular  facilities.   Whether  an
individual will be able to obtain  a  replacement  CSID  whilst  in  the  UK
depends on the documents available and, critically, the availability of  the
volume and page reference of the entry in the Family  Book  in  Iraq,  which
system continues to underpin the Civil Status Identity process.   Given  the
importance of that information, most Iraqi citizens will  recall  it.   That
information may  also  be  obtained  from  family  members  although  it  is
necessary to  consider  whether  such  relatives  are  on  the  father's  or
mother's side because the registration system is patrilineal."

At paragraph 56 of this decision the judge stated:

         "I  note  that  despite  changes  to   the   system   of   identity
         documentation, replacement CSIDs  remain  available  through  Iraqi
         consular facilities. I find that the appellant is reasonably likely
         to be able to recall the volume and page reference of the entry  in
         the family book in Iraq, given the importance of that  information.
         Even if not so able, then I further find that such information  may
         also be obtained from family members. As previously found, I do not
         accept that the appellant no  longer  has  family  members  on  his
         father's side to assist him."

The  judge's  reasoning  in  paragraph  56  of  the  decision  is   entirely
consistent with SMO. It was therefore open to the judge, for the reasons  he
gave, to find that the appellant will be able to obtain a replacement  CSID.
The judge's reasoning on this question did not  depend  on,  or  relate  to,
whether or  not  the  appellant  previously  used  a  counterfeit  document.
Accordingly, even if the judge erred by  making  contradictory  findings  in
paragraph 42, this is not material to the question of whether the  appellant
is presently able to obtain a replacement CSID.

Similarly, the judge's finding that the appellant could relocate to  Kirkuk,
which has not been challenged, was not dependent on,  or  affected  by,  the
issues raised in the grounds of appeal  because  there  is  nothing  in  the
appellant's  case,  even  taken  at  its  highest,  to  indicate  that   the
individuals who he claims are targeting his family would be a threat to  him
in Kirkuk.

In conclusion, I agree with Mr Walker that although the judge's findings  in
paragraph 42 of the decision about the counterfeit  identification  document
are unclear and appear contradictory,  this  is  not  material  because  the
findings on this issue do not undermine the  judge's  sustainable  findings,
supported by adequate reasons, on the question of whether the  appellant  is
currently able to obtain a CSID and can reasonably and  safely  relocate  to
Kirkuk.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain  a  material  error
of law and therefore is not set aside.  The appeal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed

D. Sheridan
Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan                            Date 8 October
2020

