
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10382/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 19 March 2018                                |                              |
|                                                |On 27 March 2018              |
|                                                |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                                     SA
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No Appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 30 July  1989.  He  has
      been given permission to appeal against  the  decision  of  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Shiner dismissing his appeal against  the  respondent's
      decision to refuse his asylum and human rights claim.

   2. The appellant entered the United Kingdom in 2010  on  a  student  visa
      valid until 29 February 2012. He was granted further periods of  leave
      as a Tier 4 student until 21 October 2014 but was unsuccessful  in  an
      application for leave to remain on the same basis on 9 June  2015.  He
      made three unsuccessful applications for leave to remain  outside  the
      immigration rules and on human rights grounds and then claimed  asylum
      on 7 April 2017. His asylum claim was refused on 4 October 2017.

   3. The appellant's asylum claim was made on the basis that he was gay and
      that he feared his family, community and the government on  return  to
      Pakistan. He claimed that he recognised his sexuality when he was aged
      14 and accepted that he was gay when he was 18 years of  age.  He  had
      been living an openly gay life in the UK. He had had two relationships
      in the UK. In February or March 2017 his family in Pakistan  contacted
      him about an arranged marriage but he told his intended wife  that  he
      was gay and as a result his family found out and  threatened  him.  He
      had had no further contact from his family since then. He feared  that
      his uncle and brothers would kill him.

   4. The respondent, in refusing the appellant's claim, did not accept that
      he was gay and considered that he would be at no  risk  on  return  to
      Pakistan.

   5. The appellant's appeal against that decision was heard  by  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Shiner on 14 November  2017  and  was  dismissed  in  a
      decision promulgated on 8 December 2017.  The  judge  heard  from  the
      appellant  and  three  witnesses  and  considered  the  appeal  bundle
      containing evidence relied upon by the appellant  in  support  of  his
      claim to be gay. The judge did not accept that the appellant  was  gay
      and dismissed his appeal on the basis that he was at no risk on return
      to Pakistan and that his removal would not breach his human rights.

   6. The appellant sought permission to appeal the judge's decision on  the
      grounds that the judge had failed to give weight to the evidence of Ms
      Asifa Lahore, a sexual health worker from the  sexual  health  charity
      NAZ, who had provided a letter of support and had attended the hearing
      in person and given oral evidence. It was also asserted that the judge
      failed to give reasons for rejecting the evidence  of  the  two  other
      witnesses who gave evidence in support of the appellant's claim to  be
      gay and failed to explain why he gave little weight to other evidence.

   7. Permission was granted in the First-tier Tribunal on the grounds  that
      the rejection of Ms Lahore's evidence on the basis that  she  did  not
      know the  appellant  other  than  in  her  capacity  at  NAZ  was  not
      adequately reasoned in the  context  of  her  evidence  and  that  the
      rejection of the evidence  of  the  two  further  witnesses  was  also
      arguably inadequately reasoned.

Appeal hearing

   8. Neither the appellant nor his legal representatives  appeared  at  the
      hearing. No explanation was provided for  their  absence.  I  observed
      that the notice of hearing had been served on both the  appellant  and
      his solicitors and there was no reason to suggest that  neither  party
      was aware of the hearing. In the circumstances I proceeded to hear the
      appeal in the appellant's absence.

   9. Mr Jarvis made submissions before me. He submitted that the grounds of
      appeal were simply a disagreement with the judge's  adverse  findings.
      The judge had not mischaracterised the  witnesses'  evidence.  He  had
      considered all the  evidence  and  provided  reasons  for  making  his
      adverse findings. He was entitled to conclude that the  appellant  had
      orchestrated a false sexual identity  for  the  purposes  of  claiming
      asylum.

Consideration and findings

  10. The grounds, in my view, are little more than a disagreement with  the
      weight the judge gave  to  the  evidence  of  the  witnesses,  and  in
      particular to the evidence of  Asifa  Lahore  from  NAZ.  The  grounds
      essentially assert that the judge was not entitled to find against the
      appellant in terms of his sexuality on the  basis  of  that  evidence.
      However the weight to be accorded to the evidence was a matter for the
      judge and the judge's reasons for according the  evidence  the  weight
      that he did were fully and cogently presented in his decision.

  11.  In  a  full  and  comprehensive  decision  the  judge  gave  detailed
      consideration  to  all  the  evidence.  At  [52]  he  gave  particular
      consideration to the evidence of Ms Lahore. He accepted that Ms Lahore
      was not seeking to mislead him but was not prepared to accept that her
      view of the appellant's sexuality was based  upon  reality  given  her
      limited knowledge of him. The grounds assert that the judge  erred  in
      that respect as he considered her evidence to be  that  she  knew  the
      appellant only professionally, whereas her evidence was that  she  had
      personal knowledge of him. However the judge gave  full  consideration
      to the extent of Ms  Lahore's  knowledge  of  the  appellant.  He  was
      entitled to take account of her comment, that she  did  not  know  the
      "ins and outs of every case", to be an indication of a  limit  to  her
      knowledge of the  appellant  and  to  weigh  that  against  the  other
      evidence.  Likewise, the judge  fully  recognised  that  the  evidence
      showed the appellant's attendance at NAZ and at  gay  events  and  his
      involvement in LGBT organisations since some time prior to his  asylum
      claim being made, but was nevertheless entitled to give weight to  the
      fact that there was no evidence of  such  attendance  and  involvement
      before early 2016, despite him having arrived in the UK  in  2010  and
      having become aware in 2011 that homosexuality was not illegal in  the
      UK.

  12. The grounds also assert that the judge failed to give  proper  reasons
      for rejecting the evidence of the two other witnesses, Mr  Farukh  and
      Mr Coelho. However the judge gave full consideration to their evidence
      at [53] and [54] and assessed that evidence  in  the  round  with  the
      other evidence. The judge provided reasons for  according  the  weight
      that he did to their evidence, noting a lack of knowledge by  both  of
      whether the appellant was in a relationship and of events  which  they
      recalled. The judge also provided reasons for  according  the  limited
      weight that he did to the evidence from Mr Romford  in  light  of  his
      absence from the hearing and the lack of opportunity for his  evidence
      to be tested.

  13. The judge's assessment of the weight to be given  to  the  documentary
      evidence and the evidence of  the  witnesses  was  also  made  in  the
      context of various other significant and,  it  seems  to  me,  validly
      held, concerns. The judge noted that the appellant's claim  in  regard
      to his sexuality was made only in his current  asylum  claim,  despite
      there having been plenty of opportunity previously to seek  protection
      on that basis in the years since his arrival in the  UK  in  2010  and
      despite his claimed awareness since 2011 of homosexuality being legal,
      and in the context of the various other applications he had made.  The
      judge noted in particular that the  appellant  had  referred,  in  two
      previous applications made in June 2015 and January 2017 to a risk  on
      return to Pakistan, but solely on the basis of  his  father's  claimed
      assassination due to political involvement, with no mention of a  fear
      of return based on his sexuality. The judge noted that  the  appellant
      had had the  benefit  of  legal  assistance  with  both  applications.
      Another matter of note to the judge was that there was no evidence  of
      the appellant's claimed previous relationships in the UK  nor  of  his
      claimed gay lifestyle prior to January 2016. The judge considered  the
      appellant's explanation for that at [51] and provided  cogent  reasons
      for rejecting it. The judge was unarguably entitled to consider  these
      matters to  give  rise  to  concerns  about  the  reliability  of  the
      appellant's claim to be gay and was unarguably entitled  to  draw  the
      adverse conclusions that he did.

  14. At [57] and [58] the judge drew  together  all  the  evidence,  taking
      account of the evidence  supporting  the  appellant's  claim  and  the
      matters undermining his credibility and provided  cogent  reasons  for
      reaching the  adverse  conclusion  that  he  did.  He  was  unarguably
      entitled to reject the appellant's claim to be gay and to  reject  his
      claim to be at risk on return to Pakistan on that or any other  basis.
      Contrary to the assertion at [13] of the grounds,  there  was  nothing
      irrational about such a conclusion. The judge's  findings  were  fully
      and properly open to him on  the  evidence  before  him  and  for  the
      reasons cogently given. For all of these reasons I find no  errors  of
      law in the judge's decision and I uphold the decision.

DECISION

  15. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not  involve
      an error on a point of law. I do  not  set  aside  the  decision.  The
      decision to dismiss the appeal stands.


    Anonymity

    The First-tier Tribunal made an  order  pursuant  to  rule  13  of  the
    Tribunal  Procedure  (First-tier   Tribunal)(Immigration   and   Asylum
    Chamber) Rules 2014.  I continue that order (pursuant to rule 14 of the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).


Signed   [pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede     Dated: 20 March 2018
