
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10885/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 18 December 2018                    |On 24 January 2019                   |
|                                              |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

                                   mr S P
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Howells, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms F Robertson, Counsel, instructed by Virgo
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The respondent (hereafter the claimant) arrived in the UK in July  2016
    clandestinely and claimed asylum the same day.  The basis of his  claim
    was that he had fled Iran because he had begun  attending  a  Christian
    house church which was raided by the police.  The appellant  (hereafter
    the Secretary of State for the Home Department or SSHD)  did  not  find
    his claim credible and on 29 August 2018 refused his asylum claim.  The
    claimant appealed.  In a decision sent on 26 October 2018 Judge O'Brien
    of the First-tier  Tribunal,  (FtT)  found  that  "[t]here  is  nothing
    inherently incredible about the [claimant's] claimed exposure  in  Iran
    to Christianity" (paragraph 38) and concluded at  paragraphs  43-45  as
    follows:

         "43.  In  my  judgment,  those  matters  taken  together  with  the
             [claimant's] church  activities  in  the  United  Kingdom  are
             sufficient to establish to the  lower  standard  that  he  has
             genuinely converted to Christianity after becoming involved in
             a house church in Iran.


         44.  In those circumstances, I am prepared to  accept  that  it  is
             reasonably  likely  that  the  [claimant's]  involvement   was
             discovered by the Iranian authorities  during  their  raid  of
             that church and that he would be subjected to  persecution  on
             the grounds of religion if returned.


         45.  Even if the [claimant] had not already come to  the  attention
             of the Iranian authorities, I accept  that,  if  returned,  he
             would continue to worship in Iran  as  a  member  of  a  house
             church and would involve himself in proselytising  activities,
             thereby placing himself at real risk of persecution."

2.   The SSHD's grounds of appeal were that the judge had  made  a  material
    misdirection of law  in  making  findings  in  paragraph  42  that  ran
    contrary to the principles outlined in Dorodian (01/TH/01537/IAT).  The
    claimant's failure to produce a live witness regarding the true  nature
    of his conversion should have been  treated  as  contrary  to  Dorodian
    principles.  At paragraph 42 the judge said:

         "42. Regrettably, no minister has attended today  from  the  parish
             church to give live evidence on behalf of the [claimant].  Had
             the  Appellant's  claim  been  that  he   had   converted   to
             Christianity  after  arriving  in  the  United  Kingdom,  this
             failure would likely  have  been  fatal  to  the  [claimant's]
             claim, per Dorodian.  However, I  have  already  accepted  the
             plausibility of the [claimant's] account of events in Iran and
             that he displayed a  reasonable  knowledge  of  the  Christian
             faith for his age  and  claimed  period  of  involvement  when
             interviewed on 2 February 2018."

3.   I am grateful to both representatives  for  their  clear  and  succinct
    submissions.

4.   I have concluded that the SSHD's grounds are  not  made  out,  for  two
    principal reasons.

5.   The first reason why I consider the grounds fail is that  they  confine
    their  challenge  to  the  claimant's  account  of  his  conversion  to
    Christianity since arrival in the UK and  raise  no  challenge  to  the
    claimant's account of his  experiences  in  Iran.   On  the  claimant's
    account of those experiences he had  already  become  involved  with  a
    Christian house church and, following a raid on this church, was likely
    to be  perceived  by  the  authorities  as  a  Christian  proselytiser,
    irrespective of whether he was a genuine convert.

6.   Second, the judge's assessment of paragraph 42 amounts to saying  that:



    (i)  if the issue of whether the claimant was  a  genuine  convert  had
         depended on his religious experiences since arrival in the UK,  the
         judge would have applied Dorodian principles against him;


    (ii)  however,  his  account  did  not  depend  on   his   post-arrival
         experiences because "I have already accepted the  plausibility  of
         the [claimant's] account of events in Iran and that he displayed  a
         reasonable knowledge of the Christian faith for his age and claimed
         period of involvement ...".

7.   Further, it goes too far in my view to treat Dorodian  as  setting  out
    prescriptive "principles" deviation from which amounts to legal  error.
    That is not how the Tribunal presented its guidelines in Dorodian;  the
    judge described them  merely  as  "suggestions"  (paragraph  8).   Also
    counting against these suggestions being taken to represent the correct
    legal position is the reality of many subsequent  developments  in  the
    case law.  In this regard I consider the criticism of Dorodian made  by
    the Scottish Inner House in TF, MA and SSHD [2018] CSIH 58,  30  August
    2018 to be correct, as it is more in line  with  current  jurisprudence
    and academic authority.

8.   For the above reasons I conclude that the judge did not materially  err
    in law and accordingly the judge's decision to allow  the  appeal  must
    stand.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court  directs  otherwise,  the  claimant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the claimant and to the SSHD.  Failure to comply  with  this
direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date: 12 January 2019

             [pic]
Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

