
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10710/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester CJC                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 3 May 2019                                |On May 16 May 2019            |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

                                     l l
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss Butler, Counsel instructed by AB James
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Tan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
Interpreter:  Miss Wu


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, a Chinese national, arrived in the United Kingdom  on  a
    student visa on May 12, 2008.  On February  3,  2010  she  applied  for
    further leave to remain as a Tier 4 dependant, but this application was
    rejected on May 24, 2010.  No further applications were  made  at  that
    point.

 2. On May 14, 2015 she applied for asylum, but this  was  refused  by  the
    respondent.  Her appeal went before Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Heynes who dismissed her appeal on  August  11,  2016.   Permission  to
    appeal was refused on March 20, 2017 by the Upper Tribunal.

 3. On June 21, 2017 the appellant lodged  further  submissions  which  the
    respondent accepted as fresh submissions.   However,  he  refused  that
    application on August 20, 2018 and her appeal was  subsequently  listed
    before the First-tier Tribunal on October 5, 2018 after  the  appellant
    exercised her right of appeal under Section 82(1) of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

 4. Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  McCall  refused  her  appeal  in  a
    decision promulgated on October 23, 2018.   Permission  to  appeal  was
    sought and Upper Tribunal Judge Warr granted permission  to  appeal  on
    March 4, 2019 finding there was an arguable error in  law  for  reasons
    previously identified by Designated Judge Shaerf.  The  respondent  did
    file a Rule 24 response dated March 26, 2019 opposing the  application.



    SUBMISSIONS

 5. There were four grounds of appeal argued before me.  Ground  2  related
    to  procedural  unfairness  and  to  the  fact  that  the   appellant's
    representatives  had  been  unable  to  obtain  the  necessary  medical
    evidence in time for the appeal hearing.  Two previous requests for the
    case to be adjourned had been refused  by  a  Tribunal  Caseworker  and
    subsequently by a Duty  Judge  on  the  day  prior  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal hearing.   The  appellant's  representatives  also  failed  to
    submit a bundle to the Tribunal.

 6. Miss Butler argued the Judge had erred by failing to adjourn the appeal
    because the appellant could not have her case properly  presented.   Mr
    Tan opposed the application and referred  to  the  previously  declined
    adjournment requests and argued the  request  for  an  adjournment  was
    speculative  because  the  doctor's  availability  was  unknown.    The
    appellant had been represented by the same representative for a  number
    of years and there was no  excuse  for  not  obtaining  the  report  or
    providing the relevant statements or evidence.

 7. Other  grounds  were  raised  by  Miss  Butler,  but  for  the  reasons
    hereinafter set out, I have not gone into those in any detail.

    FINDINGS ON THE ERROR IN LAW

 8. Having listened to the submissions presented  by  both  representatives
    and having looked at the decision of First-tier Judge, I find there has
    been procedural unfairness.

 9. The Judge was placed in an invidious position on  the  morning  of  the
    hearing.  Representatives take it upon themselves  not  to  assist  the
    Tribunal or provide documents in the hope  that  it  will  lead  to  an
    adjournment.  The Judge dealt with the matter in  a  way  he  felt  was
    appropriate but having read the contents of paragraphs [5] to  [11]  of
    his decision, I am  satisfied  that  the  importance  of  fairness  was
    confused with the failures of the  appellant's  representatives.  I  am
    satisfied the appellant had significant medical issues  and  there  had
    been requests to adjourn the hearing to obtain  the  necessary  medical
    evidence and/or alternatively the attendance of a doctor.

10. By refusing to adjourn the matter the  only  loser  was  the  appellant
    because she was unable to argue a case which placed significant  weight
    on Article 3/8 arguments. The appellant was not personally  responsible
    for this failure and greater weight should have  been  placed  on  this
    issue when considering whether to adjourn.

11. As the medical evidence was crucial to the appeal itself, I  find  that
    this case must be remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal.

    NOTICE OF DECISION

12. There is an error of law and I set aside the  original  decision  aside
    and I remit the appeal back to the First-tier  Tribunal  under  Section
    12(1) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date         14/05/2019


[pic]


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
