
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10592/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 18 March 2019                             |On 02 April 2019              |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HILL QC


                                   Between

                                   mr m o
                         (anonymity direction made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms P Solanki, Counsel instructed by Sky Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Miss S Cunha, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal  from  the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Watson, promulgated on 20 November 2018.  The appellant is a citizen of
    Pakistan, born on 6 August 1987 who entered the  United  Kingdom  on  a
    Tier 4 student visa in May 2011.  His application for asylum was lodged
    in February 2018 and was refused in August 2018.   His  appeal  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal was dismissed  on  asylum  grounds,  on  protection
    grounds and under the Human Rights Act 1998.

2.   The case advanced by the appellant was  that  he  was  the  son  of  an
    Ahmadi mother and although  his  parents  had  separated  (and  he  was
    brought up in a family unit comprising  father,  stepmother  and  half-
    siblings), he was nonetheless the son of an Ahmadi mother and regarded,
    or likely to be so regarded, and as a consequence he would be  at  risk
    on return to Pakistan.

3.   The grounds of appeal in this matter  were  narrowly  drawn  and  three
    specific items were raised by Miss Solanki of Counsel who  appears  for
    the appellant.

4.   Although permission was granted on all of the  grounds,  it  was  self-
    evident from the way permission  was  phrased  that  Ground  1  was  of
    greatest significance.  That ground alleged that the judge  had  failed
    to take account of key documentary evidence. In  particular,  paragraph
    20 is said to be  self-evidently  incorrect  when  the  judge  asserts:
    "There is no other documentary evidence that supports [the appellant's]
    claim that FT is his mother and is an Ahmadi".

5.   It is the appellant's case that there was  a  clear  photocopy  of  the
    mother's Pakistani passport reproduced  at  pages  69  and  70  of  the
    appellant's bundle.   It  unambiguously  states  that  the  appellant's
    mother is Ahmadi.  There was  no  suggestion  that  this  document  was
    fraudulent or inaccurate.   It is  therefore  surprising,  to  say  the
    least, that it is not referred to  at  all  by  the  judge  whether  in
    paragraph 20 (part of which I have already above), or elsewhere in  the
    decision. On any account that is a significant omission.

6.   Miss Cunha, for the Secretary of  State,  resists  the  appeal  on  the
    basis that although this was an error by the judge, it was not  in  any
    way dispositive of the appeal because the key issue  to  be  determined
    was the extent to which the appellant would be at  risk  on  return  to
    Pakistan in consequence  of  the  perception  that  he  was  of  Ahmadi
    matrilineal descent.  Miss Cunha makes the point that the appellant was
    brought up in a household with his stepmother  so  the  fact  that  his
    actual mother was Ahmadi would not have been readily apparent.

7.   I cannot accept Miss Cunha's submission.  The issue of whether  or  not
    the appellant's mother was Ahmadi was key, and for the  judge  to  have
    ignored a crucial and arguably determinative piece of evidence suggests
    at best a want of care by the judge's part in reaching the  conclusions
    which she did. I cannot  be  confident  that  the  judge  gave  anxious
    scrutiny to the issues under consideration, if something as obvious  as
    the mother's passport was overlooked.

8.   In any event, the judge's failure to recall that the mother's  passport
    was in evidence (and contained a strong indication that she was Ahmadi)
    led her to reject the appellant's primary case that he is the son of an
    Ahmadi mother.  I  cannot  be  confident  that  this  implicit  adverse
    credibility finding did not infect subsequent parts of the decision.

9.   The judge's error in not taking into  account  what  purported  to  the
    mother's passport, and the inference on what was officially recorded in
    it is not something which can be viewed in isolation. It was  a  highly
    material feature, and fundamental to the determination and disposal  of
    the appeal.

10.  In the light of this material error of law, I  allow  the  appeal.  The
    error goes to the heart of the determination and  the  process  of  the
    appeal must begin again.  I therefore remit the matter  to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal to be heard afresh by a judge other than Judge Watson.


Notice of Decision

    1) The appeal is allowed and the decision of the First-tier Tribunal is
       set aside;
    2) The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard afresh
       by a judge other than Judge Watson.
    3) No findings of fact are preserved.
    4) Anonymity direction.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                                  Mark                            Hill
  Date        27 March 2019


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hill QC
