
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10550/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Columbus House, Newport         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 12th October 2018                     |On 23rd October 2018               |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                                    E K E
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M McGarvey of McGarvey Immigration & Asylum
                    Practitioners Ltd
For the Respondent:    Mr C Howells, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant appeals against a decision of Judge O'Rourke (the  judge)
    of the First-tier Tribunal (the FtT) promulgated following a hearing on
    3rd January 2018.

 2. The Appellant is a male citizen of Cameroon born in February 1980.   He
    arrived in the UK as a student in June 2012.  He thereafter  made  four
    applications for residency on the basis  of  his  marriage  to  an  EEA
    citizen.  Those applications  were  refused.   The  first  refusal  was
    appealed, and that appeal dismissed.  On 24th April 2017 the  Appellant
    was notified that he was being treated as an overstayer, and he made  a
    claim for asylum on 25th April 2017.

 3. He claimed that he would be at risk if returned to Cameroon because  of
    his political activity and opinion which was opposed to the  government
    in Cameroon.

 4. The claim for international protection was refused on 2nd October  2017
    and the appeal heard by the FtT on 3rd January 2018.  The  judge  heard
    oral evidence from the Appellant, and found him  to  be  an  incredible
    witness.  His account was not accepted.  The judge considered an expert
    report from Assistant Professor Walker-Said  PhD  dated  21st  December
    2017.  The judge did not accept that the report author should  properly
    be regarded as an expert on Cameroon.  The judge did not attach  weight
    to opinions given in the report that the Appellant would be at risk  if
    returned to Cameroon.  With reference to sur place  activities  carried
    out by the Appellant, the judge found these to be (at paragraph 32) "an
    entirely cynical attempt by him to bolster his claim."  The  judge  did
    not find that the sur place activities would put the Appellant at risk.
     The appeal was dismissed on all grounds.

 5. The Appellant applied for permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal.
    Lengthy grounds were submitted on his behalf.  In very brief summary it
    was submitted firstly that  the  judge  had  erred  in  law  by  making
    perverse and irrational findings, secondly that he had erred in law  by
    failing to adequately consider expert evidence, and thirdly that he had
    erred in law by failing to consider relevant case  law  that  being  BA
    (Iran) CG [2011] UKUT 36 (IAC).

 6. Permission to appeal was refused by Judge Dineen of the FtT  who  found
    no arguable error of law disclosed in the grounds.

 7. The application for permission to appeal was renewed.  It was submitted
    that the judge had correctly identified at paragraph  31(iv)  that  "of
    most relevance to this appeal (as effectively conceded by Ms Morgan  in
    her closing submissions) is the risk, or otherwise that  the  Appellant
    faces in Cameroon due to his sur place activities."  It  was  submitted
    that the judge was wrong in law in finding at paragraph 31(iv) that the
    expert had not provided evidence  as  to  why  she  believed  that  the
    Cameroonian authorities would be aware of  the  Appellant's  sur  place
    activities in the UK, which would put him at risk in Cameroon.

 8. On this point reference was made to paragraph 85 of the  expert  report
    in which the expert referred to the Cameroonian authorities  initiating
    the surveillance of all fixed and mobile internet providers in  Bamenda
    in the country's Anglophone region.  Reference was also  made  in  this
    paragraph to an "internet blockade" in spring 2017  of  the  Anglophone
    region.

 9. The Appellant's representatives  submitted  with  the  application  for
    permission a copy of the article referred  to  by  the  expert  in  her
    report.  This is headed "Cameroonians stage silent protests  to  demand
    internet."  The article relates to internet users in Cameroon taking to
    the streets to urge the  Cameroonian  government  to  restore  internet
    connectivity in English speaking regions, which the government had  cut
    off.

10. It was submitted that the judge had erred in failing  to  consider  the
    evidence relied upon by the  expert  to  reach  her  opinion  that  the
    Appellant would be at risk because the government would know of his sur
    place activities.

11. It was also contended that the judge had erred at  paragraph  31(v)  in
    referring to the lack of  balance  in  the  expert's  view  as  to  the
    effectiveness  of  the  Cameroonian  state's  ability  to  monitor  its
    citizens both at home and abroad.  The judge had taken judicial  notice
    that Cameroon is an under developed, if not third world  country,  with
    pressing security concerns as to Boko Haram, and it was  asserted  that
    Cameroon had the resources to carry out widespread  monitoring  of  its
    citizens both at home and abroad.  The judge found in  the  absence  of
    satisfactory evidence, that this was not the case.   It  was  submitted
    that this was wrong, and that many third world countries invest heavily
    in monitoring their citizens both home and  abroad,  prioritising  this
    over and above many first world priorities of state responsibility.

12. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge  Kopieczek  in
    the following terms:

         "I grant permission because I am persuaded that the grounds are  at
         least arguable in terms of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  O'Rourke's
         (the FtJ's) assessment of the evidence of Dr Charlotte  Walker-Said
         in relation to his  conclusion  that  she  could  not  properly  be
         regarded as an expert, and in relation to his conclusions about the
         ability of the Cameroonian state to be aware of, or to become aware
         of, the Appellant's sur  place  activities  in  the  light  of  her
         report.  Some of his criticisms of her report may be justified  but
         I do not limit the grounds that may be argued in  relation  to  his
         conclusions in the report.

         Similarly, whilst it may be that aspects of the adverse credibility
         findings are justified, I do not limit  the  grounds  that  may  be
         argued given that the grounds in some respects are to  some  degree
         inter related."

13. Following the grant of permission, the  Respondent  lodged  a  response
    pursuant to Rule 24 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 contending, in summary, that the judge had not erred in  law,  had
    appropriately considered the expert report, made findings open  to  him
    on the evidence, and provided adequate reasons for those findings.

14. Directions were issued that there should be a hearing before the  Upper
    Tribunal to ascertain whether the FtT had erred in law  such  that  the
    decision should be set aside.





Upper Tribunal Hearing

15. Mr McGarvey relied upon  the  renewed  grounds  seeking  permission  to
    appeal dated 8th March 2018.  He provided a photocopy  of  the  article
    relied upon by the expert and referred to in her report.

16. Mr Howells, in  making  oral  submissions,  relied  upon  the  Rule  24
    response.   He  submitted  that  the  article  did  not   support   the
    Appellant's contention that the  Cameroonian  authorities  carried  out
    surveillance of Cameroonian citizens in the UK.  The article related to
    an internet blackout in the Anglophone regions  of  Cameroon.   It  was
    submitted that the judge was entitled to  make  the  finding  that  the
    expert had asserted that  there  would  be  monitoring  of  Cameroonian
    citizens in the UK, without providing  any  evidence  to  support  that
    assertion.

17. It was submitted that it was open to the judge to  make  findings  that
    the expert had  gone  beyond  her  remit  and  was  effectively  making
    findings of fact.  It was submitted that the expert  had  not  complied
    with Practice Direction 10 in  relation  to  the  provision  of  expert
    evidence, and specifically had not complied with 10.4 which states that
    an expert should assist the Tribunal by providing  objective,  unbiased
    opinion on matters within his or her expertise, and should  not  assume
    the role of an advocate.

18. Mr Howells submitted, with reference to the assertion  in  the  grounds
    seeking permission to appeal, in relation  to  third  world  countries,
    that there appeared to be no evidence before the judge  to  prove  that
    there were third world countries investing heavily in monitoring  their
    citizens both at home and abroad.

19. In response Mr McGarvey submitted that the article  relied  on  by  the
    expert related to cutting off internet access, and this would not  have
    happened if  the  government  did  not  have  concerns  about  internet
    activity carried out by the Anglophone diaspora.

20. Mr McGarvey submitted that the expert should properly be regarded as an
    expert on Cameroon, and that she had specifically referred to paragraph
    10 of the Practice Direction in her report, and complied with it.  With
    reference to third world countries, Mr McGarvey  submitted  that  there
    were many such countries which monitored their citizens abroad,  giving
    the example of North Korea as one.

21. I was asked to find that the judge had erred in  his  consideration  of
    the expert report.

22. At the conclusion of oral submissions I reserved my decision.

My Conclusion and Reasons

23. The challenge to the FtT decision before me, related to the  assessment
    by the judge of the expert report, and in particular to  his  rejection
    of the expert's opinion that the Appellant's sur place activities would
    be discovered by the Cameroonian authorities.

24.  The  initial  grounds  for  appeal,   had   alleged   perversity   and
    irrationality.  That ground was not pursued before me, and rightly  so.
    Having carefully considered the FtT decision, I find no indication that
    the judge made any findings which could be categorised as  perverse  or
    irrational.

25. The judge did not err in law at paragraph 28 when  he  found  that  the
    Appellant's credibility was adversely affected because he  had  delayed
    in making an asylum claim.  The judge was entitled  to  note  that  the
    Appellant had only claimed asylum after  four  successive  applications
    had been made in relation to marriage to an EEA citizen, and  that  the
    appellant had undertaken no political activity in the UK whatsoever  in
    the first four years after his arrival in 2012.

26. No error of law is disclosed at paragraph 29(i)-(v) in which the  judge
    rejected the Appellant's claim  to  have  been  politically  active  in
    Cameroon, and rejected his claim to have been  arrested,  detained  and
    tortured.

27. At paragraph 31(i) the judge did not accept that the report author "can
    truly be regarded as an expert on  the  current  political  climate  in
    Cameroon."  Having considered the expert's  CV,  and  the  contents  of
    paragraphs 1-5 of the report dated 21st December 2017, I note that  the
    expert has previously lived and worked in Cameroon,  most  recently  in
    May 2014, and that the expert has spent ten years  studying  Cameroon's
    politics, policies and governments.  I accept that the  Appellant  has,
    as stated in paragraph 2 of her report, "written  papers  and  articles
    and given talks and presentations on politics, history and human rights
    in Cameroon."

28. On balance, my view is that the report author can  be  regarded  as  an
    expert on the current political climate in Cameroon.

29. The judge did not, in my view, err  materially  in  not  accepting  the
    report author to be an expert, as the judge did go on  in  considerable
    detail to consider the expert report,  and  I  will  now  consider  the
    conclusions reached.

30. It is trite law that a judge does not have to accept at face value  all
    that is stated by an expert.  If a judge rejects what is stated  by  an
    expert, or does not attach weight to an expert opinion,  then  adequate
    reasons must be given.

31. The judge makes a relevant point at paragraph 31(v) in referring to AAW
    (Somalia) [2015] UKUT 673 (IAC), in making the point that if an opinion
    is offered that is unsupported by a demonstration  of  the  objectivity
    and comprehensive review  of  material  facts  required  of  an  expert
    witness, that opinion is likely to be afforded  little  weight  by  the
    Tribunal.

32. A further relevant point is made by the judge at paragraph  31(iii)  in
    which he points out that "many of the expert's opinions  are  based  on
    the supposition that he is telling the truth about that period  of  his
    life."  This relates to the expert's opinion based upon the Appellant's
    account of what he asserts happened in Cameroon.  The judge found  that
    the Appellant had not given a credible account of  events  in  Cameroon
    and did not accept that account.  The judge was therefore entitled  not
    to attach weight to an expert opinion based upon an account  which  the
    judge had found not to be credible.  It is for a judge  to  find  facts
    not the expert.  It is clear, as stated in paragraph  31(iv)  that  the
    Appellant's representative relied  as  most  relevant,  in  the  appeal
    before the FtT, on the Appellant's sur place activities, which  it  was
    submitted would put him at risk if returned to Cameroon.

33. I find no error of law in paragraph 31(iv) in which the judge notes the
    expert's opinion that the Appellant's sur place activities  would  have
    likely come to the attention of the Cameroonian authorities and  in  my
    view the judge is fully entitled to make the finding, "However,  it  is
    not clear from the report how the expert  is  able  to  so  confidently
    state these opinions."  The  judge  is  correct  in  finding  that  the
    footnotes for sources do  not  relate  to  surveillance  of  sur  place
    activities.  The article relied upon by the expert, and produced at the
    hearing before me, does not indicate surveillance of internet activity,
    but relates to Cameroonian authorities refusing to let  the  Anglophone
    regions of Cameroon have access to the internet.  That is not the  same
    as surveillance of diaspora activity.

34. The judge makes the point at paragraph 31(iv) that the "expert provides
    no evidence of monitoring of the sur place activities of dissidents  in
    the Cameroon diaspora."  I have not been provided with any evidence  to
    indicate that the judge's conclusion is wrong.  I do not find that  the
    judge erred materially in his consideration of the expert report.

35. With reference to paragraph 31(v) which is  referred  to  as  paragraph
    38(v) in the grounds, I find no error of law disclosed.  The judge  did
    not err in describing Cameroon as an under developed if not third world
    country with pressing security concerns as to Boko  Haram.   The  judge
    did not err in finding that no evidence had been produced to prove that
    the Cameroonian authorities carry out widespread monitoring of citizens
    at home and abroad.  The evidence to prove such activity was not before
    the judge.

36. I do not find that the judge materially erred in law in considering the
    Appellant's sur place activities.  The judge was entitled to  conclude,
    on the evidence, that the sur place activities were a  cynical  attempt
    by the Appellant to  remain  in  the  UK,  following  refusal  of  four
    applications for residence as the partner  of  an  EEA  citizen.   That
    however is not  the  primary  issue,  as  when  considering  sur  place
    activities, a judge must consider whether the  Appellant  would  be  at
    risk, whether or not  his  activities  are  cynical.   The  judge  must
    consider how the  appellant  would  be  perceived  by  the  Cameroonian
    authorities.

37. The judge has not erred on this point.  The judge  finds  at  paragraph
    32(i) that no satisfactory evidence  has  been  placed  before  him  to
    conclude the Cameroonian authorities would have  seen  the  Appellant's
    photograph which he posted on Facebook.  The judge  has  clearly  taken
    into account the principles in BA (Iran)  CG.   The  judge  finds  that
    there  is  insufficient  evidence  to  prove   that   the   Cameroonian
    authorities would be  aware  of  various  Facebook  and  Twitter  posts
    containing political messages posed by the Appellant.  The  judge  also
    finds no evidence has been produced to indicate  that  the  Cameroonian
    authorities  would  be  able  to  identify  the  Appellant  at  various
    demonstrations.  The judge set out the principles in BA  (Iran)  CG  at
    paragraph 7 of his decision, and in my view it is evident that  he  has
    applied those principles and guidelines when considering the evidence.

38. The grounds seeking permission to appeal disclose a  disagreement  with
    the conclusions reached by the judge but in my view do not  disclose  a
    material error of law.  I therefore conclude that the  appeal  must  be
    dismissed.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the FtT does not disclose a material error  of  law.   I  do
not set aside the decision and dismiss the appeal.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 13th October 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal is dismissed.  There is no fee award.


Signed                              Date 13th October 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall


