
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10067/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 18 February 2019                           |On 11 March 2019              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN


                                   Between

                                  mr l h a
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Walker, Counsel instructed by Hersi & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms K Pal, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, a citizen of Somalia born on 24 February 1990, is the
    partner of a Somalian citizen who has indefinite leave to remain in the
    UK and the father of their child (born on 5 July 2018) who is a British
    citizen.

 2. The appellant entered the UK on 5 August 2014 and claimed asylum.  His
    asylum application was refused on 22 January 2015.  A fresh claim was
    refused on 3 July 2018.  His human rights application under Article 8
    ECHR was also refused.

 3. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal where his appeal was
    heard by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Housego.  In a decision
    promulgated on 1 October 2018 the judge dismissed the appeal, finding
    that the appellant would not be at risk on return to Somalia and that
    his removal would not be contrary to Article 8 ECHR.

 4. The appellant is now appealing against the decision of the First-tier
    Tribunal to dismiss his human rights (Article 8 ECHR) appeal.  He is
    not challenging the decision to dismiss his asylum appeal.
    Accordingly, only the Article 8 Claim will be considered in this
    decision.

Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 5. Judge Housego found that the appellant has been in a relationship with
    his partner for more than two years and that they have a son together
    (born on 5 July 2018) who is a British citizen.  The judge found that
    even though it would be in the best interests of the child to remain in
    the UK with both parents it would nonetheless be reasonable for him to
    relocate to Somalia with his father.

 6. The judge gave the following reasons for finding that it would be
    reasonable to expect the child to leave the UK:

      a) He is ethnically Somali and his parents will bring him up able to
         speak Somali wherever he resides.

      b) The family are well-connected and would not return to destitution.

      c) The child does not have to leave the UK as he can remain with his
         mother in the UK if that is what the family chooses.

      d) As a British citizen the child will retain the right to come to the
         UK when an adult.

      e) The appellant arrived in the UK using false documentation and when
         he lost his appeal he remained in the UK in breach of immigration
         law.

 7. The evidence of the appellant's partner was that if the appellant is
    removed from the UK she would remain in the UK with their child without
    him.  The judge stated that it was the family's choice whether to
    relocate together to Somalia or to be separated.

Grounds of appeal and submission

 8. The appellant contends that the judge failed to properly apply the
    reasonableness test under Section 117B(6) of the Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("the 2002 Act") because he took into
    account the appellant's misconduct in using a false document and
    overstaying.  Ms Walker argued that this was inconsistent with KO
    (Nigeria) [2018] UKSC 53 which is clear that parental misconduct is
    irrelevant in the assessment of reasonableness. She also argued that
    the judge erred by appearing to assume that any separation caused by
    the appellant having to leave the UK would only be temporary as he
    could apply to enter the UK from Somalia.  She argued that this failed
    to recognise that the financial requirements under Appendix FM would
    not be met and therefore the separation would be permanent.

 9. Ms Walker also took issue with the judge finding that the appellant's
    child would not lose all the rights of citizenship if he relocates to
    Somalia as he could return to the UK as an adult.  She maintained that
    the child would lose the advantages of growing up and being educated in
    the UK.

10. Ms Pal, in response, argued that the judge followed the correct
    approach by considering the best interests of the child as a distinct
    matter before dealing separately with the reasonableness test under the
    2002 Act.  The judge recognised that the child's best interests are the
    primary consideration and found his best interests are to remain in the
    UK.  The judge then looked at reasonableness and took into account a
    range of issues.  She argued that although the judge took into
    consideration the appellant's misconduct when assessing reasonableness
    this was only one of the factors considered, and even if this was an
    error (which she did not concede) it was not material.

Analysis

11. Section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act provides that the public interest will
    not require the appellant's removal from the UK if (a) he is not
    subject to deportation; (b) he has a genuine and subsisting
    relationship with his son; (c) his son is a qualifying child; and (d)
    it would not be reasonable to expect his son to leave the UK.

12. It was not in dispute that the appellant is not subject to deportation
    and has a genuine and subsisting relationship with his son, who is a
    qualifying child.  Therefore the only area of contention before the
    First-tier Tribunal in respect of Section 117B(6) was whether it would
    be reasonable to expect the appellant's son to leave the UK.

13. In MA (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA Civ 705 Elias J found that the assessment
    of reasonableness in Section 117B(6) must include all potentially
    relevant public interest considerations including the conduct and
    immigration history of a child's parents.

14. However, the Supreme Court in KO rejected this approach, finding that
    there is nothing in Section 117B(6) that imports a reference to the
    conduct of the parent and that the only relevance of a parent's conduct
    is that reasonableness must be considered in the real world in which
    the child lives (which in this case is that the appellant has no right
    to remain in the UK but his partner, the child's mother, does).

15. One of the reasons Judge Housego gave for finding that it would be
    reasonable to expect the appellant's son to leave the UK was the
    appellant's misconduct.  This approach is consistent with the Court of
    Appeal in MA, but not with the Supreme Court in KO. As explained above,
    KO makes clear that parental misconduct is not a relevant consideration
    in the assessment of reasonableness under Section 117B(6).  The judge
    therefore made an error of law in the assessment of reasonableness by
    not following the approach in KO.

16. Ms Pal argued that if the judge erred by incorporating parental
    misconduct into the reasonableness test the error was not material as
    the same outcome would have been reached even if it had not been
    considered.  I disagree.  Reading the decision as a whole, it is
    apparent that the appellant's misconduct was a significant - although
    by no means the only - reason the judge reached the view that it would
    be reasonable to expect the appellant's son to leave the UK.  I cannot
    discern from the decision whether, if the appellant's conduct had been
    excluded from the assessment of reasonableness, the judge would have
    reached the same conclusion.

17. I reserved my decision at the error of law hearing.  After doing so I
    invited the parties to make submissions as to how the appeal should be
    disposed of if I were to find there was an error of law.  Both took the
    view that a decision could not be made relying only on the factual
    findings of the First-tier Tribunal and that the appellant should have
    an opportunity to give further evidence.

18. Given the extent of further fact finding that is likely to be required
    in order to remake the decision, I have decided that the appeal should
    be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be considered afresh.

Notice of Decision

19. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal in respect of the appellant's
    protection claim has not been challenged and stands.

20. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal in respect of the appellant's
    human rights claim contains a material error of law and is set aside.

21. The decision (in respect of the appellant's human rights claim) is
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard afresh by a different
    judge.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the appellant is
granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
indirectly identify him or any member of his family.  This direction
applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.  Failure to comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|Signed                               |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan    Dated: 7 March 2019



