
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: PA/10590/2016
     PA/10594/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 11 July 2017                               |On 20 July 2017               |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WARR

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     EIO
                                     NEO
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Ms L Appiah, Counsel instructed by Apex Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   This is the appeal of the Secretary of State but I will  refer  to  the
    original appellants who are citizens of Nigeria born in  November  1999
    and September 2004 as the appellants herein.  They were  granted  multi
    visit visas to the UK as accompanied children on 5 August  2014.   They
    entered the UK on 27 August 2014.  They applied for asylum on 21  March
    2016.  Their applications were refused on 15 April 2016.

2.   The appellants claim that they would be at risk of  undergoing  FGM  if
    returned to Nigeria from their  paternal  aunts  who  had  visited  the
    family home from early 2014 in relation to the children undergoing FGM.
     The parents did not support such  a  practice  and  arranged  for  the
    appellants to travel to the UK.

3.   The respondent did not accept that the appellants had given a  credible
    account.  The respondent noted that the appellants had been notified of
    a decision to grant them leave to enter the UK on 27  August  2014  but
    had not claimed asylum until 21 March 2016 and that the claim  did  not
    rely wholly on matters arising after they were notified of the decision
    since it was claimed that family members had been putting  pressure  on
    their parents in early 2014.  While the appellants were  children  they
    were accompanied by their mother and it was reasonable to expect her to
    make an asylum claim on their behalf.  This was  particularly  so  when
    taking into account the claim that their parents had arranged for  them
    to travel to  the  UK  to  avoid  FGM.   Reliance  was  placed  by  the
    respondent on Section 8(5) of the Asylum and Immigration (Treatment  of
    Claimants, etc.) Act 2004.

4.   A point was also taken by  the  respondent  on  the  ensuing  delay  in
    making a claim - the appellants had travelled with their mother and had
    been  residing  with  their  maternal  aunt  in  the  United   Kingdom.
    Reference was made to TP (credibility) Zimbabwe [2004] UKIAT 00159.

5.   The Secretary of State noted that the appellants' parents had  made  no
    attempt to relocate and it would have been reasonable for  them  to  do
    so.  Both the appellants' parents were currently  working  in  Nigeria.
    They had already demonstrated  the  capability  of  relocating  to  the
    United Kingdom where they had limited ties.  They could  not  meet  the
    relevant requirements of  the  Rules  and  there  were  no  exceptional
    circumstances.  In considering the best interests of the appellants  it
    was considered that the best durable solution was for them to return to
    Nigeria where they could live with their family.

6.   The appellants appealed and their  appeals  came  before  a  First-tier
    Judge on 16 January 2017.

7.   The appellants were then unrepresented.

8.   The judge records that he was satisfied that the  appellants  had  told
    the truth and that their evidence was credible in paragraph 34  of  his
    decision.  He was satisfied that the parents had sent the appellants to
    the UK for their protection and the determination continues:

         "36. It follows that I am satisfied that the  Appellants  were  the
             subject of attempts by their paternal aunts to perform FGM  on
             them.  I am  satisfied  that  this  pressure  was  based  upon
             cultural practices within the Yoruba  tribe  and  was  pursued
             vigorously by those aunts.   I  am  also  satisfied  that  the
             Appellants parents, who had used various strategies to protect
             the Appellants, sent them to the UK in  the  hope  that  their
             absence from Nigeria would remove the pressure from the  aunts
             and would allow the Appellants to return to Nigeria in safety.
              I accept that this hope was not fulfilled and that the  aunts
             remain intent on performing FGM on the Appellants."

9.   The judge did not consider that recent changes in the law  relating  to
    FGM in Nigeria would  remove  the  risk.   The  judge  then  states  as
    follows:

         "39. I have considered the Appellants' cultural and tribal heritage
             as members of the  Yoruba  tribe.   The  Home  Office  Country
             Information and Guidance Nigeria: 'Women facing  gender  based
             harm or violence' dated August 2016 makes it  clear  that  the
             Yoruba tribe is one of the six largest tribes in  Nigeria  and
             they practice FGM.  I have noted the  following  extract  from
             that Guidance:

             2.3.7   Although  against  the  law  and  in  decline,  female
                  genital mutilation (FGM) continues to  be  practiced  with
                  differing prevalence rates and type across Nigeria and  by
                  ethnic group, religion,  residence  (urban/rural),  state,
                  education and socio-economic class.  A 2013 UNICEF  report
                  found that 27% of women had undergone FGM, although in the
                  last 20 years the prevalence among  adolescent  girls  has
                  dropped by a half.  FGM is usually inflicted  on  a  child
                  before she can give her informed consent but it  may  also
                  be difficult for adolescent girls and women, who have  not
                  had FGM, to refuse social and extended family pressure  to
                  have the procedure."

         40.  This recent information suggests that a female child has a one
             in four chance of suffering FGM.  In certain tribes and  areas
             it will be higher.  The Appellants have cited  the  figure  of
             54.5% of all females between the ages  of  15  to  49  in  the
             Yoruba tribe have undergone FGM.  I am satisfied that  if  the
             Appellants were returned to  Nigeria  they  would  become  the
             subject of intense interest from their extended family to meet
             what are considered to be the cultural requirements  of  their
             tribe."

10.  The judge was further not satisfied that the fact that  the  appellants
    had reached adolescence would reduce the risk.   FGM  could  be  forced
    upon a woman before marriage.  They would be prejudiced in  maintaining
    their cultural identity.  Their parents would not be  able  to  provide
    long-term protection.  Relocation would not be an  option  as  FGM  was
    practised by all but one of the sixth largest tribal groups in  Nigeria
    which would cover the majority of the country. Reference  was  made  at
    paragraph 45 to the Home Office Country Information.  At  paragraph  46
    the judge refers to Januzi v Secretary of State for the Home Department
    [2006] UKHL 5.  The judge noted the appellants were still children  and
    would be vulnerable in Nigeria unless they continued to have the  close
    support of their family.  The judge continues:

         "...As a result relocation for them would not  be  feasible  unless
         their parents relocated with them.  The difficulty is that  at  the
         present time their  parents  are  settled  and  employed  in  their
         current location in Nigeria.  Relocating would mean that they would
         likely have to relinquish that employment  and  face  an  uncertain
         financial future.  The Appellants have  submitted,  and  I  accept,
         that the  prospects  of  finding  new  jobs  in  Nigeria  would  be
         difficult in the current economic climate.  In  addition,  if  they
         relocate to an area with a Yoruba population I  am  satisfied  that
         the pressures to comply with cultural practices would  continue  to
         some extent and that if they move to an area without a  significant
         Yoruba presence the family will  face  additional  difficulties  by
         reason of not being part of the  local  tribal  structures.   As  a
         result I am satisfied that it would be unduly harsh to  expect  the
         Appellants to relocate to Nigeria."

 11. The judge accepted that the best interests of the appellants  would  be
    to remain with their parents but that this would give rise to the  risk
    of FGM.  Their best interests were served by living  apart  from  their
    parents and remaining in the UK.  Accordingly  the  judge  allowed  the
    appeal.

12.  The Secretary of State applied for permission to appeal noting that  it
    was not clear who else apart from the paternal aunts were determined to
    have the appellants subjected to FGM.  The  Secretary  of  State  noted
    that the parents had hitherto prevented the aunts from doing so and the
    evidence why they could not  continue  to  do  so  in  the  future  was
    unclear.  The Secretary of State noted that it was a  striking  feature
    of the case that there was absolutely no evidence from  the  parents  -
    the mother had brought the appellants to the  UK  to  stay  with  their
    aunt. It was not clear why the aunt had not given evidence either.

13.  The positive findings made  by  the  judge  were  "devoid  of  adequate
    reasoning".  On the judge's generalised findings any  young  female  in
    Nigeria would be at risk, per se.  The  practice  was  illegal  and  in
    decline.  Among adolescent girls the  practice  had  dropped  by  about
    half.   There  was  no  generalised  risk.   In  relation  to  internal
    relocation the Secretary of State submitted:

         "5.  The consideration of internal relocation with all due  respect
              to the learned judge is  completely  inadequate.   The  judge
              finds that the appellants' parents cannot relocate with  them
              because they  are  settled  and  employed  in  their  current
              location and relocation could  entail  relinquishing  current
              employments and would mean facing uncertain financial  future
              [46].  The judge accepted  the  elder  appellant's  assertion
              that it would be difficult to find a new job  in  Nigeria  in
              the current economic climate.  It is not clear as to how  and
              why the judge accepted such a self serving assertion from the
              adolescent appellant  without  any  reference  to  background
              evidence and particularly when there was no evidence from the
              appellant's parents.  The older appellant stated at interview
              at q.76 (E11) that the family home was new and that they were
              not planning on moving.  It is clear that the family have the
              financial  means  to  relocate.   Furthermore  even  if   the
              assertions made with  respect  difficulties  in  finding  new
              employments for their parents were correct  it  is  submitted
              such eventuality cannot amount to being unduly harsh."

14.  A point was additionally taken that the  judge  had  not  engaged  with
    Section 8 of the 2004 Act.

15.  The appellants filed a  response  on  3  July  2017  in  which  it  was
    submitted that the judge had engaged with the evidence as given by  the
    appellants and his findings had  been  consistent  with  the  objective
    evidence.  Reliance on the Section 8 issue had not been  made  out  and
    was immaterial to the judge's overall decision to find in favour of the
    appellants.  There was no material error of law.  Permission to  adduce
    further material was sought from members of the appellants' family.

16.  Mr Clarke submitted that the major concern in the grounds was the  lack
    of reasoning.  No reasons  were  given  for  the  positive  credibility
    finding.  There had been no engagement with  the  points  made  in  the
    refusal letter in paragraphs 22 to 30 in relation to the credibility of
    the appellants' account.  The respondent  did  not  consider  that  the
    claims had remained consistent and the appellants' parents had made  no
    attempt to relocate.  The explanation why their father was not planning
    to move was neither reasonable nor consistent given that the appellants
    continued to live in Nigeria and did not apply for a visa until 25 July
    2014 and had not left the country despite the visa being  issued  on  5
    August 2014 until 27 August 2014.   The  appellants'  account  had  not
    remained internally consistent  and  was  not  generally  supported  by
    objective sources.

17.  Although it was apparent from the answer given to question  88  at  the
    asylum interview that the appellants knew  their  parents'  numbers  no
    attempt had been made to get any evidence from either  of  them  before
    the First-tier Judge.  The judge's interpretation of  the  Home  Office
    country information in paragraph 40 was "bewildering".  The  judge  had
    misinterpreted the statistics.

18.  In relation to internal relocation both the  appellants'  parents  were
    self-employed and well-educated.  The First-tier Judge had  noted  that
    the older appellant was articulate.  The parents  had  protected  them.
    The figure of 27% of women having undergone FGM had been misinterpreted
    to include children.  The error in relation to Section 8 was an obvious
    one.  It would not be unduly harsh in all  the  circumstances  for  the
    appellants to relocate with their parents.  The determination should be
    set aside.

19.  Counsel relied on her Rule 24  response.   The  judge  had  taken  into
    account the age of the appellants.  He had  been  satisfied  that  they
    spoke the truth.  He had noted the direct manner  in  which  the  first
    appellant had answered the questions.  In the light of that  the  judge
    said it followed that he was satisfied that the appellants had been the
    subject of attempts by their paternal aunts to perform FGM on  them  in
    paragraph 36 of his decision.  It had not been necessary  to  refer  to
    every point taken in  the  refusal  letter.   The  early  part  of  the
    determination had set out the Secretary of State's case.  Reference had
    been made in this  connection  at  paragraph  10  to  reliance  by  the
    respondent on Section 8.  While Counsel accepted there  was  no  direct
    reference by the judge to Section 8 in his reasoning she submitted that
    in paragraph 36 of the decision there had been implicit reference.  The
    appellants had been sent to the UK on a temporary  basis  in  the  hope
    that they could subsequently return in safety.  When  asked  about  the
    delay in claiming asylum the appellants said that they had thought  the
    pressure from the aunts would stop.  It was accepted that the judge had
    not dealt with Section 8 under a separate heading.

20.  The judge had set out relevant parts of the decision  and  guidance  in
    the determination.  Even if the figure had dropped  by  half  it  would
    still represent a risk on return for the appellants.  The background to
    the case was important.  The judge was entitled to  conclude  that  the
    risk facing the appellants had not decreased having found  them  to  be
    credible  witnesses.   In  relation  to  internal  relocation  it   was
    necessary to take into account the individual circumstances.  While the
    reference to the parents being employed might be an error it was not  a
    material one.  While it was accepted there were no  witness  statements
    it was not clear what they would add.  All the cases had been  set  out
    by the first appellant.  There had been few questions at  the  hearing.
    The grounds showed no error of law.  The children had been litigants in
    person.

21.  Mr Clarke submitted that paragraph 36 of  the  decision  did  not  deal
    with Section 8 - there had been a nineteen month delay between  arrival
    and making the claim.  The judge had not grappled with  the  Section  8
    issue.  The judge had misinterpreted the statistics.  It was not one in
    four children but one in four women who would be at risk.

22.  Both representatives were in agreement that if a material error of  law
    was identified the appeal should be remitted for a fresh hearing before
    a different First-tier Judge.

23.  At the conclusion of the submissions I reserved my decision.  I  remind
    myself that I can only interfere with the decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal if it was materially flawed in law.

24.  This is a case where the respondent expressly raised the issue  of  the
    appellant's credibility under Section 8(1):

         "In determining whether to believe a statement made by or on behalf
         a person who makes an asylum claim  or  a  human  rights  claim,  a
         deciding authority shall take account, as damaging  the  claimant's
         credibility, of any behaviour to which this section applies."

25.  It is not argued that Section 8 does not apply in the circumstances  of
    this case.  It is  accepted  by  Counsel  that  apart  from  making  an
    appearance in the judge's summary of the reasons for refusal  there  is
    no further reference to the effect of Section 8 in this case.  Reliance
    is placed on paragraph 36.  It is submitted that  Section  8  is  dealt
    with by implication.  I do not find that it is possible  to  read  into
    paragraph 36 an engagement by the judge with the mandatory requirements
    of Section 8.  The judge expressly accepted that the parents  had  sent
    the children to the UK for protection. This is a  case  where  although
    the appellants came to this country as children there was no statements
    from the appellants' parents or evidence  at  the  hearing  from  their
    maternal aunt and no explanation for the delay in bringing  their  case
    to the attention of Secretary of State - a delay  which  as  Mr  Clarke
    points  out  was  substantial.  The  points  made  by  the   respondent
    summarised at paragraph 3 above were ones which called to be dealt with
    and were not. This is one of those cases where  the  positive  findings
    made in respect of the appellants are, as is submitted in  the  grounds
    "devoid of adequate reasoning".

26.  Even if the judge had not  erred  in  his  credibility  assessment,  he
    failed to give adequate reasons why the appellants' parents  could  not
    reasonably relocate.  At interview the appellants' father was  said  to
    be self-employed, a businessman, selling scoreboards used  in  stadiums
    and projectors.  The appellants' mother was a computer operator.  There
    was no basis for the judge finding  that  relocation  would  be  unduly
    harsh.

27.  The judge's findings  appear  to  have  been  based  on  a  statistical
    misinterpretation as submitted by Mr  Clarke.   The  risks  facing  the
    children would have been much less than calculated by the judge and  of
    course they would have their parents with them even  if  they  did  not
    relocate.

28.  As Mr Clarke points out the refusal letter is lengthy and  detailed  in
    its analysis of the appellants' case and the judge failed  properly  to
    grapple with it quite apart from the issue taken by the  respondent  in
    relation to Section 8.

29.  I have carefully taken into account the arguments advanced  by  Counsel
    but in my view the respondent's complaint that the judge's decision  is
    flawed and inadequately reasoned as contended in the  grounds  is  made
    good.  The errors are material.  Both sides were in agreement  that  in
    that event a fresh hearing would be required before a different  First-
    tier Judge at which the fresh material  referred  to  in  the  response
    would no doubt be relied upon.

30.  A fresh hearing is required with  none  of  the  findings  of  fact  to
    stand.  The appeal is remitted to be reheard before a different  First-
    tier Judge.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Fee Award
The First-tier Judge made no fee award and I make none.


Signed                                  Date 18 July 2017

G Warr, Judge of the Upper Tribunal

