
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10578/2019

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House (remotely                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|by Skype for Business)                        |                              |
|On 9 February 2021                            |On 24 February 2021           |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE

                                   Between

                                     SKN
                                                                   Appellant
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT




                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Rogers
For the Respondent:    Mr Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS




 1. The appellant is a citizen of Iraq who was born in 1978. He appealed to
    the First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Kelly)  against  a  decision  of  the
    respondent refusing his claim for international protection. The  First-
    tier Tribunal, in a decision promulgated on 6  August  2020,  dismissed
    the appeal. The appellant now appeals, with permission,  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

 2. The appellant claims to fear two  separate  individuals  in  Iraq;  his
    former lover (Negar's) husband, Jalil, who had attacked  the  appellant
    in 2006 and Khasro, the widower of the appellant's sister in law (Awat)
    who had committed suicide in 2014 (the  appellant  claims  that  Khasro
    believed she had died on account of a relationship with the appellant).
    Significantly in the light of what I say below, it had been Khasro (and
    not Jalil) from whom the appellant appears to have fled  in  2018  when
    Khasro 'and a number of armed men' had in June 2018  come  looking  for
    the appellant.

 3. Judge Kelly considered the  evidence  carefully  and  at  [22-29]  made
    findings of fact in the course of which he rejected several  challenges
    to both strands of the appellant's account made  by  the  Secretary  of
    State in the decision letter. Awat is referred to in  this  section  of
    the decision only at [35] where the  judge  contrasts  the  appellant's
    failure to have his identity documents sent to him  from  Iraq  to  the
    United Kingdom with his ability to bring with him documents  concerning
    Awat's suicide. At [31-37], the judge  has  set  out  his  reasons  for
    concluding at [38] that the appellant is not a 'witness of  truth'  who
    had failed to 'substantiate his claim concerning either his reasons for
    leaving Iraq or his supposed lack of documentation...'

 4. The appellant challenges the decision on the ground that the judge  has
    not given reasons why he rejected the 'Khasro' element of his claim. Ms
    Rogers, who appeared at the Upper Tribunal initial  hearing,  submitted
    that the account as a whole should have  be  the  subject  of  detailed
    findings. She rejected the notion that the judge had not 'finished' his
    decision and that it should be remitted to him to be completed; in  her
    view, the appeal should be remitted to a different judge. She did  not,
    however, either  in  her  submissions  or  in  the  grounds  raise  any
    challenge to those findings of fact which the judge has made in respect
    of the 'Khalil' part of the claim.

 5. Mr Melvin, who appeared for the Secretary  of  State,  argued,  in  the
    first instance, that the decision was sound and that the  rejection  of
    the appellant as a witness of truth was sufficient to  dispose  of  all
    aspects of the appeal. In the alternative, he submitted  that  the  two
    parts of the claim were severable  and  that  the  decision  should  be
    returned to Judge Kelly for him to complete it.

 6. I find that there is no  error  of  law  in  this  decision  such  that
    requires me to set it aside. It is important to examine what the nature
    of  the  findings  which  the  judge  has  made.  The  judge  finds   a
    'substantial discrepancy' [32] between the appellant's written evidence
    in March 2019 (in which he speaks of having 'moved on' after Negar  had
    rejected his marriage proposal) and his asylum interview when he refers
    to having continued his relationship with her after her  marriage.  The
    clear implication is that the appellant has invented an untrue account.
    Secondly, at [33] the judge focuses on a further discrepancy. The judge
    records that the appellant has given  two  different  accounts  of  the
    attack at his parents'  home  in  2018.  Again,  the  accounts  are  so
    different that it was clearly open to the judge to  find  that  neither
    was true. At [35] the judge  gives  clear  reasons  for  rejecting  the
    appellant's account regarding his CSID identity document. Similarly, at
    [36], the judge gives cogent reasons for finding that the appellant had
    lied to the respondent and the Tribunal regarding  the  whereabouts  of
    his passport and, at [37],  regarding  his  reasons  for  not  claiming
    asylum in Greece. These are all findings which penetrate  to  the  very
    core of the appellant's credibility as  a  witness  and  which,  in  my
    opinion, fully entitled the judge at [38]  to  make  the  comprehensive
    finding that the appellant is not a witness of truth; in  other  words,
    that no part of his evidence regarding either element of his claim  can
    be relied upon as being true and accurate.  It  matters  not  that  the
    parts of the account which led the judge to that comprehensive  finding
    concern only the 'Jalil' element of the account. The problems with that
    part of the account and the failure of the appellant  to  claim  asylum
    before he reached the United Kingdom are so serious that the judge  was
    justified in rejecting all of the appellant's evidence  and  to  do  so
    without making detailed findings specifically  regarding  the  'Khasro'
    parts of the account.  It is also clear, in my view, that the judge  is
    speaking of both elements of the appellant's  account  he  rejects  the
    appellant's 'reasons for leaving Iraq' at [38].  I  consider  that  the
    appellant has been left in no doubt as to the reasons why he  lost  his
    appeal; in short, the judge did not believe any part of his evidence.

 7. In the circumstances and for the reasons I have given,  the  appeal  is
    dismissed.

    Notice of Decision

    The appeal is dismissed.


Signed                              Date 9 February 2021

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

