
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
PA/10077/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 16 January 2018                         |On 14 February 2018              |
|                                           |                                 |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J M HOLMES

                                   Between

                                     A A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Kiai, Counsel, instructed by Elder Rahimi
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a national of Iran who appears to have entered the  UK
    illegally as a child.  A grant of discretionary leave to  remain  as  a
    child was made to him initially, and that was varied and  extended.  An
    application for asylum was made as a child, which  was  refused  on  24
    April 2007, and an appeal against that refusal dismissed on 18  January
    2012.

 2. A further application for asylum was made as an adult.  That protection
    application was refused on 14 April 2016  and  the  Appellant's  appeal
    against that decision came before Judge Gillespie at Hatton Cross on 29
    September 2017 with the result that it  was  dismissed  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 9 October  2017.  The  Appellant  sought  permission  to
    appeal from the First-tier Tribunal which was granted by Judge  Ransley
    on 23 November 2017.  The author of the grounds for the application for
    permission to appeal was also  the  Appellant's  representative  before
    Judge Gillespie. He is employed by the solicitors who instruct Ms  Kiai
    today. The author is not present to represent the Appellant today,  and
    Ms Kiai who is instructed in his place has now spent the best  part  of
    the day in attempting to contact him through his employer, having  been
    forced to make a number of applications for short adjournments in order
    to facilitate this. She informs me now that she has had no  success  in
    seeking to speak to him, although he has been contacted by e-mail,  and
    has responded to that contact, and has spoken to  his  employer.  I  am
    satisfied that he knows that he has been required to telephone  her  to
    address her concerns about her instructions, and  I  am  not  satisfied
    that any good reason has been offered for his failure to do so. All  of
    that however falls away in  the  light  of  what  has  transpired  this
    afternoon.

 3. I note that contained within the grounds  is  the  assertion  that  the
    Appellant did not pursue  his  appeal  on  the  basis  of  a  Christian
    conversion, and that the Judge had misunderstood the nature of the case
    advanced, which was that the Appellant faced a risk of harm in Iran  as
    a homosexual. The difficulty with that assertion is that it appears  to
    be unfounded. The Appellant had advanced a claim that he faced  a  risk
    of harm as an apostate in the event of return to Iran, and  had  placed
    before the Judge documentary evidence  from  a  church  supporting  his
    claim to have converted to the Christian faith. There appears  to  have
    been no formal withdrawal of this aspect of the claim before the Judge.
    In those circumstances there was no possible error on the part  of  the
    Judge in dealing with that limb of the protection claim.

 4. The grounds also assert that the Respondent  had  conceded  before  the
    Judge that the Appellant was a homosexual and complain that  the  Judge
    was thus in error in treating that issue as one  that  was  in  dispute
    before him, and requiring his decision upon  it.  I  have  considerable
    sympathy with the Judge and his approach to the  evidence.   Indeed  my
    own approach to the refusal letter would have been exactly the same  as
    his evidently was, namely that it contains no clear concession  of  the
    nature asserted, and that the author intended to place the  Appellant's
    sexuality in dispute.

 5. Judge Gillespie offered a number of reasons, apparently perfectly well-
    grounded in the  evidence,  to  identify  why  the  Appellant  and  his
    witnesses had given inconsistent evidence, and why the Appellant's oral
    evidence was inconsistent with the contents  of  various  documents  in
    front of him, so that the Judge assessed the Appellant as an individual
    upon whose  word  little  weight  could  be  placed.   The  Judge  then
    inevitably concluded that the Appellant had not told  the  truth  about
    his sexuality in the light of the six reasons that he gave at paragraph
    20 of the decision, all of which as I say appear to be well-founded  in
    the evidence before him, and went on as a result to conclude  that  the
    Appellant faced no possible risk of harm upon the return to Iran in the
    light of his sexuality because he was in truth a heterosexual man.

 6. I note also that the record of proceedings suggests no concession  upon
    the issue of sexuality was made to the Judge at the hearing. However, I
    have been informed this  afternoon  by  Mr  Tarlow  on  behalf  of  the
    Respondent, that his reading of the refusal letter  suggests  that  the
    Respondent did intend to concede that the Appellant  was  a  homosexual
    man. His view, (which does not appear to be backed by any  contemporary
    note of the hearing) is that there was no dispute over the  Appellant's
    homosexuality for  Judge  Gillespie  to  resolve.  Even  if  there  was
    confusion at the hearing with the parties having failed to  make  their
    respective positions clear to the Judge, then it is his view on  behalf
    of the Respondent, that this is not an issue that the Respondent  would
    seek now (or in the future) to place in dispute. It follows, as he  now
    accepts, that he must  therefore  concede  that  the  Judge  fell  into
    material error, even if without any fault on his part. It also  follows
    that the Judge's  adverse  credibility  findings  in  relation  to  the
    Appellant's sexuality cannot  be  severed  from  his  approach  to  the
    Appellant's evidence upon the risk of harm that the  Appellant  claimed
    he would face upon return to Iran.

 7.  Given  Mr  Tarlow's  late  concession,  the  Judge's   decision   must
    regretfully be set aside and, as both parties also  agree,  the  appeal
    must be reheard de novo. In circumstances where it  would  appear  that
    the relevant evidence has not properly been  considered  by  the  First
    Tier Tribunal, the effect of that error of law has been to deprive  the
    Appellant of the opportunity for his case to be properly considered  by
    the First Tier Tribunal; paragraph 7.2(a) of the Practice Statement  of
    13 November 2014. Moreover the extent  of  the  judicial  fact  finding
    exercise is such that having regard to the over-riding objective, it is
    appropriate that the appeal  should  be  remitted  to  the  First  Tier
    Tribunal; paragraph 7.2(b) of the Practice  Statement  of  13  November
    2014. To that end I must remit the appeal for  a  fresh  hearing  by  a
    judge other than Judge Gillespie at the  Hatton  Cross  Hearing  Centre
    where no doubt a Farsi interpreter will be required.


Notice of decision

 8. The decision promulgated on 9 October 2017 did involve the making of an
    error of law sufficient to require the decision to  be  set  aside  and
    reheard. Accordingly the appeal is remitted to the First Tier  Tribunal
    for rehearing de novo with the directions set out above.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed                              Date 16 January 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J M Holmes
Fee award

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.

Signed                              Date 16 January 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J M Holmes
