
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/10074/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester CJC              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 7 February 2018                   |On 4 March 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between

                                     S H
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               the Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Patel, Lei, Dat & Baig Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1.     The Appellant is a national of Iraq, born on 15.3.96. He is a
    Sunni Kurd, from Kala, Suleymaniya in the IKR. The Appellant arrived in
    the United Kingdom and claimed asylum on 26 October 2017, on the basis
    that he had a relationship with a Shia woman whose father was involved
    with Shia militia, whilst the Appellant was working in Jalawla, Diyala
    province, which is a contested area. The Appellant asserted that his
    former partner, W, had been subjected to an honour killing as a
    consequence of their relationship and he too feared being killed if
    returned.

    2.     His asylum application was refused in a decision dated 31 August
    2008 and the Appellant appealed against this decision. His appeal came
    before First tier Tribunal Judge Shergill for hearing on 26 September
    2018. In a decision and reasons promulgated on 17 October 2018, the
    Judge dismissed the appeal, finding the Appellant not to be credible,
    owing to discrepancies in his account of who he feared, stating in his
    screening interview that he feared Daesh but in a preliminary
    information form, which the Appellant claimed was completed by a
    Kurdish woman who was a lay person, which explanation the Judge
    rejected, that he was also assaulted by Daesh, but did not rely on this
    aspect of the claim at all in his substantive interview; discrepancies
    in his account as to his relationship; that a copy arrest warrant was
    not reliable and that he had previously fled to Sweden in 2015 where he
    put forward a different asylum claim based on a blood feud. Thus the
    Judge found that the Appellant could return to the IKR.

    3.     An application for permission to appeal was made to the Upper
    Tribunal by the Appellant himself, out of time, on the basis that there
    had been a mistake because he had always referred to a fear of Hasht Al
    Shaabi and that his girlfriend's family were involved with them; that
    the Judge had made errors in his assessment of the arrest warrant and
    that he now had photographs of his girlfriend on his phone, which had
    been broken but was now fixed.

    4.     In a decision dated 30 November 2018, permission to appeal to
    the Upper Tribunal was granted by Designated Judge Shaerf, who also
    extended time, noting as follows:

         "It is clear from the interview record (Q.10ff) that he referred to
         Hashd Al-Shaabi. The Appellant dealt with this at paras.22ff of his
         witness statement and it is arguable the Judge's treatment of this
         at paras. 16 and 17 of his decision is inaccurate.

         At para 27 the Judge placed considerable weight on apparent dating
         errors in letters at page D20 of the Respondent's bundle and page
         23 in the Appellant's bundle. Both these letters which he considers
         are in identical form are from the Appellant's solicitors. First,
         they are not in identical form. The earlier letter at page D20
         encloses a copy of an arrest warrant and the later letter at
         encloses the original arrest warrant. The Judge arguably erred in
         placing reliance on this apparent but not actual inconsistency and
         in any event the relevant evidence is the arrest warrant not the
         solicitors' letters referring to it.

         These are arguable errors of fact finding sufficient to amount to
         an arguable error of law. However, whether those errors are
         sufficient to make the Judge's overall adverse credibility unsafe
         in light of the other findings will be for the Upper Tribunal to
         determine."

    Hearing

    5.     At the hearing before the Upper Tribunal, Ms Patel sought to
    rely on the grounds of appeal and drew my attention to [16]-[17] of the
    decision of the First tier Tribunal and [4] of the grant of permission.
    The Judge found inconsistencies between the screening interview, the
    substantive interview and the PIF, however, the Appellant recognized
    there were errors and at C18 submitted a letter to the Respondent. The
    Judge failed to take this into consideration in any substantive or
    significant detail. She submitted this is an error of law. She
    submitted that the Judge granting permission to appeal does recognize
    that the Appellant defined his fear of persecution as being of Hashd A-
    Shaabi. The Judge's treatment of the arrest warrants is at [27] which
    seems to be a lengthy observation of certain inconsistencies. These are
    included in the Respondent's bundle at D20 - which is a copy of the
    arrest warrant and translation sent on 27.7.18 with a recorded delivery
    slip (page 23 of the Appellant's bundle). The Judge looks at the dates
    of when the documents were served but did not engage with the documents
    themselves, which she submitted is a material error.

    6.     In his submissions, Mr McVeety stated that he was somewhat
    puzzled by the grant of permission. Whilst what it states in the grant
    of permission is that there are errors it is not apparent that the
    Judge granting permission considered what the Appellant stated about
    inconsistencies. The First tier Tribunal Judge says at [17]-[19] that
    he has considered everything put forward by the Appellant and he found
    inconsistencies and he did not believe the Appellant. Credibility is a
    matter for the judge, he found no plausible explanation and there is
    nothing he did not consider. The letter referred to at C18 simply says
    he has a fear of being killed because of a girl.

    7.     Mr McVeety submitted that there is a huge amount of this
    decision and reasons which has not challenged, particularly that
    relating to the core of the Appellant's account. At [23] putting aside
    the inconsistencies, the Judge stated he was not persuaded by the core
    of the claim: see findings at [23]-[25]. The Judge focused solely on
    how the document came to be rather than content: see [27] but also see
    [28] where the Judge does consider the evidence. He submitted that it
    was entirely open to the Judge to make findings he did on the evidence.

    8.     Mr McVeety stated that he had not seen the original arrest
    warrant which had been served on the Home Office but having checked the
    file, confirmed that it was on the file, albeit from the minute
    compiled by the Presenting Officer, it was not available at the
    hearing.

    9.     In reply, Ms Patel submitted with respect to [16]-[17] of the
    Judge's decision, that the Judge failed to consider that the Kurdish
    woman described is a British citizen, not a legal representative nor an
    interpreter.







    Findings and reasons

    10.    I reserved my decision, which I now give with my reasons. Whilst
    the Judge has made adverse findings in respect of the Appellant's
    credibility, I have concluded that the Judge also made material errors
    of fact which undermine the safety of his conclusions.

    11.    At [11]-[17] the Judge focused on discrepancies as to who the
    Appellant feared, however, as pointed out by Judge Shaerf in the grant
    of permission to appeal, the Appellant referred to a fear of Hashd Al-
    Shaabi in his interview record and witness statement, as it was members
    of this militia who accompanied his girlfriend's male relatives to the
    Appellant's family home.  The Judge refers to the Shia militia at [17]
    but takes a different point, ie the fact that the Appellant's account
    of a fear of this militia is inconsistent with his previous accounts,
    as set out in his screening interview and preliminary information form.
    However, he fails to engage with the consistency between the
    Appellant's account in his witness statement and substantive asylum
    interview. Whilst I find that the Judge was entitled to place some
    weight on the screening interview, I find in this particular case that
    he attached undue weight, given that the screening interview is
    precisely that and is not intended to set out a detailed basis of
    claim. I am also concerned at the readiness with which at [12] and [13]
    the Judge disregarded the Appellant's explanation for the repetition of
    the erroneous account of a fear of persecution from Daesh on the basis
    that the person who assisted him in completing the preliminary
    information form [PIF] was a British Kurdish woman, who was not a legal
    representative. It also does not appear to have occurred to the Judge,
    because he makes no mention of it, that the reason why the PIF was
    consistent with the screening interview is because the woman assisting
    the Appellant took the information from the screening interview.

    12.    Thus I find any reliance on discrepancies between the
    Appellant's accounts as to the (partial) basis of his fear of
    persecution given at different times, in respect of which he also
    provided an explanation, are not sustainable in light of this error of
    fact, which amounts to a failure to take account of a material
    consideration and is thus a material error of law.

    13.    I further find that the Judge erred at [27] and [28] in that he
    failed to apprehend that the Appellant's representatives sent a copy of
    the arrest warrant to the Respondent on 28 June 2018 and then, when
    they subsequently received the original, they also forwarded that to
    the Respondent on 27 July 2018. Contrary to the Judge's finding, this
    is not an indication that there is clearly something amiss. In the
    absence of the original document, the Judge then went on to find that
    the arrest warrant is not reliable and in so doing appeared to place
    weight on its absence, which was in no way the fault of the Appellant.
    I find that the Judge erred in his treatment of the arrest warrant and
    failed to properly analyse the arrest warrant and give reasons for his
    findings.

    14.    Whilst the Presenting Officer's minute of the hearing indicates
    that he was not in possession of the original document, when requested
    Mr McVeety searched the Home Office file and found it. Thus it is now
    available for inspection.

    15.    Whilst the Judge made further adverse findings against the
    Appellant, I find that those findings are infected by the errors of law
    in the two key areas set out above.

    Decision

    16.    I find material errors of law in the decision of First tier
    Tribunal Judge Shergill. I set aside that decision and remit the appeal
    for a hearing de novo before the First tier Tribunal.


Rebecca Chapman

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman     28 February 2019

