
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10837/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard by Skype at Field House        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11 January 2021                   |On 15 March 2021                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

                                     N F
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss Fitzsimons, instructed by Wilson Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Kaler, promulgated on 18 March 2020.  That decision
    was set aside for the reasons set out in my decision promulgated on  25
    September 2020.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Morocco.  She is the  youngest  of  seven
    children. Her father was a very strict and controlling person  and  was
    violent. Although she was allowed to study until she was 22 and then to
    work, he permitted the latter only because he could use the money.  She
    had to give him half her salary as he had ceased to work and had to  be
    home by 7 p.m. at latest.  She had an affair with a man she  met  in  a
    restaurant where she had  lunch  and  had  sex  with  him  after  being
    pressured to do so.  She became pregnant and  the  man  then  vanished.
    Acting on advice of her niece in whom she had confided, she went  to  a
    herbalist and who gave her a remedy which led to the termination of the
    pregnancy.

 3. In 2018 she agreed, against her will, to  marry  her  father's  cousin;
    but, worried that it would be discovered she  was  not  a  virgin,  she
    considered she  would  be  subject  to  honour  violence.   She  became
    depressed and was put on antidepressants.  She was,  however,  able  to
    obtain a visa to visit her brother in Scotland. Although  in  the  past
    her mother had gone with  her,  she  was  not  given  a  visa  on  this
    occasion, but the appellant was.  Her father agreed to let her  travel.



 4. The appellant told her brother about the pregnancy  and  abortion  but,
    instead of being sympathetic, told her he could  no  longer  stay  with
    her. The  appellant's  brother  telephoned  the  father  and  told  him
    everything.

 5. The Secretary of State did not accept the appellant's case, considering
    that she was not credible.  Further, she considered that  even  if  the
    appellant's case were true, there was sufficiency of protection for her
    in Morocco and/or that  she  would  be  able  to  relocate  within  the
    country.

 6. The judge accepted [31] that the  appellant's  father  was  strict  and
    controlling; that she had had an  affair  and  an  abortion;  that  the
    appellant's father and other members of the  family  knew  about  that;
    that there would be a risk of violence to her from  her  family  should
    she return to Morocco [34] given that  the  appellant's  actions  meant
    that there would be no marriage  with  his  cousin  and  that  she  had
    dishonoured him.

 7. The judge also accepted that the background evidence was supportive  of
    the appellant's  assertion  that  the  authorities  would  not  readily
    intervene to protect her from her father and male relatives, but  found
    that the appellant was educated, has skills and she could use those  to
    get herself a job; and,  that  she  could  reasonably  be  expected  to
    relocate to another part of Morocco where she would be  safe  from  any
    honour crime.  Having  had  regard  to  the  report  of  Dr  Thorne,  a
    consultant clinical psychologist, [41] the judge was not satisfied that
    there was a risk of suicidal ideation noting that this  would  increase
    but only if "she believed her family would  discover  her  whereabouts,
    there was thus no reason to suppose that they would be able to do  so".
    The judge considered that whilst the  appellant  might  fear  what  her
    family may do to her, the risk of this happening in an area miles  away
    from her home in a large city was negligible [42].  He found there  was
    no reason for the supposition for the appellant having reported her  to
    the authorities as missing and thus no reason why anyone should contact
    them should she apply for employment or housing.  He concluded that she
    was  able  to  manage  for  over  a  year  in  the   past   by   taking
    antidepressants, and could be expected to live in another town far from
    her home area and could access medical treatment for her depression  as
    she had done in the past.  [43].

 8. The appellant was granted permission to appeal.   On  27  July  2020  I
    issued directions which, so far as is material, provided:

      1. I have reviewed the file in this case.  In the light of the present
         need to take precautions against the spread of  Covid-19,  and  the
         overriding objective expressed in the Procedure  Rules[1],  I  have
         reached the  provisional  view  that  it  would  in  this  case  be
         appropriate to determine the following questions without a hearing:

        a)  whether  the  making  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision
           involved the making of an error of law, and, if so

        b) whether that decision should be set aside.

      2. It is my preliminary view that the  judge  did  err  materially  in
         failing to take  into  account  the  report  of  Dr  Panjwani  when
         assessing (a) sufficiency of protection and (b) internal flight and
         also adopted an incorrect test.  It is  also  my  preliminary  view
         that the judge erred in his approach to the psychological  evidence
         in not taking it into account  in  assessing  the  ability  of  the
         appellant to access protection and/or relocate to an area where she
         would be safe.

      3. In consequence, it is my preliminary view that the decision of  the
         First-tier Tribunal involved the making of  an  error  of  law  and
         should be set aside  to  be  remade  in  the  Upper  Tribunal,  the
         findings of fact as to what had happened to the  appellant  in  the
         past, her credibility and as to the threat from her  father  to  be
         preserved.


 9. I then gave a timetable within which responses were  to  be  made.  The
    appellant replied, agreeing to the proposed course of action. There was
    no response by the respondent and on 23 September 2020, I set aside the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal, stating that:


         The appellant has agreed to the proposed action. There has been  no
         timely response by the respondent. Accordingly, I am satisfied that
         neither party objects to the  matter  being  determined  without  a
         hearing and has nothing further to say. I am  satisfied  that  that
         the determination of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the making
         of an error of  law  for  the  reasons  set  out  above,  and  must
         therefore be set aside.  In the circumstances, and in line with the
         directions set out I above, I set aside the decision of the  First-
         tier Tribunal and direct that it be remade in the Upper Tribunal on
         the issues of whether there would be a  sufficiency  of  protection
         for the appellant and/or whether it would be reasonable  to  expect
         her to relocate within Morocco.

10. As noted in my decision, most of the findings of fact  were  preserved.
    There was no application for me  to  hear  further  evidence  from  the
    appellant and the remaking of the appeal  proceeded  on  the  basis  of
    submissions only.

11. Miss Fitzsimons submitted, relying on the expert report of Dr  Panjwani
    that there was a risk to the  appellant  outside  the  home  area,  the
    expert report at paragraphs 11.5 to 11.6 addressing  this  issue.   She
    drew  my  attention  to  the  need  for  the   appellant   to   provide
    identification evidence were she to rent a property and the appellant's
    belief, as set out in her witness statement, paragraphs [49 to 50]  and
    she believed that they would have reported her.

12. Miss Fitzsimons submitted that given the diagnosis by Dr Thorne  for  a
    major depressive order and chronic anxiety, that although there was  no
    current intent to commit suicide, there was a risk that the risk  would
    increase and that the appellant would  be  vulnerable.   She  submitted
    this was consistent with the positive credibility findings  as  to  how
    she had suffered in the past and that her mental health was relevant to
    the question as to how she would be able to relocate.

13. I observed at this point that the report did not address the ability of
    the appellant to function, that is as  to  how  her  current  state  of
    mental ill health would affect her abilities to for example get  a  job
    or accommodation.

14. Miss Fitzsimons submitted that the appellant would face difficulties as
    a single woman in Morocco,  relying  on  the  report  of  Dr  Panjwani,
    submitting that whilst in theory there was equality that did not  occur
    in practice, that  there  were  significant  difficulties  with  mental
    healthcare given the stigma attached and that the appellant would  face
    discrimination in the labour market.

15. Miss Fitzsimons also drew my attention to the representations  made  by
    the appellant's  solicitors  corroborating  what  she  said  about  the
    difficulties of obtaining housing and employment.

16. Mr Melvin relied on the refusal letter submitting  that  there  was  in
    this case a  sufficiency  of  protection  for  the  appellant,  drawing
    attention to the laws passed  as  recently  as  2018,  indicating  that
    protection was available as indeed was legal representation.

17. Mr Melvin submitted further that there  was  insufficient  evidence  to
    show that the appellant would not  be  able  to  get  accommodation  or
    employment and given she had worked in the past, had been educated  and
    thus there was no basis  in  which  she  could  not  relocate,  getting
    accommodation and provide for herself.  He  submitted  also  she  would
    have the voluntary return assistance which could be taken into account.



18. Turning to the applicant's mental ill health, Mr Melvin submitted  that
    there was insufficient evidence to show that she faced stigma  on  that
    basis, the material being relied on by the expert at  11.4  related  to
    schizophrenia  in  India.   He  submitted  there  was  nothing  helpful
    regarding the situation in Morocco and that the medical  report  should
    be viewed with a degree of caution given it had not been prepared by  a
    psychiatrist but by a clinical  psychologist  and  that  there  was  no
    indication that the recommendations made in that report had been  acted
    upon.  There was no indication that she had been referred to obtain the
    treatment necessary.

19. Mr Melvin submitted that there  was  in  this  case  a  sufficiency  of
    protection and that it  was  reasonable  to  expect  the  appellant  to
    relocate.  He submitted that there was little evidence to  support  any
    current suicidal ideation and certainly insufficient to meet  the  high
    threshold in respect of an Article 3 claim.

20. In response Miss Fitzsimons submitted that weight could be attached  to
    the psychiatric report and that it was reliable.  She accepted  it  did
    not deal with any difficulties that there might  be  in  the  appellant
    reintegrating into Morocco on return but that it was sufficiently clear
    that she would have difficulties  in  coping.   She  submitted  it  was
    unlikely that the authorities would give the appellant help.

The Law

21. It is for the appellant to prove, on the lower standard, that she is at
    risk on return to Morocco of serious  harm  such  as  would  constitute
    persecution, entitle her to humanitarian protection or engage article 3
    of the Human Rights Convention.

22. The appellant's fear in this case is of non-state agents.  As was noted
    in  AW  (Sufficiency  of  Protection)  Pakistan  [2011]  UKUT  31,   in
    Bagdanavicius the House of Lords at [2005] UKHL 38 left undisturbed the
    proposition set out  by  Auld LJ  on  real  risk  and  sufficiency  of
    protection in  the  Court  of  Appeal  [2005]  EWCA  Civ 1605.   These
    propositions are in the following terms:
       "54. Summary  of  conclusions  on  real  risk/sufficiency  of  state
      protection.
          The common threshold of risk
          1) The threshold of risk is the same in both categories of claim;
         the main reason for introducing section 65 to the 1999 Act was  not
         to provide an alternative, lower threshold of risk and/or a  higher
         level of protection against such risk through the medium  of  human
         rights claims, but to widen the reach of protection  regardless  of
         the motive giving rise to the persecution.
      Asylum claims
         2) An asylum seeker who claims to be  in  fear  of  persecution  is
         entitled  to  asylum  if  he  can  show  a  well-founded  fear   of
         persecution for a Refugee Convention reason and that there would be
         insufficiency of state protection to meet it;  Horvath [2001] 1  AC
         489].
         3) Fear of persecution is well-founded if there  is  a  'reasonable
         degree of likelihood' that it will materialise;  R  v  SSHD  ex  p.
         Sivakumaran [1988] AC 956, per Lord Goff at 1000F-G.
         4) Sufficiency of state protection, whether from  state  agents  or
         non-state actors, means a willingness and ability on  the  part  of
         the  receiving  state  to  provide  through  its  legal  system   a
         reasonable level of protection  from  ill-treatment  of  which  the
         claimant for asylum has a well-founded fear;   Osman  v  UK  [1999]
         1 FLR  193],  Horvath,  Dhima  [2002]  EWHC  80  (Admin),  [2002]
         Immigration Judge AR 394].
         5) The effectiveness  of  the  system  provided  is  to  be  judged
         normally by its systemic ability to deter  and/or  to  prevent  the
         form of persecution of which there is a risk, not  just  punishment
         of it after the  event;  Horvath;  Banomova  [2001]  EWCA  Civ.807.
         McPherson [2001] EWCA Civ 1955 and Kinuthia [2001] EWCA Civ 2100.
         6) Notwithstanding systemic sufficiency of state protection in  the
         receiving state a claimant may still have a  well-founded  fear  of
         persecution if he can show that its authorities know  or  ought  to
         know of circumstances particular to his case  giving  rise  to  his
         fear, but are unlikely to provide  the  additional  protection  his
         particular circumstances reasonably require;  Osman.
          Article 3 claims
          7) The same principles apply to claims in removal cases of risk of
         exposure to Article 3 ill-treatment in  the  receiving  state,  and
         are, in general, unaffected by the approach of the Strasbourg Court
         in Soering; which, on its facts, was, not only a state-agency  case
         at the  highest  institutional  level,  but  also  an  unusual  and
         exceptional case on its facts;  Dhima, Krepel [2002] EWCA Civ 1265
         and Ullah [2004] UKHL 26.
         8) The basis of an article 3 entitlement in a removal case is  that
         the claimant, if sent to the country in question, would be at  risk
         there of Article 3 ill-treatment.
         9) In most, if not all, Article 3 cases in this context the concept
         of risk has the same or closely similar  meaning  to  that  in  the
         Refugee Convention of a 'well-founded fear  of  persecution',  save
         that it is confined to a risk of Article 3 forms  of  ill-treatment
         and is not restricted to conduct with any particular motivation  or
         by reference to the conduct of the claimant;  Dhima, Krepel, Chahal
         v UK [1996] 23 EHRR 413.
         10) The threshold of risk required to engage Article 3  depends  on
         the circumstances of each case,  including  the  magnitude  of  the
         risk, the nature and  severity  of  the  ill-treatment  risked  and
         whether the risk emanates from a state agency or  non-state  actor;
         Horvath.
         11) In most, but not necessarily all, cases of ill-treatment which,
         but for state protection, would engage Article 3, a  risk  of  such
         ill-treatment will be  more  readily  established  in  state-agency
         cases than in non-state actor  cases  -  there  is  a  spectrum  of
         circumstances giving rise to such risk spanning the two categories,
         ranging from breach of a duty by the state of a negative  duty  not
         to inflict Article 3 ill-treatment to a breach of a  duty  to  take
         positive protective action against such ill-treatment by  non-state
         actors;  Svazas.
         12) An assessment to the  threshold  of  risk  appropriate  in  the
         circumstances  to  engage  Article  3   necessarily   involves   an
         assessment of the sufficiency  of  state  protection  to  meet  the
         threat of which there is such a risk -  one  cannot  be  considered
         without the other whether  or  not  the  exercise  is  regarded  as
         'holistic' or to be conducted in two stages; Dhima, Krepel,  Svazas
         [2002] EWCA Civ 74.
         13)  Sufficiency  of  state  protection  is  not  a  guarantee   of
         protection from Article 3 ill-treatment any  more  than  it  is  a
         guarantee of protection from  an  otherwise  well-founded  fear  of
         persecution in asylum cases - nor, if and to the extent that  there
         is any difference, is it eradication or removal of risk of exposure
         to Article 3 ill-treatment'; Dhima, McPherson; Krepel.
         14) Where the risk falls to be judged by the sufficiency  of  state
         protection, that sufficiency is judged, not according to whether it
         would eradicate the real risk of the relevant harm,  but  according
         to whether it is  a  reasonable  provision  in  the  circumstances;
         Osman.
         15) Notwithstanding such systemic sufficiency of  state  protection
         in the receiving state, a claimant may still be able  to  establish
         an Article 3 claim if he can show that the authorities there  know
         or ought to know of particular circumstances likely to  expose  him
         to risk of Article 3 ill-treatment;  Osman.
         16) The approach is the same whether the receiving country is or is
         not a party to the ECHR, but, in determining whether  it  would  be
         contrary to Article 3 to remove a  person  to  that  country,  our
         courts should decide the factual  issue  as  to  risk  as  if  ECHR
         standards apply there - and the same applies to  the  certification
         process under section 115(1) and/or (2) of the 2002 Act".

23. While it will always be relevant to ask whether  or  not  there  is  in
    general a sufficiency of protection in a country, the critical question
    will nevertheless remain in an asylum case as  set  out  in  the  sixth
    proposition by Auld LJ and in an Article 3 case as  set  out  in  the
    fifteenth proposition.  Thus I must  look,  notwithstanding  a  general
    sufficiency of protection in a country, to the individual circumstances
    of the appellant and ask the above questions.

24. The questions to be answered are:

      a) Does the risk to the appellant which is accepted exists in her home
         area extend across the whole of Morocco?

      b) If so, would there be a sufficiency of protection for her?

      c) If not, would it be unduly harsh to expect her to  relocate  to  an
         area where she would not be at risk?

      d) Does  any  serious  harm  she  faces  have  a  nexus  with  Refugee
         Convention reason?

    Does the risk to the appellant extend across Morocco?

25. Two questions fall to be answered: would the  family  be  motivated  to
    find her; and, what means to do so would be available?

26. Given what has happened to the appellant  in  the  past,  her  fear  of
    violence at the hands of her family is understandable.   While  I  note
    the FtT held that, in the context of the medical report, her  fear  was
    not rational, that is to miss the point; the fear is real  to  her  and
    contributes to her depression and other mental ill-health as  is  clear
    from the report of Dr Thorne on whose expertise I find it  is  safe  to
    rely. For her the  fear  is  very  real,  even  if  that  fear  is  not
    objectively justified. It is evident also from Dr  Thorne's  report  at
    [38]  that  she  has  been  left  vulnerable  to  depression  which  is
    complicated by what she believes to be a real threat to her  safety  in
    Morocco.

27. Whether the appellant's family would seek her out or whether they would
    be alerted to her return is not easy to discern.  The family are  aware
    that she is in the United Kingdom.  The appellant says in  her  witness
    statement at [50] that "I am convinced my family will  have  registered
    me as 'missing' with the police and I believe that once my details  are
    registered, the police in whichever city I am in will inform the police
    in my home town," she does not explain why she is convinced of that but
    it is consistent with the evidence from the cousin.

28. In her witness  statement,  the  appellant's  cousin  does  state  that
    whenever the appellant's name comes up in conversation there remains  a
    huge amount of anger about what she did,  and  that  she  considers  it
    dangerous for her to even be in contact with her [4].  She also says at
    [9] that the appellant is still a topic  of  conversation  amongst  the
    family.  She says:

         Whenever she comes up in conversation the men talk about  the  same
         thing, they talk about how she disobeyed and brought shame  on  the
         family and how they will find and kill her.  I think they know they
         cannot do anything to [the appellant] in the United Kingdom but  if
         she is returned to Morocco I am convinced  she  will  be  found  by
         them.

         There is no way she would be able to live by herself  without  them
         finding out.  It is totally abnormal for a young woman to  live  by
         herself and questions will  materialise about  who  [the  appellant
         is], where she has come from, why she is alone.  She will  have  to
         register with the local authorities and sooner or later  my  family
         will be able to track her down.

29. I consider that weight can be attached  to  this  as  evidence  of  the
    strength of feeling in the family and the extent to which they wish  to
    seek revenge. It is also evidence of a  continuing  desire  to  do  her
    harm; it is repeated activity.  Equally,  it  is  consistent  with  the
    account  the  appellant  gave  to  Dr  Thorne  [41]  of  being   beaten
    frequently, and not just by her father.   Accordingly,  and  given  the
    preserved findings of fact and credibility, I  am  satisfied  that  the
    appellant's family do still have the motivation to find her and to harm
    her.

30. Would they then have the means to do so? The evidence from  the  cousin
    is limited; it does not explain how she could be tracked down, nor  why
    questions about her would  come  back  to  the  family.  But,  equally,
    contacting the police or reporting her missing  would  be  a  means  to
    trying to find the appellant. The family know  she  is  in  the  United
    Kingdom. It would be consistent with past behaviour to  take  steps  to
    find her.

31. I accept that in a country with a compulsory  registration  system  and
    where registering residence is the norm, that  it  may  be  easier  for
    someone to be traced by family, if they choose to do so.

32. It is implicit in the expert report, and back by external sources, that
    there is an ID card system in Morocco but there is no detail of it.   I
    do not for example know how difficult it is to  obtain  a  replacement,
    whether the appellant had one, whether she has lost it or  whether  she
    would be able to obtain a new one easily using her passport.

33. That is not to say that the family would not  be  able  to  trace  here
    through a registration system, but there is simply not enough  evidence
    as to how  the  system  operates.  Given  the  evidence  of  widespread
    corruption in the police in Morocco (see US State Department Report  at
    section 4), it is likely that the family would be able to find out what
    information on her is retained.

34. I accept that women are treated as second class citizens in Morocco for
    many purposes.  It is sufficiently clear from the expert evidence  that
    despite the apparent equality  granted  by  the  constitution  and  the
    recent law  from  2018  regarding  domestic  violence,  there  is  less
    evidence that this is in fact the case in practice.  As is noted in the
    US State Department Report, at section 6, the police were slow  to  act
    in domestic violence cases,  that  the  government  generally  did  not
    enforce the law, the police generally treating domestic violence  as  a
    social rather than a  criminal  matter.   Further,  the  courts  appear
    rarely to prosecute low  level  domestic  violence.  In  that  context,
    although new, better laws have been enacted,  there  is  little  or  no
    evidence that they will be enforced.

35. Taking all of these factors into account, and applying the factors  set
    out at [22] above, I am satisfied that there would not be a sufficiency
    of protection for this appellant, given her  particular  circumstances.
    It needs to be considered that the appellant could not conceal from the
    authorities why her family wished  to  do  her  harm;  it  is  hard  to
    conceive of any police force not asking the appellant what  had  caused
    the problem with the family. Given  the  evident  attitudes  to  extra-
    marital affairs, pregnancy and abortion (which is prohibited), there is
    even less chance of her receiving assistance.

36. Viewing the evidence as a whole, and bearing in mind its consistency, I
    conclude that the  family  are  motivated  to  find  the  appellant.  I
    conclude also, giving the appellant the benefit of the doubt given that
    the rest of her account is credible, that they will take steps to  find
    her.  Given the severity of the risk to her, and the continuing adverse
    interest, I am satisfied that she is at risk of ill-treatment from them
    of sufficient severity to constitute persecution  and/or  a  breach  of
    article 3 of the Human Rights Convention.; and, that there would not be
    a sufficiency of protection for her.

37. Further, and in any event, for the reasons set out  below,  I  consider
    that it would be unduly harsh to expect her to relocate.

    Internal Relocation

38. I accept that in some countries, as COI and Country  Guidance  on  this
    issue in Pakistan shows, it is very difficult for a woman on her own to
    obtain a job or accommodation without the support of a male  member  of
    the family.  There are, I accept,  countries  where  a  landlord  would
    simply just not rent a flat to a single woman or where a  single  woman
    living on her own might be assumed to have loose morals and/or to be  a
    sex worker, leading to  significant  problems.   But  there  is  little
    material before me as to whether such  issues  arise  in  Morocco.   Dr
    Panjwani's report is lacking in sufficient evidence  of  any  obstacles
    that a single woman would face and goes little beyond a  commentary  on
    readily available sources.  There is, for example no reference  to  any
    materials produced by women's associations in Morocco or even  if  they
    exist.

39. In assessing further Dr Panjwani's expertise I note he cited  a  number
    of book reviews and articles primarily on Islamic teaching  and  ethics
    and as regards Islamic law, but nothing specific regarding the position
    of women in Morocco or on Morocco.

40. Looking at the Dr Panjwani's report in detail it does appear that women
    are  in  difficulties  in  participating  in  the  workforce  but   the
    conclusion at [5.9] that because female  participation  in  the  labour
    force is only 23% that she would face difficulties in getting a job  is
    not sufficiently justified.  Many of those women are housewives as  the
    report notes in the passage cited at page  19  which  also  notes  that
    17.9% of single women are unemployed.  What the report does not  do  is
    explain properly why the appellant, who has seven years' experience  in
    an office job would not be able to get  employment  again.   No  proper
    evidence is given for the basis that "even if she were able  to  do  so
    unequal pay and lack of quality jobs would make her  economic  survival
    arduous as a single woman who cannot  now  depend  on  her  family  for
    support", given that there is no indication of what level of income she
    could deprive, what she had got before and of course that half  of  her
    income went to her father which would no longer be the case now.  There
    is no analysis of what the cost of accommodation  would  be  or  if  it
    would be available; or, even, whether as a single woman without  family
    support, she simply could not get accommodation.

41. With regard to the possibility of honour killing and how  that  may  be
    perceived, the report is not properly sourced. At  paragraph  [7.5]  Dr
    Panjwani relies on the report on Kurdistan in making comments on honour
    killings.  In stating that "reports below suggest that honour  killings
    do occur in Morocco and specifically,  the  perpetrator  of  the  crime
    (whether the head of the  family,  sons  or  relatives)  could  face  a
    reduced sentence and possibly exonerated under Moroccan law.   Yet  the
    only example stated in detail  at  [7.8]  occurred  in  Palestine.   No
    specific detail is cited from the delegation of the European  Union  to
    Morocco's report.

42. That said, the section on protection by the authorities by  the  police
    and the legal system in Morocco is properly referenced by reference  to
    the US State Department and  a  report  on  Amnesty  International  but
    beyond that adds little.  In addition to the  reasons  set  out  above,
    I accept  also  that  there  would  be  difficulty  in  the  appellant
    persuading the police to take her case seriously.  Further, it would be
    difficult for her not to disclose the circumstances which gave rise  to
    the threats.  Were she to admit that she had had sex  outside  marriage
    and had had an abortion, it  is  likely  that  the  police  would  take
    considerably less interest in her if not  display  outright  hostility.
    That is due to the prejudice that would follow from that.

43. With regard to the availability of mental healthcare, Dr Panjwani fails
    to take into account properly that the appellant was able to  get  help
    for her depression in Morocco.   She  was  prescribed  antidepressants.
    There is no indication that she would require  hospitalisation  and  so
    the references at [10.2] to the availability of  psychiatric  hospitals
    is of little relevance.  In the context of  previous  treatment  it  is
    unclear why the report refers [10.4] to the trend in Morocco in society
    to take people with mental health conditions  to  traditional  healers,
    herbalists  and  so  on,  rather  than  mental  health   practitioners.
    Similarly, the difficulties facing those  with  schizophrenia  are  not
    relevant.

44. With regards internal relocation, although Dr Panjwani refers at [11.1]
    to "the plethora of  issues  facing  single  women  in  Morocco.   [The
    appellant's] fear of internally relocating within Morocco is  plausible
    because it is likely she will be discriminated against  in  the  labour
    force, education, political representation, obtaining housing and  most
    importantly, in being able to be located by her family (who  intend  to
    carry out the honour killing) because Moroccan police are  understaffed
    and unequipped.

45. Whilst the report cites statistics  on  average  unemployment  and  the
    difficulties facing women, particularly those who are illiterate,  that
    does not apply to this appellant.  Quite  why  her  lack  of  political
    representation is an issue regarding her internal relocation I  do  not
    know.  There is in reality  little  or  no  information  regarding  the
    difficulties that a woman might face in renting accommodation  although
    I accept that if she is  suffering  from  a  mental  illness  that  may
    inhibit her ability to function normally.  Again, there are  references
    to the consequences of suffering from a  mental  illness  but  this  is
    reference to serious mental illnesses, such as  schizophrenia.   It  is
    not at all clear why  that  would  be  applied  to  the  appellant  who
    suffered from depression and suffered from depression in  the  past  in
    Morocco and was able to function and hold down a job.

46. The only issues regarding ID cards are  mentioned  at  paragraph  11.6.
    The reference that failed asylum seekers  are  likely  to  be  given  a
    residence permit.  Paragraph 11.6 is speculative and  this  comes  from
    the position of no apparent knowledge  of  the  system.   There  is  no
    proper basis for the assertion that it was possible that a woman in the
    appellant's position could be identified through her family  background
    and  the  sentence  "giving  out  an  ID  card  to  her  landlord  will
    necessitate some kind of formal  registration  that  the  police  could
    track if her family has indeed deemed her to be a  missing  person"  is
    speculative.  The passage cited at the end of the paragraph relates  to
    the position of refugees in a host country, not returning residents and
    again is of limited relevance to the facts of this case.   The  passage
    cited referring to the refusal of residence permits is in  the  context
    of this material refusal of a residence permit in the Netherlands,  not
    a residence permit in Morocco.  That would make no sense as  a  citizen
    would not need a residence permit but a Moroccan citizen would need one
    in the Netherlands and is not likely to get it because it is considered
    a safe country.

47. There is also little before me regarding the identity  card  system  in
    Morocco.   While  I  accept  that  there  is  one,  there   is   simply
    insufficient evidence before me as to how a new card could be  obtained
    or what difficulties there would be for this appellant given  that  she
    arrived in the United Kingdom with  a  valid  passport.   There  is  no
    evidence that she would not get one because she claimed asylum  as  the
    passage cited is not evidence for that.

48. I accept that the appellant could not go to live in her home area given
    the risk of violence and given the  lack  of  protection  for  her.   I
    accept that her family maintain an adverse interest in her and that she
    could not therefore get support from them; indeed, for the reasons  set
    out above, she is at risk from them.

49. In assessing, in the alternative,  whether it  is  reasonable  for  the
    appellant to relocate within Morocco, I bear  in  mind  that  she  does
    suffer from mental ill health.  I have no doubt either that  she  truly
    believes that she is at risk from her family and that this is likely to
    cause greater mental  health  problems  as  noted  in  a  psychological
    report.  It is not surprising that returning  to  somewhere  where  she
    faces fear would almost certainly exacerbate  the  appellant's  anxiety
    and depression.  I accept that she will be returning with  a  voluntary
    grant from the Home Office and this will go some way to allowing her to
    obtain accommodation at least initially on return to Morocco.  I accept
    that she may be able to get some treatment for her mental ill health as
    she did in the past.

50. That said, I bear in mind that she has chronic anxiety about what would
    happen to her in the future. I note Dr Thorne's conclusion [70],  which
    I accept, that the appellant's mental health  is  likely  seriously  to
    deteriorate on return to Morocco and at [73] that  here  depression  is
    likely to deepen with her being anxious to protect herself.

51. Taking into account her well expressed and accepted fears  of  violence
    at the hand of her family, while she might if she  no  longer  had  any
    mental ill health problems, be able to rationalise her fear and to live
    with it, I conclude that at present should not be able  to  do  so.   I
    have no doubt that she genuinely believes that her family may be  after
    her  and  that  is  understandable  in  the  circumstances.   She  also
    genuinely fears, , having to hand over  her  identity  card  to  obtain
    employment or get a job.  I consider it a  reasonable  inference  of  a
    country in which there is clearly an  identity  card  system  that  she
    would be expected to prove her identity somehow to a landlord or to  an
    employer.

52. Given the probable severity of the appellant's anxiety and  depression,
    as well as her genuinely held fear of discovery,  I  conclude  that  it
    would be very difficult for her to obtain housing or a job, or carry on
    a normal life as a result of the fear she has, to such an  extent  that
    it would be unduly harsh to expect her to live under conditions of such
    fear.

53. Taking these factors into account, I find that on the particular  facts
    of this case it would given the effect on the appellant's mental health
    and ability to cope elsewhere in Morocco be unduly harsh to expect  her
    to relocate.

54. Accordingly, for these reasons, I conclude that  the  appellant  has  a
    well-founded fear of ill-treatment in Morocco of sufficient severity to
    amount to persecution and/or a breach of Article 3.

55. I consider also that there is a connection in the lack of protection on
    account of her gender.  There is sufficient material before me to  show
    that there is a lack of protection afforded to women by the authorities
    in Morocco on account of gender.  More particularly, in this  case,  it
    is women who have transcended the accepted mores of  society.   In  her
    case she has had an affair outside of marriage and she has also had  an
    abortion.  Both of these are immutable characteristics and accordingly,
    I am satisfied that she is a member of a particular social group.

56. Accordingly, I conclude that the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    involved the making of an error of law and I set it  aside.   I  remake
    the appeal by allowing the appeal on asylum and human rights grounds.

57. I formally dismiss the appeal on humanitarian protection grounds solely
    on  the  basis  that  the  appellant's  fear  of  ill-treatment  has  a
    connection with a Convention reason.  If it were not so, then  I  would
    have been satisfied she was entitled to humanitarian protection but the
    two statuses are mutually incompatible.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date 5 March 2021

Jeremy K H Rintoul
Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul

-----------------------
[1] The overriding objective is to enable the Upper Tribunal to deal with
cases fairly and justly: rule 2(1) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008; see also rule 2(2) to (4).


