

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
         (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
                                                               PA/10618/2016
                                                               PA/10616/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester Piccadilly            |Decision Promulgated        |
|On 24 November 2017                       |On 05 December 2017         |
|                                          |                            |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL

                                   Between

                                    ASBK
                                    SFII
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTIONS MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: unrepresented
For the Respondent: Mr A Mc Vitie Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction
1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
   anonymity direction.  An  anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
   respect of these Appellants and shall continue.
2. The first Appellant (A1) was born on 8 April 1972 and is the  husband  of
   the second Appellant A2 who was born  on  22  May  1990.There  are  three
   dependent children: child 1 (C1) born 19 June 2008 in Iraq, child 2  (C2)
   born 6 September 2009 in the UK and child 3 (C3) born in  the  UK  on  19
   February 2013. The children are now respectively 9, 8 and 4 years old. In
   order to avoid confusion, the parties are referred to as they were in the
   First-tier Tribunal.
3. This was a resumed hearing. On 10 August 2017 at an error of law  hearing
   I set aside the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Austin in so far as
   it related to the human rights aspect of this appeal in particular to the
   Article 8 best interests of the children given that two of  the  children
   were qualifying  children  for  the  purpose  of  section  117B6  of  the
   Nationality Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.
4. At the hearing I heard submissions from  Mr  McVitie  on  behalf  of  the
   Respondent that :
   a) He acknowledged that  the  Appellants  had  produced  a  comprehensive
      bundle based largely on the Respondents own background material.
   b) The issue for the Tribunal was whether, given that two of the children
      were qualifying children, it was reasonable for  the  children  to  be
      removed from the UK and in relation to  that  assessment  he  conceded
      that security issues in Iraq, were relevant.
   c) He noted that one of the children was 18 months away from  entitlement
      to British citizenship.

5. The Appellants submitted that :

   a) They relied on the bundles of documents  they  had  prepared  for  the
      Tribunal.

   b) They confirmed that only their eldest child had ever been to Iraq  and
      that was in 2012 and the situation was  very  different  now  and  had
      deteriorated significantly.

   c) There was no safe place for them to take their children now.

   d) He pointed out that the refusal letter appeared  to  think  they  were
      Kurds and could live there but this was not correct: they  were  Arabs
      A1 had at one time worked in the Kurdish area. They  were  also  Sunni
      Arabs.

Legal Framework
 7. The burden of proof in  this  case  is  upon  the  Appellants  and  the
    standard of proof is upon the balance of probability.
 8. Section 117A (2) of the 2002 Act provides  that  where  a  Tribunal  is
    required to determine whether a decision  made  under  the  Immigration
    Acts would be unlawful under section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998  it
    must, in considering 'the public interest question', have regard in all
    cases in particular to the considerations listed in section117B of  the
    Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  (as  amended  by  the
    Immigration Act 2014).  Section  117  (3)  provides  that  the  'public
    interest question' means the question of whether an interference with a
    person's right to respect for private  and  family  life  is  justified
    under Article 8(2).
 9. The S117B considerations are as follows:

         "(1)     The maintenance of effective immigration  controls  is  in
             the public interest.

         (2)      It is in the public interest, and  in  particular  in  the
             interests of the economic well-being of  the  United  Kingdom,
             that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
             are able to speak  English,  because  persons  who  can  speak
             English-

             (a) are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

             (b) are better able to integrate into society.

         (3)      It is in the public interest, and  in  particular  in  the
             interests of the economic well-being of  the  United  Kingdom,
             that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
             are financially independent, because such persons-

             (a) are not a burden on taxpayers, and

             (b) are better able to integrate into society.

         (4)      Little weight should be given to-

             (a) a private life, or

             (b) a relationship formed with a qualifying  partner  that  is
                  established by a person at a time when the  person  is  in
                  the United Kingdom unlawfully.

         (5)       Little  weight  should  be  given  to  a   private   life
             established  by  a  person  at  a  time  when   the   person's
             immigration status is precarious.

         (6)      In the case of a person who is not liable to  deportation,
             the public interest does  not  require  the  person's  removal
             where-

             (a)  the  person  has  a  genuine  and   subsisting   parental
                  relationship with a qualifying child, and

             (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the  child  to  leave
                  the United Kingdom."

Section 117B6


  10. The definition of "qualifying child" is found in section 117D:

           "qualifying child" means a person who is under the age of 18 and
           who-

             (a) is a British citizen, or

             (b) has lived in the United Kingdom for a continuous period of
             seven years or more;"


11. I have taken into account the guidance given in R (on  the  application
    of MA (Pakistan) and Others) v UT (IAC) & Anor [2016] EWCA Civ  705  in
    relation to the issue of reasonableness in section 117B 6 of  the  2002
    Act at paragraph 46


     "46.Even on the approach of the Secretary of State, the  fact  that  a
    child has been here for seven years must be  given  significant  weight
    when carrying out the proportionality exercise. Indeed,  the  Secretary
    of State published guidance in August 2015 in the form  of  Immigration
    Directorate Instructions entitled "Family Life (as a partner or parent)
    and Private Life: 10  Year Routes"  in which  it  is  expressly  stated
    that once the seven years' residence requirement  is  satisfied,  there
    need to be "strong reasons" for refusing leave  (para.  11.2.4).  These
    instructions were not in force when the cases  now  subject  to  appeal
    were determined, but in my view, they merely confirm what  is  implicit
    in adopting a policy of this nature. After such a period  of  time  the
    child will have put down  roots  and  developed  social,  cultural  and
    educational links in the UK  such  that  it  is  likely  to  be  highly
    disruptive if the child is required to leave the UK. That may  be  less
    so when the children are very young because the focus  of  their  lives
    will be on their families, but the disruption becomes more  serious  as
    they get older.  Moreover, in these cases there must be a  very  strong
    expectation that the child's best interests will be to remain in the UK
    with his parents as part of a family unit, and  that  must  rank  as  a
    primary consideration in the proportionality assessment.


    47.Even if we were applying the narrow reasonableness  test  where  the
    focus is on the child alone, it would not in my view follow that  leave
    must be granted whenever the child's best interests are  in  favour  of
    remaining. I reject Mr  Gill's  submission  that  the  best  interest's
    assessment  automatically  resolves  the  reasonableness  question.  If
    Parliament had wanted the child's best interests to dictate the outcome
    of the leave application, it would have said so."

Findings

12. I am required to look at all the evidence in the round before  reaching
    any findings.  I have done  so.   Although,  for  convenience,  I  have
    compartmentalised my findings in some respects below, I must  emphasise
    the findings have only been made having taken account of  the  evidence
    as a whole.

13. The Appellants appealed the decision of the  Respondent  on  the  basis
    that the decision was unlawful under section 6 of the Human Rights  Act
    1998.I have determined the issue on the basis of the questions posed by
    Lord Bingham in Razgar [2004] UKHL 27


Will the proposed removal be an interference by a public authority with  the
exercise of the applicant's right to respect for  his  private  (or  as  the
case may be) family life?


14. I am satisfied that the Appellants and  their  three  children  have  a
    family life in the United Kingdom and given the length of residence  in
    the UK they have a strong private life.


If  so,  will  such  interference  have  consequences  of  such  gravity  as
potentially to engage the operation of Article 8?


15. I am satisfied that removal would have consequences of such gravity  as
    potentially to engage the operation of Article 8.








If so, is such interference in accordance with the law?


16. I am satisfied that there is in place  legislative  framework  for  the
    decision giving rise to the interference with Article 8 rights which is
    precise and accessible enough for  the  Appellants  to  regulate  their
    conduct by reference to it.


If so, is such  interference  necessary  in  a  democratic  society  in  the
interests of national security, public safety or the economic well-being  of
the country, for the prevention of disorder or crime, for the protection  of
health or morals, or for  the  protection  of  the  rights  and  freedom  of
others?


17. The interference does have legitimate aims since it is  in  pursuit  of
    one of the legitimate aims set  out  in  Article  8  (2)  necessary  in
    pursuit  of  the  economic  well  being  of  the  country  through  the
    maintenance of the requirements of a policy of immigration control. The
    state has the right to control the entry  of  non  nationals  into  its
    territory and Article 8 does not mean that  an  individual  can  choose
    where she wishes to enjoy their private and family life.


If so, is such interference  proportionate  to  the  legitimate  public  end
sought to be achieved?


18. In making the assessment of the best interests of the children  I  have
    also taken into account ZH (Tanzania) (FC) (Appellant) v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department (Respondent) [2011]  UKSC  4  where  Lady
    Hale noted Article 3(1) of the UNCRC which states that "in all  actions
    concerning  children,  whether  undertaken  by  ...  courts   of   law,
    administrative authorities or legislative bodies, the best interests of
    the child shall be a primary consideration."

19. Article 3 is now reflected in section 55 of  the  Borders,  Citizenship
    and Immigration Act 2009 which provides that, in relation, among  other
    things, to immigration, asylum or nationality, the Secretary  of  State
    must  make  arrangements  for  ensuring  that  those   functions   "are
    discharged having regard to the  need  to  safeguard  and  promote  the
    welfare of children who are in the United Kingdom".  Lady  Hale  stated
    that "any decision which is taken without having regard to the need  to
    safeguard and promote the welfare of any children involved will not  be
    "in accordance  with  the  law"  for  the  purpose  of  article  8(2)".
    Although she noted that national authorities were expected to treat the
    best interests of a child as "a primary consideration", she  added  "Of
    course, despite the looseness with  which  these  terms  are  sometimes
    used, "a primary  consideration"  is  not  the  same  as  "the  primary
    consideration", still less as "the paramount consideration".

20. The Appellants produced a very comprehensive  bundle  with  documentary
    evidence relating to both the personal circumstances of the family,  in
    particular the children, and the current security  situation  in  Iraq.
    The findings I make below  are  all  underpinned  by  this  documentary
    evidence.


21. I note first of all that two of the children have  accumulated  over  7
    years residence in the UK and that the other, while only 4  years  old,
    was born in the UK and  are  well  integrated  into  UK  society.  They
    clearly speak English as indeed  do  both  of  their  parents.  I  give
    significant weight to it being in the best  interests  of  children  to
    maintain continuity in their social and cultural environment.


22. I accept that the children are all settled in  their  schools  and  are
    doing well academically benefiting from an English education.  If  they
    were  returning  to  a  country  at  peace  where  the  infrastructure,
    including the provision of education, were stable then  I  accept  that
    with the assistance of well-educated parents there may  be  nothing  to
    suggest that it would be contrary to their best interests to return  to
    that country with their parents. However that is not the case here. The
    March 2017 COIS Iraq:  Security  and  humanitarian  situation  at  8.10
    states:


    'The OCHA, in December 2016, noted that 3.5 million  children  were  in
    need of education support.41 In April 2016 the OCHA  noted  that  there
    were 2 million children (out of 10 million) out of school.42


    8.10.2 In a report dated December 2016, the OCHA  stated:  'Schools  in
    the governorates impacted by ISIL [Daesh] are forced to  convene  three
    sequential sessions to cope with  the  increased  number  of  students.
    Nearly  3.5  million   school-aged   Iraqi   children   attend   school
    irregularly, or not all.'


23.  The Appellants produced  a  bundle  before  me  that  'up  dated'  the
    information in their 'old bundle' in relation to the security situation
    and I have also taken into account the March 2017 COIS as stated above.
    I accept that it would not be in their best interests to  return  to  a
    country where the challenges raised by an extremely  volatile  security
    situation may be something that an adult could cope with but would not,
    even with parental support, be something that young children  who  have
    only ever lived in the UK should be expected to cope with.  The  family
    originate from Mosul and Mr Mc Vitie did not seek to  argue  that  they
    could live there, they could not live in  the  IKR  and  were  they  to
    relocate to Baghdad as Sunni Arabs they would be in  a  minority  group
    and have no family support there.


24. I therefore conclude that in relation to the  best  interests  of  the
    children both in terms of their security, their education  and  social
    continuity it is overwhelmingly in the best interests of the  children
    to remain in the UK.


25. I now turn to the wider proportionality assessment.  Consideration  of
    the issue of proportionality is 'consideration of "the public interest
    question" as defined  by  section  117A(3)  of  the  2002  Act.  I  am
    therefore required  by  section  117A(2)(a)  to  have  regard  to  the
    considerations listed in section 117B.


Qualifying Children


26. A1 and A2 are qualifying children having accumulated over  7  years
    residence in the UK. The issue is therefore  whether  it  would  be
    reasonable to expect them to leave the UK taking into  account  all
    of their circumstances in the UK,  their  best  interests  and  the
    circumstances of their parents.


27. I have found  that  in  terms  of  their  education,  private  life
    generally and security it is overwhelmingly in their best  interest
    to remain in the UK and not to return  to  Iraq  where  they  would
    inevitably be IDPs in a country that  has  undergone  a  period  of
    extended insecurity and strife. In relation to  the  reasonableness
    of return I note that only one of the children has visited Iraq and
    that was in 2012. The other two have never lived or  visited  their
    country of nationality. While they are of course  entitled  to  the
    benefits of their Iraqi citizenship those  benefits  are  currently
    severely curtailed by the country situation. I am told they do  not
    speak Arabic and while I hesitate in accepting that this is  likely
    to be entirely accurate I am satisfied that they have grown  up  in
    an English speaking society and with English speaking  parents  and
    therefore would lack the fluency in Arabic to be able to  integrate
    easily back into Iraqi life. While the Appellants do have family in
    Iraq A1 was clear that they were focused on  leaving  as  they  are
    themselves non Kurdish IDPs in the IKR  and  therefore  the  family
    would be socially isolated on their return without any close family
    in a position to support them in reintegrating.


28. The Home Offices own policy and caselaw recognises that the  longer
    a child has resided in the UK, the more the balance will  begin  to
    swing in terms of it being unreasonable  to  expect  the  child  to
    leave the UK, and strong reasons  will  be  required  in  order  to
    refuse a case with continuous UK residence of more than 7 years.


29. The assessment of the reasonableness of return must  not  focus  on
    the position of the children alone as this is not determinative and
    this has been made clear in MA referred to above and more  recently
    in AM (Pakistan) [2017] EWCA Civ  180.  There  is  however  nothing
    however about the conduct of the parents that amounts in my view to
    a countervailing  factor.  While  their  asylum  applications  were
    refused they pursued the process promptly and have to  that  extent
    complied with the requirements of the immigration system. They have
    been in the UK at all times lawfully originally with A1 pursuing an
    academic career and latterly pursuing an  application  for  refugee
    status.  They  were  initially  self-supporting   and   given   A1s
    qualifications I am confident the family would not be in  future  a
    burden on society. The parents both speak English very well.


30. Having considered all of the evidence carefully and  in  the  round
    and giving due weight to the requirements of immigration control  I
    have come to the conclusion that on balance it  is  not  reasonable
    for the purposes of section 117B6 to require the children to  leave
    the United Kingdom.


DECISION

31. I allow the appeals under Article 8 of the ECHR.

32. Under Rule 14(1) the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) rules 2008  9as
   amended)  the  Appellant  can  be  granted  anonymity  throughout   these
   proceedings, unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise.  An
   order for anonymity was made in the First-tier and shall continue.

Signed                                                              Date
3.12.2017
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell
