
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/10392/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 24th October 2019                  |On 07th November 2019                 |
|                                              |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON


                                   Between

                                     A H
                         (aNONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Chirico, South West London Law Centre
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a national of Morocco, born on 24th  March  1985,  who
    fears return to Morocco owing to a fear of the authorities in  Morocco,
    society in general, and his family, because he is gay.

 2. The appellant was issued with a student visa valid from 12th March 2010
    and he entered the United Kingdom ('the UK') on 25th  March  2010.   He
    returned to Morocco in April 2011 and returned to  the  UK  within  the
    validity of his student visa, overstayed and was arrested as an illegal
    entrant on 8th August 2012; he claimed asylum.   On  18th  March  2015,
    the Secretary of State's refused the appellant's protection  and  human
    rights claim.  I note the three year time lapse between the  claim  and
    the Secretary of State's decision but the further delay in the  history
    of this appeal was occasioned because the appellant failed to lodge his
    appeal in time; it was, however, concluded on application to the First-
    tier Tribunal that it was in the interests of justice  to  extend  time
    for his appeal because of the appellant's mental health issues. On  1st
    April 2019, First-tier Tribunal Judge Mace  dismissed  the  appellant's
    appeal.  The appellant appealed.

 3. The grounds of appeal identified that the Secretary of State's decision
    under appeal focused on the appellant's credibility but  there  was  no
    separate consideration of any evidence  about  the  treatment  of  LGBT
    people in Morocco and the judge had failed to make  a  proper  analysis
    and  proper  findings.   There  was  a  flawed  conclusion   that   the
    appellant's past sexual experiences had been  consensual,  for  example
    that the appellant "has been able to express his sexuality in the  past
    as described without encountering adverse  attention  from  society  in
    general or the authorities".  The grounds of application for permission
    to appeal set out that the judge had failed to follow HJ (Iran)  [2010]
    UKSC 31.  The judge accepted that the appellant was  gay  but  did  not
    clearly reason whether the appellant could return  to  his  small  home
    city of Berber, and even if the judge had concluded that the  appellant
    could not return to his home, the judge  had  not  adequately  reasoned
    whether the appellant could live openly without  taking  any  steps  to
    conceal his sexual identity, elsewhere and  thus  reasonably  relocate.
    Further, the judge should  have  considered  whether  he  would  commit
    suicide.  Risk in the home area and risk following relocation were  not
    sufficiently demarcated in the decision.

 4. The matter came before me on 2nd August 2019 because of  the  challenge
    to the First-tier Tribunal decision which dismissed his claim to have a
    well-founded fear of persecution and his claims under Article 3 of  the
    ECHR.      I  found  the  grounds  of  appeal  were  well  founded  and
    constituted a material error  of  law  and  set  aside  the  First-tier
    Tribunal decision, but I preserved the findings that the appellant  was
    credible as to his homosexuality, [paragraphs 29 and 31].

 5. The matter was resumed before me and  further  evidence  was  admitted,
    without objection from the Secretary of State, under Rule 15(2)A of The
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.  This included a letter
    from South West London Law Centre to  the  Single  Competent  Authority
    dated 7th October 2019, an addendum psychiatric report  from  Professor
    Cornelius  Katona  dated  2nd  September  2019,  a  letter  from  Sarah
    Anderson, Chief Executive of the Listening Place dated 4th October 2019
    and a chronology.

 6. Although not conceding the claim at the hearing before  me,  Mr  Walker
    acknowledged that the medical reports confirmed that the appellant  was
    a high suicide risk.  The appellant had been found to  be  gay  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal, could not return to his hometown and  had  serious
    mental health issues. Mr Walker also acknowledged, sensibly in my  view
    the ongoing  and  serious  nature  of  the  appellant's  mental  health
    condition.  Mr Walker conceded that there needed to be an assessment of
    whether discrimination and harassment would amount  to  persecution  in
    the appellant's particular case because of  his  mental  health  issues
    which was set out in the reports.

 7. Mr Chirico relied on his skeleton argument pointing  out  that  it  had
    taken a long time for  the  appellant  to  build  trust  in  healthcare
    professionals. The appellant would be vulnerable  to  exploitation  and
    the combination of his sexuality, his mental health problems,  and  his
    past experiences of exploitation should lead to  a  finding  that  this
    particular appellant would be at risk on return to Morocco.

Analysis.

 8. The approach to be adopted when considering asylum claims by those  who
    are gay was explained in HJ (Iran) at paragraph 35 by Lord Hope
      '[35]...It is necessary to proceed in stages.
      (a) The first stage, of course, is to consider whether  the  applicant
      is indeed gay. Unless he can establish that he is of that  orientation
      he will not be entitled to be treated as a member  of  the  particular
      social group. But I would regard this part of the test as having  been
      satisfied if the applicant's case is that he is at risk of persecution
      because he is suspected of being gay, if his past history  shows  that
      this is in fact the case.

      (b) The next stage is to  examine  a  group  of  questions  which  are
      directed to what his situation will be on return.  This  part  of  the
      inquiry is directed to what  will  happen  in  the  future.  The  Home
      Office's Country of Origin report will provide the  background.  There
      will be little difficulty in holding that in countries  such  as  Iran
      and Cameroon gays or persons who are believed to be gay are persecuted
      and that persecution is something that may reasonably be  feared.  The
      question is how each applicant, looked at individually,  will  conduct
      himself if returned and how others will react to what he  does.  Those
      others will include everyone with whom he will  come  in  contact,  in
      private as well as in public. The way he  conducts  himself  may  vary
      from one situation to another, with varying degrees of  risk.  But  he
      cannot and must not be expected  to  conceal  aspects  of  his  sexual
      orientation which he is unwilling to conceal, even from those whom  he
      knows may disapprove of it. If he fears persecution as  a  result  and
      that fear is well-founded, he  will  be  entitled  to  asylum  however
      unreasonable his refusal to resort to concealment may be. The question
      what is reasonably tolerable has no part in this inquiry.

      (c) On the other hand, the fact that the applicant will not be able to
      do in the country of his nationality everything that he can do  openly
      in the country whose protection he seeks is not the test.  As  I  said
      earlier (see para 15), the Convention was not  directed  to  reforming
      the level of rights in the country of origin. So it would be wrong  to
      approach the issue on the basis that the purpose of the Convention  is
      to guarantee to an applicant who is gay that he can live as freely and
      as openly as a gay person as he would be able to do  if  he  were  not
      returned. It does not guarantee to everyone the human rights standards
      that are applied by the receiving country within  its  own  territory.
      The focus throughout must be on what will happen  in  the  country  of
      origin.

      (d) The next stage, if it is found that the  applicant  will  in  fact
      conceal aspects of his sexual orientation if returned, is to  consider
      why he will do so. If this  will  simply  be  in  response  to  social
      pressures or for cultural or religious reasons of his own choosing and
      not because of a fear of persecution, his claim  for  asylum  must  be
      rejected. But if the reason why he will resort to concealment is  that
      he genuinely fears that otherwise he will be persecuted,  it  will  be
      necessary to consider whether that fear is well founded.

      (e) This is the final and conclusive question: does he  have  a  well-
      founded fear that he will be persecuted?  If  he  has,  the  causative
      condition that Lord Bingham referred to in Januzi v Secretary of State
      for the Home Department [2006]  2  AC  426,  para  5  will  have  been
      established. The applicant will be entitled to asylum.

 9. The  First-tier  Tribunal  assessed  the  particular  evidence  of  the
    appellant, accepted the appellant was gay, and stated as follows

    'Having considered all  of  these  matters  I  am  satisfied  that  the
    appellant has given an accurate and truthful account of  his  sexuality
    '[29].

10. That finding was preserved.

11. The acceptance of his sexuality renders the appellant's account that he
    was attacked by his father, because of his sexuality, credible and thus
    he  remains  at  risk  in  his  hometown.   Although  there  were  some
    inconsistencies in the account (and in relation to the stabbing of  the
    appellant) it is important to contextualise the evidence in view of the
    appellant's vulnerabilities; he was loathe to discuss the  stabbing  as
    it depressed and overwhelmed him.  To support this, Dr Katona  produced
    two recent reports.  She is a well-qualified and experienced author and
    practitioner on psychiatry, Emeritus Professor of Psychiatry  with  the
    University of Kent and Honorary Professor at University College London.
     She identified the impact  of  his  mental  health  condition  on  his
    ability to give a consistent  account.   The  UK  Home  Office  Country
    Policy and Information; sexual orientation and  gender  identity  (July
    2017) ('CPIN') confirms at 2.3.14 that

    'it is difficult for an LGBT person to be accepted by their  family  as
    such. Sources point to a lack of acceptance;  harassment;  intimidation
    and alienation'.

12. I accept, on the lower standard of proof that the appellant is at  risk
    from his father and brothers should he return to his hometown.

13. The appellant delayed in his asylum claim from his re-entry to  the  UK
    until his was arrested.   JT  Cameroon  v  SSHD  [2008]  EWCA  Civ  878
    confirms, however, it is the duty of the  judicial  decision  maker  in
    every instance to reach his own conclusion upon the credibility of  the
    claimant.  Section  8  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration  Treatment  of
    Claimants) Act 2004 should be taken only as part of a global assessment
    of credibility and is not the starting point  SM  [2005]  UKAIT  00116.
    Bearing in mind the mental health difficulties of the appellant I  find
    that the delay does not damage his credibility such as to fundamentally
    damage his claim.

14. Whilst in Morocco the appellant on a number of occasions over a  period
    of years experienced sexual encounters with different men,  meeting  at
    bars, restaurants and caf�s; and a relationship with his cousin M.

15. His experiences of sex with foreign men in Morocco, began when  he  was
    12 or 13 years old and the  majority  of  occasions  were  mediated  by
    Moroccan men acting as 'tourist guides'. As set out in the error of law
    decision past sexual exploitation is  irrelevant  to  the  question  of
    whether a person will be able  to  live  his  or  her  sexual  identity
    openly; the evidence of tolerated sex tourism in Morocco,  particularly
    when the appellant was said to be exploited,  is  not  helpful  to  the
    question of whether a Moroccan gay man can be  wholly  open  about  his
    sexual identity in the manner described by  the  Supreme  Court  in  HJ
    (Iran).  As the appellant states  in  his  witness  statement,  he  was
    introduced by Moroccan men acting as 'tourist guides' to  European  men
    who  used  him  in  Morocco  and  only  later  he  realised   this   as
    exploitation. The information he gave on this aspect of his account was
    sufficiently detailed to be accepted as part of  his  past  experience,
    bearing in mind the acceptance of his sexuality.

16. It is notable that his relationship  with  M,  his  cousin,  whilst  in
    Morocco was, according to the appellant, was conducted with secrecy.

17. I do not find that the appellant had lived an open life as a gay man in
    Morocco in the manner contemplated by the Supreme Court in  HJ  (Iran),
    but I accept that following his experience in the UK he would  wish  to
    do so on return.   The appellant's experience as a  student  whilst  he
    was in the UK where he conducted a relationship  openly  is  indicative
    that he would wish to live an openly gay life in Morocco.

18. I turn to an assessment of the treatment of  gay  men  in  Morocco  and
    whether the appellant could relocate as an openly gay man.   At page  5
    of the Secretary of State's refusal letter she noted "it is also  noted
    that being gay in Morocco is not accepted and it is not legal to have a
    gay relationship  in  Morocco".  This  was  stated  to  be  objectively
    verified from a human rights report on societal abuses  at  section  6.
    The Secretary of State's observation was, however, that  the  appellant
    was not gay and therefore did not  need  protection  on  return.   Mere
    criminalisation of homosexuality, however, does  not  necessarily  mean
    that persecution will ensue.

19. The CPIN (noted above) at  2.3.5  commented  on  'State  Treatment'  as
    follows:

2.3.5 'Same-sex sexual acts are prohibited by article 489  of  the  Moroccan
Penal Code. The penalty on conviction can result in between 6 months  and  3
years' imprisonment and a fine. Other articles of the penal  code  may  also
be applied - notably articles 490, which criminalises sex between  unmarried
persons, and 491 which criminalises adultery (see Criminal/Penal Code).



2.3.6 Up-to-date official statistics to quantify the number of  cases  where
prosecutions are sought or not; persons convicted  or  acquitted;  sentences
handed down etc. are not available (see Official statistics on  use  of  the
law).



2.3.7 Although cases involving prosecutions appear to be reported  across  a
variety  of  both  national  and  international  media  outlets,  these  are
relatively few in number and do not appear to contradict the  commonly  held
view that the law  is  used  rarely  (see  Use  of  the  law  generally  and
Demography).



2.3.8 It also appears as though the law, when used, involves  cases  of  men
involved in same-sex sexual acts;  it  is  rarely,  if  ever,  used  against
women'



With regards 'Societal Treatment' the CPIN records:

      2.3.16 In general, the level of discrimination faced by  LGBT  persons
      in  Morocco  by  society  in  general  and/or  their  family  is   not
      sufficiently serious by its nature and  repetition  as  to  amount  to
      persecution or serious harm.

      2.3.17 However,  decision  makers  must  consider  whether  there  are
      particular factors relevant to the specific person  which  might  make
      the treatment serious by  its  nature  and  repetition.  For  example,
      previous physical attacks which are reasonably likely to  continue  on
      return; those who have  previously  been  arrested  and/or  prosecuted
      under the penal code, including those  who  report  incidents  to  the
      police which has exposed them to that risk.

      2.3.18 Each case must however be considered on its facts with the onus
      on the person to demonstrate that they would be at real risk on return



20. The CPIN also cited information with regard the gay 'scene' at 8.2 such
    that

      'the visibility of gay people in Morocco has increased  in  the  last
      few years but many still face huge challenges in the country".

21. There were references to contradictory  reports  in  the  CPIN  and  to
    articles  which  made  pejorative  references  to  Tangier,  Marrakesh,
    Essaouira and Agadir as being 'gay nests' and the CPIN  refers  to  "an
    underground gay community in Morocco" and a description that  "gay  men
    whom he sees are prostitutes come out at night" and that "the situation
    of the LGBTQ community in Morocco depends on  various  factors  (social
    class, education level, region in which they live..."

22. The CPIN also recorded that "the Moroccan Association of  human  rights
    (Association Maroucaine de Droits Humains -AMDH)  informed  the  Danish
    immigration service as part of their October 2016 fact-finding  mission
    that

      'the only safe public space in the society  is  the  University  media
      where intellectuals are known for being rather tolerant'

     and further

      'First, people who are wealthy and therefore benefit  from  a  certain
      financial independence or who have power that de facto to protect them
      against homophobic aggression and contempt all, at least, they benefit
      by protection in case they are arrested by the  police  stop  secondly
      people from the middle class  and  the  working  class  attempting  to
      conceal their sexual orientation and who are victims of  contempt  and
      aggression enacted by individuals  groups.  Within  the  middle-class,
      those who express their gender identity the most are  also  those  who
      are the most exposed to violence'.

    The report also  identified  that  the  'LGBT  'scene'  in  Morocco  is
    organising itself discreetly'.  Although there  was  reference  to  the
    opposition to the gay community as stemming from a small section of the
    community not the government there were also a citation  that  'no  gay
    person can live freely in Morocco' [9.1.5]/

    At [9.1.7] the CPIN noted the  report  of  the  Office  of  the  United
    Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights as  part  of  the  May  2017
    Universal Periodic Review process identified that

      "the Human Rights Committee recommended that Morocco... Put an end  to
      the social stigmatisation of homosexuality incitement to hate directed
      at persons because of their sexual orientation or gender identity'

23. The Danish Immigration  Service  Report  dated  2017  recorded  in  its
    executive summary that

      "LGBT persons in Morocco are exposed  to  additional  risk  of  social
      rejection, prejudice and violence compared to heterosexual  Moroccans"
      and further "according to  four  interviewed  sources,  it  is  almost
      impossible for an LGBT person fearing for his or her safety to  obtain
      efficient protection by the police".

    It added

      "There have been a number of cases brought to trial in 2015  and  2016
      invoking article 489 where men have been found  guilty  of  committing
      homosexual acts some based on confessions of the  defendants  obtained
      at the police station and signed without the presence of a lawyer. The
      level of convictions range from 4 months to one year  of  imprisonment
      with fines of 500 deer arms, however, convictions above 4 months  were
      given for more than one violation of the penal code".

    It was further recorded that "the conditions in  Moroccan  prisons  are
    precarious in general. LGBT people constitute a vulnerable group  while
    imprisoned".

24. From the information above,  including  the  reputable  source  of  the
    Danish Immigration Service as recently as 2017, I conclude that  it  is
    possible for certain sections of the community to live  an  openly  gay
    life in Morocco but homosexuality is outlawed, convictions are recorded
    as  pursued,  (albeit  the  statistics  were  not  available),   prison
    sentences meted out  and  prison  conditions  are  poor.   The  overall
    reports together with the specific evidence for this appellant  do  not
    suggest that for this particular appellant  it  would  be  possible  to
    relocate even to a large city whether there  may  be  more  of  a  'gay
    scene'.  I have considered the evidence holistically.

25. A particular feature of this appeal is that on  22nd  August  2018  the
    appellant had been referred to  the  National  Referral  Mechanism  for
    Trafficking victims by the Salvation Army. On 29th August 2018  he  was
    issued with a Positive Reasonable Grounds  decision  by  the  Competent
    Authority. The appellant suffers from a serious mental illness and  has
    complex needs which are set out  in  detail  in  the  evidence  of  his
    treating medical teams, his support workers and in the expert report of
    Professor Katona who diagnosed complex PTSD  with  secondary  psychotic
    features and a major depressive order.  The appellant was said in  that
    report to be a victim of trafficking and abusive treatment by older gay
    men and had reportedly self-harmed on many occasions.  For the purposes
    of the resumed hearing before the Upper Tribunal a second  report  from
    Dr Katona was produced dated 2nd September 2019. The expert  considered
    that if he were returned to Morocco his  PTSD  and  depressive  systems
    would worsen significantly; the appellant would  be  unlikely  to  have
    sufficient  trust  in  the  Moroccan  authorities  to  seek  or  accept
    specialist treatment.  Dr Katona  had  already  identified  the  likely
    significant deterioration in the appellant's mental health if  he  were
    returned to Morocco at [13.1 - 13.5] of her report dated 12th  February
    2019. She also identified the real risk of 're-victimisation' should he
    return to Morocco and a real risk of a  significant  attempt  at  self-
    harm, possible suicide [13.9-13.11].  She added, in her  first  report,
    that even if suicide were not attempted 'he would be unlikely  to  have
    sufficient trust in  the  Moroccan  authorities  to  accept  specialist
    treatment for his  worsening  mental  symptoms';  he  would  remain  at
    significant risk of suicide in the long-term.

26. I accept Dr Katona's evidence and that of Mo Kempson,  outreach  worker
    with victims of trafficking and Miss  N  Nasim,  LGBTQ  asylum  support
    worker/volunteer, who confirmed the complex support networks from which
    the appellant had benefited in the past year including counselling  and
    social support which were inextricably linked.  Ms Kempson assists  the
    appellant with taking medication  (which  includes  the  anti-psychotic
    drug Olanzapine) and advised that he was prescribed fortnightly because
    of the risk of self-harm and that  he  remained  extremely  vulnerable.
    The reports were objective and detailed,  and  I  accept  the  evidence
    therein.  Miss Nasim made the point that her trust was  reticent  about
    giving letters of support.

27. The CPIN at Section 12.1 on  Healthcare  highlighted  the  difficulties
    with access to healthcare overall

      12.1.1 In  an  October  2013  Response  to  Information  Request,  the
      Immigration and Refugee Board of Canada ('the Canadian IRB')  cited  a
      May 2010 Afrik News article, which in turn referenced the  coordinator
      general of Kifkif as having  said  that  'sexual  minorities  are  not
      always well received by healthcare workers and that Kifkif refers them
      to  doctors   [and   psychologists]   with   whom   the   organization
      collaborates.'

      ...

      12.1.4 In an  October  2016  interview  with  the  Danish  Immigration
      Service,  the  Moroccan  Association  of  Human  Rights   (Association
      Marocaine de Droits Humains - AMDH) stated that as  a  consequence  of
      self-censorship '[...] LGBT persons are reluctant to approach existing
      health care services when they suspect to suffer from a sexual  health
      related problem out of fear of being  exposed  to  prejudices  by  the
      health workers when they discover their LGBT  identity.  According  to
      AMDH, this reluctance has a negative impact on the effective access to
      HIV/AIDS  prevention  services,  as  there  are  no  medical  services
      targeting LGBT persons.  Stigmatisation  is  also  a  common  practice
      within in the health sector'.

28. I accept that there are medical facilities available in Morocco but  in
    his medical condition I do not accept the appellant, on the strength of
    the evidence above, would be able to access those facilities, with  his
    present mental health difficulties as detailed  by  Dr  Katona.  It  is
    reasonably likely  that  would  expose  him  to  further  risk  of  re-
    victimisation and exploitation without protection and this reaches  the
    threshold for persecution and discrimination in Morocco.

29. As set out at paragraph 21 by Lord Bingham in  Januzi  v  Secretary  of
    State [2006] UKHL 5

'The  decision-maker,  taking  account   of   all   relevant   circumstances
pertaining to the claimant and his country of origin,  must  decide  whether
it is reasonable to expect the claimant to relocate or whether it  would  be
unduly harsh to expect him to do so. The source of  the  persecution  giving
rise to the claimant's well-founded fear in his place of  ordinary  domicile
may be  agents  of  the  state  authorised  or  directed  by  the  state  to
persecute; or they may be agents of the state whose persecution is  connived
at or tolerated by the state,  or  not  restrained  by  the  state;  or  the
persecution may be by those who are not agents of the state,  but  whom  the
state does not or cannot control.

30. This is an appellant who has experienced further education although  he
    did not finish his degree at the university of  Agdal  in  Morocco  but
    undertook a 2-year diploma in commerce in Morocco.  He then came to the
    UK to learn English but here he experienced self-harm in  the  form  of
    drinking and drugs, and he failed to attend classes.  It was  from  the
    UK that he was trafficked to Belgium.   There is  clear  evidence  that
    the  appellant  has  now  suffered  with  complex  PTSD  and  secondary
    psychotic features.  As identified in Januzi where medical care  cannot
    be provided or is clearly inadequate, the area for relocation  may  not
    be a reasonable alternative.  In these individual  circumstances,  when
    considering the evidence holistically, I find  it  likely  his  medical
    condition, and lack of access to it, would render him more  vulnerable.
    Moreover, I find that this would impede his ability to  act  discreetly
    on return to Morocco which in itself would place him at greater risk in
    the light of the background evidence.  I find that  on  his  particular
    profile in the light of the background evidence he would be at risk  of
    persecution on the lower standard of proof, which must  also  apply  to
    the  findings  in  relation  to  the  salient  background  facts.   His
    'discretion' in Morocco hitherto was only in an exploitative situation,
    prior to the onset on his mental health difficulties and unlikely to be
    re-adopted. He would have to be discreet because otherwise he  will  be
    persecuted, and, in the light of the individual  circumstances  of  the
    appellant together with the country background material  that  fear  is
    well founded.

31. In addition, the appellant as observed by Dr Katona, is  likely  to  be
    vulnerable  to  further  exploitation  following  a  forced  return  to
    Morocco. She also opined, and  with  which  no  issue  was  taken,  his
    symptoms of PTSD and depression would  'prevent  him  from  working  to
    support himself and [...] securing his basic needs  such  as  food  and
    accommodation'. I accept therefore that there is a real risk of serious
    harm to the appellant from the state authorities and/or  from  Moroccan
    society if the appellant lived openly as a gay man in Morocco. He would
    be unable to avoid such harm by being  consistently  discreet  and  any
    such concealment would be his  fear  of  persecution  and  thus  he  is
    entitled to international protection.  The appellant  has  lived  as  a
    homeless person in the United Kingdom, engaged in  substance  abuse  in
    the UK and in  Morocco  and  there  is  a  finding  that  he  has  been
    trafficked from the UK. I accept that he would be highly vulnerable  to
    further exploitation on return to Morocco particularly bearing in  mind
    the difficulties with access to healthcare with  little  likelihood  of
    being able to avail himself of state protection.

32. The appellant's persistent and serious mental  health  condition  would
    elevate the discrimination found  in  Morocco  to  levels  which  would
    amount to persecution.  He is therefore entitled to asylum and  Article
    3 protection.

33. Turning to Article 3 in relation to suicide  the  unchallenged  medical
    evidence was that a forced  return  to  Morocco  would  result  in  the
    significant risk that the appellant would harm himself with potentially
    fatal results.  In line with Y and Z v SSHD [2009] EWCA  Civ  362,  the
    appellant has, owing to the  credibility  of  his  sexuality  his  past
    experiences and his medical problems (as set out in the expert  report)
    being  accepted,  substantiated  an  objective   and   a   well-founded
    subjective fear such that he is at serious risk of self-harm should  he
    be returned to Morocco.

34. For completeness  I  find  that  the  appellant  can  comply  with  the
    provisions of Paragraph 276ADE because there would be very  significant
    obstacles to his return to Morocco as highlighted above.

    Order

    I therefore allow the appeal on asylum.

    I therefore allow the appeal on human rights grounds (Article 3 and 8).

    I therefore allow the appeal under the Immigration Rules.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Helen                          Rimington
            Date    1st November 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington






