
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber          Appeal Number: PA/10175/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House           |  Decision and Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 24th October 2019           |On 26th November 2019                |
|                               |                                     |


                                   Before


                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON


                                   Between


                                     HM
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant


                                     And


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Childs, instructed by Quality Solicitors A-Z
Law
For the Respondent:    Mr W Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant was granted permission to appeal a determination of First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Chana, which allowed  the  appellant's  appeal,  on
    humanitarian grounds but which dismissed the appeal, against a decision
    of the Secretary of State dated 9th September 2016 on  asylum  grounds.
    The appellant is a citizen of Eritrea born on 1st January 1989

 2. The appeal has a lengthy history. The appeal was  dismissed  by  First-
    tier Tribunal Farrelly on 25th July 2017, but  that  decision  was  set
    aside on the basis that no or insufficient reasons had been given.  The
    matter came before the First-tier Tribunal again on 24th May  2019  and
    was dismissed on 17th July 2019.

Application for Permission to Appeal

 3. The application for permission contended

       i)  the judge  had  improperly  gone  behind  a  concession  of  the
          Secretary of State stating that 'she [the appellant] had left the
          country due to her unsubstantiated  speculation  that  the  local
          administration wanted to arrest her'.  In the decision of the 9th
          September 2016 it was pointed out that the Secretary of State had
          accepted that the appellant was wanted by the  local  authorities
          and that she was at risk on return because of this.

      ii) the country guidance case of MST and Others (national  service  -
          risk  categories)  Eritrea  CG  [2016]  UKUT  00443   (IAC)   was
          promulgated shortly after the Secretary of State's  decision  but
          before the second decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal.  It  was
          argued that the appellant would be seen as a draft evader because
          he had never completed military service, and she was thus opposed
          to the government and would be questioned about  her  reason  for
          leaving the country when she returned.  The  Secretary  of  State
          had accepted that the appellant was (a) of  draft  age,  (b)  had
          never  completed  military  service  (c)  had  left  the  country
          illegally. As such this placed her within the MST  guidance  and,
          further, with the Home  Office  published  guidance  for  Eritrea
          dated July 2018

     iii) the judge failed to consider the appeal further to HJ (Iran)  and
          if asked about her views she could not be expected to lie.




 4. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Grubb  on  the
    basis that it was arguable that the judge failed to properly apply  MST
    and that the appellant was at risk for a convention reason as  a  draft
    evader  or  owing  to  past  illegal  exit.  He  specifically   refused
    permission on the third ground HJ (Iran) stating that it had  not  been
    argued before the First-tier Tribunal and added nothing to the claim.

 5. Even following Safi and others (permission to appeal decisions)  [2018]
    UKUT 388 (IAC), I consider that permission was granted on the first two
    grounds only, and not  on  the  third  ground  which  had  clearly  and
    unambiguously been refused permission in  the  body  of  the  grant  of
    permission by Upper Tribunal Judge Grubb.

 6. I turn to the grounds in question.

 7. The Secretary of State set out in her refusal letter of  9th  September
    2016 the following

    '5. In  order  for  your  asylum  claim  to  be  considered  under  the
    Convention on the Status of (Refugees  (Geneva  Convention)  1951,  you
    must be in possession of a  valid  convention  reason.  Your  claim  of
    persecution in  Eritrea  is  based  upon  your  fear  of  the  Eritrean
    authorities, due to your being wanted for detention, and  your  illegal
    exit. It is not accepted  that  this  falls  under  the  convention  as
    background evidence shows that such acts will be perceived as  acts  of
    political opposition. As such  your  claim  for  asylum  fails  at  the
    outset, as no convention reason has been met.

    6. However, it is considered that due to your profile as a  person  who
    is wanted for detention by the Eritrean authorities, it  is  considered
    likely that you will face this treatment by  the  national  authorities
    upon return to Eritrea. It is considered such punishment would one gain
    breach article 3 of the European Convention on Human Rights'.

 8. At the hearing I drew Mr Walker's attention  to  the  contents  of  the
    Secretary of State's  refusal  letter  which  he  agreed  suggested  an
    acceptance of the ingredients  of  a  convention  reasons  and  thus  a
    refugee claim particularly in  the  light  of  the  subsequent  country
    guidance. This concession which I highlight above was not addressed  by
    the First-tier Tribunal and contrary to  CD(Jamaica)  [2010]  EWCA  Civ
    768.  As set out at paragraph 15 therein.



      ' A tribunal can allow a concession to be withdrawn if there is good
      reason in all the circumstances to do so and if it can be done with
      the absence of prejudice. No principle will govern every case, but the
      most important feature of any decision is that the tribunal must put
      itself in a position in which the real issues of dispute on the merits
      can be decided, so long as that can be done without prejudice to one
      side or the other'.


 9. The failure  to  approach  that  concession,  made  on  the  facts,  in
    accordance with CD(Jamaica) was an error of law which was material  and
    I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

10. The Secretary of State  granted  the  appellant  an  Eritrean  national
    humanitarian protection but rejected her asylum claim.  The appeal  was
    made on the basis of her  actual  or  imputed  political  opinion.   Ms
    Childs argued before me that the appellant, who is 30 years old,  would
    be seen as a draft evader and that it had been accepted  that  she  had
    exited illegally which on the  authorities  suggested  on  both  counts
    imputed political perception by the authorities. This was  specifically
    argued  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal.    I  have  highlighted  the
    relevant parts of MST and as they apply to the appellant.

11. The headnote of MST sets out as follows:



           1. Although reconfirming parts of the country guidance given  in
           MA (Draft evaders - illegal departures - risk) Eritrea CG [2007]
           UKAIT 00059 and MO (illegal exit - risk on  return)  Eritrea  CG
           [2011] UKUT 00190  (IAC),  this  case  replaces  that  with  the
           following:

           2. The Eritrean  system  of  military/national  service  remains
           indefinite and since 2012 has expanded  to  include  a  people's
           militia programme, which although not part of national  service,
           constitutes military service.

           3. The age limits for national service are likely to remain  the
           same as stated in MO, namely 54 for men and 47 for women  except
           that for children the limit is now  likely  to  be  5  save  for
           adolescents in the context of family reunification. For peoples'
           militia the age limits are likely to be 60 for women and 70  for
           men.

           4. The categories of lawful exit have not significantly  changed
           since MO and are likely to be as follows:

                       (i)   Men aged over 54

                       (ii)  Women aged over 47

                       (iii) Children aged under five (with some  scope  for
                           adolescents in family reunification cases

                       (iv)  People exempt from national service on  medical
                           grounds

                       (v)   People travelling abroad for medical treatment

                       (vi)  People travelling abroad for studies or  for  a
                           conference

                       (vii) Business and sportsmen

                       (viii)      Former freedom fighters  (Tegadelti)  and
                           their family members

                       (ix)  Authority representatives in leading  positions
                           and their family members

           5. It continues to be the case (as in MO)  that  most  Eritreans
           who have  left  Eritrea  since  1991  have  done  so  illegally.
           However,  since  there  are  viable,   albeit   still   limited,
           categories of lawful exit especially for those of draft age  for
           national service, the position remains as it was in  MO,  namely
           that a person whose asylum claim has  not  been  found  credible
           cannot be assumed to have  left  illegally.  The  position  also
           remains nonetheless (as in MO) that if such a person is found to
           have left Eritrea on or after August/September 2008, it  may  be
           that inferences can be drawn from their health history or  level
           of education or their skills profile as to whether legal exit on
           their part was feasible, provided that such  inferences  can  be
           drawn in the light of adverse credibility  findings.  For  these
           purposes a lengthy period performing national service is  likely
           to enhance a person's skill profile.

           6. It remains the case (as in MO) that failed asylum seekers  as
           such are not at risk of persecution or serious harm on return.

           7. Notwithstanding that  the  round-ups  (giffas)  of  suspected
           evaders/deserters, the "shoot to kill" policy and the  targeting
           of relatives of evaders and deserters are now significantly less
           likely occurrences,  it  remains  the  case,  subject  to  three
           limited exceptions set out in (iii) below, that if a  person  of
           or approaching draft age will be perceived on return as a  draft
           evader or  deserter,  he  or  she  will  face  a  real  risk  of
           persecution, serious harm or ill-treatment contrary to Article 3
           or 4 of the ECHR.




                 (i)  A  person  who  is  likely  to  be  perceived   as   a
                 deserter/evader will not be able to avoid exposure to  such
                 real risk merely by showing they have paid (or are  willing
                 to pay) the diaspora tax and/have signed (or are willing to
                 sign) the letter of regret.

                 (ii) Even if such a person may avoid punishment in the form
                 of detention and ill-treatment it is likely that he or  she
                 will be assigned to  perform  (further)  national  service,
                 which,  is  likely  to  amount  to  treatment  contrary  to
                 Articles 3 and 4 of the ECHR unless he or she falls  within
                 one or  more  of  the  three  limited  exceptions  set  out
                 immediately below in (iii).

                 (iii) It remains the case (as in MO) that there are persons
                 likely not to face a real risk of  persecution  or  serious
                 harm notwithstanding that they will be perceived on  return
                 as draft evaders and deserters, namely:  (1)  persons  whom
                 the regime's military and political leadership perceives as
                 having given them valuable service (either  in  Eritrea  or
                 abroad); (2) persons who are trusted family members of,  or
                 are themselves part of, the regime's military or  political
                 leadership.  A further possible exception, requiring a more
                 case specific analysis is (3) persons (and  their  children
                 born afterwards) who fled (what later became the  territory
                 of) Eritrea during the War of Independence.

           8.  Notwithstanding  that   many   Eritreans   are   effectively
           reservists having been discharged/released from national service
           and unlikely to face recall, it remains unlikely that they  will
           have received or be able to  receive  official  confirmation  of
           completion of national service. Thus it remains the case, as  in
           MO that "(iv) The general position adopted in MA, that a  person
           of or approaching draft and not medically unfit who is  accepted
           as having left Eritrea illegally  is  reasonably  likely  to  be
           regarded with  serious  hostility  on  return,  is  reconfirmed,
           subject to limited exceptions..."

           9. A person liable to perform service in  the  people's  militia
           and who is assessed to  have  left  Eritrea  illegally,  is  not
           likely on return to face a real risk of persecution  or  serious
           harm.

           10. Accordingly, a person whose asylum claim has not been  found
           credible, but who is able to satisfy a decision-maker  (i)  that
           he or she left illegally, and (ii) that  he  or  she  is  of  or
           approaching draft age, is likely to be perceived on return as  a
           draft evader or deserter from national service and as  a  result
           face a real risk of persecution or serious harm.

           11. While likely to be a rare case, it is possible that a person
           who has exited lawfully may on forcible return  face  having  to
           resume or commence national service. In such a case there  is  a
           real risk of persecution or  serious  harm  by  virtue  of  such
           service constituting forced labour contrary to Article 4(2)  and
           Article 3 of the ECHR.

           12. Where it is specified above that there is  a  real  risk  of
           persecution in the context of performance  of  military/national
           service, it is highly likely that it will be persecution  for  a
           Convention reason based on imputed political opinion.


12. The appellant is within the age for mobilisation and does not fall into
    the exceptions' category. There was no suggestion  that  the  appellant
    suffered with ill health.

13. In accordance with paragraph 12  of  the  headnote  together  with  the
    acceptance by the Secretary of State that the appellant was wanted  for
    detention by the authorities it was conceded by Mr Walker, rightly  and
    sensibly in my view, that the appellant's reason  for  claiming  asylum
    fell within the ambit of a convention reason.   As  a  perceived  draft
    evader,  having  undertaken  an  illegal  exit  and  being  wanted  for
    detention by the authorities, all of which was accepted in the  refusal
    letter, it is likely, on the lower standard  of  proof,  she  would  be
    construed and perceived by the authorities as having imputed  political
    opinion inimical to those authorities.

14. As set out in Respondent's own  Country  Policy  and  Information  Note
    Eritrea: National service and illegal exit Version 5.0 July 2018

    2. Consideration of issues

           2.1 Refugee Convention reason

           2.1.1 Persons who have evaded or deserted national service and /
           or left the country illegally in order to avoid national service
           are likely to be  perceived  by  the  government  as  holding  a
           political view  contrary  to  the  state.  Consideration  should
           therefore be given to their claims on the basis of their imputed
           political opinion.

15. The Judge erred in law for the reasons identified, and,  in  a  manner,
    which could have a material effect on the outcome.   I  set  aside  the
    decision pursuant to Section  12(2)(a)  of  the  Tribunals  Courts  and
    Enforcement Act 2007 (TCE 2007) and remake the decision  under  section
    12(2) (b) (ii) of the TCE 2007 and allow the appeal on  asylum  grounds
    for the reasons given above.

Order

The appeal is allowed on asylum grounds.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008


Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.







Signed      Helen  Rimington                         Date      24th  October
    2019





Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington

                                      .



