
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10711/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 25 January 2019                            |On 1 March 2019               |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

                                 Sardar [Q]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Clark (Counsel instructed by Migrant Legal
Project (Cardiff)
For the Respondent:    Mr C Howells, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a national of Iraq.  After arrival in the UK  sometime
    in 2016 he claimed asylum on the basis that he  would  be  at  risk  on
    return on account of his conversion from Sunni Islam to Zoroastrianism.
     On 11 October 2017 the respondent decided to refuse  his  claim.   The
    appeal came before Judge Osborne of the First-tier Tribunal (FtT)  who,
    in a decision sent on 28 February 2018 dismissed his appeal.

2.   The appellant's grounds submitted that the judge had erred  in  law  in
    failing to take into account of material background evidence (grounds 1
    and  2);  in  failing  to  give  adequate  reasons  for  rejecting  the
    reliability of the letter written on 7 February 2016 by  a  Zoroastrian
    organisation in Iraq (ground 3); in disregarding the transcript of  the
    audio record of interview when assessing the consistency  or  otherwise
    of the evidence the appellant had given about threats from  his  uncles
    (ground  4);  and  in  being  procedurally  unfair  in  relying  on   a
    discrepancy in his evidence regarding threats from his uncles when  the
    respondent had not put the matter to the appellant in cross-examination
    (ground 5).

3.   I am grateful to both representatives for their careful submissions.

4.   I see no merit in grounds  4  and  5.   As  regards  ground  4,  I  am,
    satisfied that the judge took account of  all  the  evidence  including
    that given by the appellant in his witness statement (see paragraph 15)
    and was entitled to conclude that he had not been wholly consistent  in
    his evidence regarding whether or  not  his  maternal  uncle  had  ever
    threatened him.

5.   In any event, paragraph 28 (where the judge addresses  the  appellant's
    evidence regarding the maternal uncle) clearly provides  an  additional
    reason for the conclusion that the appellant  had  not  given  credible
    evidence in relation to the nature of threats made against him  and  it
    is clear from  paragraphs  25  and  27  that  it  was  the  appellant's
    inconsistencies in the evidence he gave about threats from the paternal
    uncles that were seen as far more important.

6.   Ground  5  founders  on  the  evident  fact  that  the  respondent  had
    identified discrepancies in the appellant's evidence about threats from
    the paternal uncles and the fact that  the  appellant  had  embellished
    their level of seriousness over time.  The  appellant  then  sought  to
    explain these discrepancies in his witness statement.  It was  open  to
    the judge to make findings on these  discrepancies,  even  though  they
    were not, it appears, the subject of questions in cross-examination.

7.   I am persuaded, however, by the first two  grounds.   At  paragraph  19
    the very first reason for finding the appellant's account of conversion
    to Zoroastrianism not credible was set out as follows.

         "19. The Appellant in the asylum interview confirmed that faith  is
             important to him.   The  changing  of  his  established  Sunni
             Islamic faith would therefore  have  been  a  matter  of  real
             significance to the Appellant.  However, when  asked  for  his
             reasons for his disenchantment with his Islamic  faith,  I  am
             far from satisfied that the Appellant  provided  any  adequate
             description of his feelings or reasons to  change  his  faith.
             The Appellant is patently of the belief  that  those  who  are
             members of Daesh are not representative of Islam and that  the
             Islamic faith exists beyond Daesh.  Nonetheless, the Appellant
             gives as a reason for his disillusion with Islam the fact that
             members of  Daesh  are  fighting,  waging  wars,  and  killing
             innocent people in the name of Islam.  I am far from satisfied
             that someone  as  intelligent  as  the  Appellant  (he  was  a
             university student who passed his first  year  at  university)
             and someone who had a genuine Sunni Islamic faith would become
             disillusioned by their established faith because others decide
             to behave in a manner in which  they  disapprove.   There  are
             many millions of Sunni Muslims who observe the  Islamic  faith
             in a wholly  appropriate  and  peaceful  manner.  The  reasons
             provided by the Appellant are conveniently  superficial;  they
             have  no  depth;  they  are  objectively  incapable   of   any
             reasonable belief.  On the basis of the evidence I am far from
             satisfied that the Appellant has provided genuine reasons  for
             becoming disillusioned with his Sunni Islamic faith whether as
             described by him or at all."

8.   The assessment that such reasons  are  "objectively  incapable  of  any
    reasonable belief" is at odds with the analysis contained in the report
    in  the  appellant's  bundle  from  the  United  States  Commission  on
    International Religious Freedom, May-August 2016.  At paragraphs  19-20
    the  report  noted  a  "recent  trend  in  conversion  from  Islam   to
    Zoroastrianism" and proffered two possible reasons:

         "The first is the perception on the part of Kurds that their  roots
         are closer to Zoroastrianism  than  Islam  with  Kurdish  adherents
         often  talking  about  the  inherent  "Kurdistan"   [elements]   of
         Zoroastrianism.   The  second  more  speculative  reason  is   that
         conversion to Zoroastrianism is a reaction to the rise of ISIS  and
         extreme sects of Islam in the region".

9.   The appellant had stated in his witness  statement  that  he  had  been
    taught that the Zoroastrian prophet was Kurdish (see also his answer at
    Q98 of his asylum interview).

10.  There is nothing to  indicate  that  the  judge  took  this  background
    evidence, coupled with the appellant's own evidence as to his knowledge
    of Zoroastrian history, into account or sought to  address  whether  it
    was significant enough to have an impact  on  the  judge's  credibility
    assessment.  Mr Howells sought to argue  that  this  evidence  was  too
    peripheral to require assessment, especially  as  one  of  the  reasons
    given in the Commission report was  described  as  "more  speculative".
    However, the first of the two reasons was  not  so  qualified  and  the
    judge's approach treats the issue as simply one he could  decide  based
    on his  own  perceptions.   Further,  there  were  two  other  articles
    contained in the appellant's bundle that corroborated the view taken in
    the US report.

11.  I am satisfied that  the  judge's  failure  to  consider  the  external
    consistency  or  otherwise  of  the  appellant's  explanation  for  his
    conversion with the background evidence amounted to a material error of
    law.  I cannot exclude that had the judge addressed his  mind  to  this
    evidence he may have assessed the  other  aspects  of  the  appellant's
    account differently.

12.  For the above reasons I  set  aside  the  decision  of  the  judge  for
    material error of law.

13.  I see no alternative to the case being remitted to the FtT (not  before
    Judge Osborne).   Whilst  I  consider  that  Judge  Osborne's  analysis
    identifies several significant shortcomings in the appellant's account,
    the appellant is entitled to have his appeal heard de novo  by  another
    judge.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date: 20 February 2019

             [pic]
Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

