
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
PA/10394/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |         Decision & Reasons          |
|                                      |Promulgated                          |
|On 8th May 2017                       |         On 31st May 2017            |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAHMOOD

                                   Between

                                     M N
                         (anonymity direction made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:      Mr A Fouladvand of Migrant Advisory & Advocacy
                    Service (MAAS)
For the Respondent:   Mr T Wilding, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Lucas sitting at Taylor House on 28th October  2016
    whereby in a decision promulgated  on  21st  November  2016  the  judge
    dismissed the appeal on all grounds including  protection  grounds  and
    human rights grounds.  The Appellant had sought  permission  to  appeal
    against that decision.  Permission to appeal was refused by the  First-
    tier Tribunal and thereafter there was a  renewed  application  to  the
    Upper Tribunal.  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce said the following  in  her
    grant of permission,

    (1)  Permission is granted despite of, not  because  of,  the  grounds,
         which amount to some ten pages of written submissions about why the
         decision of the First-tier Tribunal should have been other than  it
         was.


    (2)  I am prepared to grant permission because it is arguable  that  in
         finding at paragraph 33  there  is  to  be  no  evidence  that  the
         Appellant's former husband worked for  a  television  company,  the
         Tribunal overlooked the Appellant's own evidence on the matter.  If
         that evidence was to be rejected then reasons had to be given.   It
         is further arguable that  in  stating  at  paragraph  31  that  the
         background to this appeal leads inevitably to the  conclusion  that
         this claim is entirely manufactured and the Tribunal placed  rather
         more weight on matters raised in Section 8  AI  (TC)  A  2004  than
         Parliament intended.

2.   Before me today  the  Appellant's  solicitor  said  he  relied  on  the
    grounds of appeal and the grant of permission. It  was  submitted  that
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal should be reversed and that  if
    necessary the matter either be reheard here at the  Upper  Tribunal  or
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.  That was all  that  was  said.  I
    then heard submissions on behalf of the Respondent.  It  was  submitted
    that it was clear that Judge Bruce was not impressed with  the  grounds
    of appeal.  It was unfortunate that this stage had been reached but  it
    was clear at paragraph 33 of the First-tier Tribunal  Judge's  decision
    that there was no corroborative evidence that the husband worked for  a
    satirical television station in the United Kingdom.  It was  said  that
    Judge Lucas was aware of what the claim was in relation to the  husband
    so despite Judge Bruce  saying  what  she  did  about  there  being  no
    evidence in terms of finding it is clear what Judge Lucas  was  driving
    at.

3.   It was submitted that insofar as the evidence was concerned, the  point
    was that the evidence  was  manifestly  missing.   The  judge  had  not
    accepted the position as simply  suggested.  The  Appellant  submitting
    pictures of a man broadcasting does not show he was employed or  linked
    to the Appellant.  It was said  that  in  any  event  at  paragraph  34
    onwards the judge had considered the matter  in  the  alternative  i.e.
    even if there was this acceptance of the Appellant's fundamental aspect
    of claim.  It was said that the  rejection  which  is  a  comprehensive
    finding of the alternative basis of the  case  really  did  lead  to  a
    conclusion which could not be impeached in any way.

4.   I then heard the Appellant's  solicitor  in  response.   Unfortunately,
    the paperwork which he held was lacking for example he did not have the
    Reasons for Refusal Letter and other important documents.  I  therefore
    provided him with the relevant documentation from the  Tribunal's  file
    to enable him to be able to represent the Appellant.  I then  adjourned
    the matter for a period of time to enable him to deal with such things.
     Thereafter further submissions were made but it is right to say that a
    fair amount of confusion crept in in terms of as to whether the initial
    grounds of appeal were still relied upon or not and if  there  were  on
    what basis or whether it was simply the grant of  permission  by  Judge
    Bruce.  It was said by Mr  Wilding  that  the  Appellant's  submissions
    really were nonsensical and there were manifest difficulties with  what
    was being said on behalf of the Appellant.

5.    Unfortunately,  I  got  very  little  assistance  in   following   the
    Appellant's case through her solicitor so  I  had  to  adjourn  matters
    again to look through the file with some detail because with regret the
    assistance being provided on behalf of the Appellant was  not  what  it
    should have been and  that  necessitated  me  looking  through  several
    hundred pages of documents on my own to ascertain  what  the  case  was
    really about. I then went through the mass of grounds of  appeal  which
    Judge Bruce herself had highlighted.

6.   Now, ultimately I do find that there is a material  error  of  law  and
    that  is  against  my  initial  inclination  but  it  is  after  having
    considered the case with some care and in some detail. It  is  just  as
    Judge Bruce noted when she granted permission, namely that I allow this
    appeal despite of not because of the submissions made to me  on  behalf
    of the Appellant.

7.   It really just comes down to two  relatively  straightforward  aspects.
    The judge said in the decision  at  paragraph  33  that  "there  is  no
    evidence to show that the Appellant's husband had any role within  that
    TV channel."  Whilst it is right that there were some  stills  pictures
    of a male person broadcasting on television, but there was  also  other
    evidence from the Appellant herself.  That  in  my  judgment  was  well
    encapsulated in Judge Bruce's grant of permission.  Secondly  there  is
    reference to whether the judge went too far in  respect  of  section  8
    matters at paragraph 31 of her decision when it was said,

         "The background to this appeal leads inevitably to  the  conclusion
         that this claim is entirely manufactured  and  opportunistic.   The
         Appellant entered the UK in December 2014 with a spousal visa.  She
         then separated from her spouse one year later in December 2015  and
         returned to Iran in February 2016.  Her leave to remain in  the  UK
         was curtailed on 24th February 2016 and she returned to the  UK  on
         8th March 2016.  At the time of her return  therefore  she  had  no
         leave to remain in the UK.  It was only upon her re-entering to the
         UK on 8th March 2016 and the absence of any other  leave  that  she
         lodged this claim for asylum."

8.   In my judgment, this does take the Section 8 matters into  account  but
    it goes way to far just as Judge Bruce  noted.   Giving  the  case  the
    anxious scrutiny that it requires this being a protection  claim  leads
    me to the inevitable conclusion that the most anxious scrutiny was  not
    applied by the judge in  this  case.   She  did  not  explain  why  the
    evidence of the Appellant was "not evidence" for the  purposes  of  the
    background to the Appellant's husband or former  husband  and  secondly
    she went too far in respect of Section 8 issues.  Had she not done that
    then she may well have come to a different decision.  Therefore, in the
    circumstances I conclude that there is a material  error  of  law.  The
    matter will have to be reheard and in my judgment the appropriate place
    for the matter to be considered further is at the First-tier  Tribunal.
    There will be a hearing de novo.  None of  the  current  findings  will
    stand.  The rehearing will take place at Taylor House or at such  other
    venue as  the  Resident  Judge  directs  and  there  will  be  a  Farsi
    interpreter.  All other directions will be dealt with by the First-tier
    Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed.

There shall be a re-hearing at the First-tier Tribunal on all issues.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                                  Date: 8 May 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mahmood


No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.






Signed                                  Date: 8 May 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mahmood


