
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10469/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 19th August 2019                  |On 23rd August 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                                     AK
                           (Anonymity Order made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms Z McCallum, instructed by Londonium solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal
    or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any
    form of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  the
    respondent in this  determination  identified  as  AK.  This  direction
    applies to, amongst others, all parties. Any  failure  to  comply  with
    this direction could give rise to contempt of court proceedings

      1. AK, a citizen of Bangladesh, arrived in the UK in November 2009. He
         remained lawfully in the UK and was granted leave to  remain  until
         30th August 2015. In August 2014 his leave to remain was  curtailed
         and he was served with removal  documents.  After  an  unsuccessful
         judicial review challenge in February 2016, he sought  asylum.  His
         asylum claim was refused for reasons set out in a letter dated 15th
         September 2016. The decision by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  on  the
         appeal against that decision was set aside by  the  Upper  Tribunal
         and the appeal remitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  be  heard
         afresh. That appeal was allowed by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Aujla
         for reasons set out in a decision promulgated on 17th June 2019.

      2. The Secretary of State sought, and was granted permission to appeal
         that decision on the grounds:

             Ground 1: procedural irregularity/unfairness;

             Ground 2: Making a material misdirection of law

             Ground 3: perversity.




         Ground 1

      3. The SSHD submitted that the First-tier Tribunal  refused  to  allow
         cross-examination of AK, thus amounting to a  procedural  error  of
         law. In support he submitted that [13]  of  the  decision  did  not
         reflect what had actually happened  and  that  the  submission  was
         supported by the hearing minute prepared by the Presenting Officer.

      4. [13] of the decision reads as follows:

             "I had lengthy discussions with both representatives as to the
             issues in  the  appeal.  In  addition  to  claiming  that  the
             Appellant was an activist in  the  Bangladesh  National  Party
             ("the BNP") both in  Bangladesh  and  since  arriving  in  the
             United Kingdom, the Appellant  claimed  that  members  of  the
             Awami league ("AL") political party and  the  authorities  had
             filed three false criminal charges against him.  A  number  of
             documents including FIRs were submitted as evidence  of  that.
             There had  been  numerous  adjournments  before  to  give  the
             respondent the opportunity to have those documents verified in
             Bangladesh through the British High Commission. The respondent
             had provided three  different  Document  Verification  Reports
             ("the  DVRs").  It  was  common  ground  between  me  and  the
             representatives that if it was found that false criminal cases
             had  indeed  been  commenced  against   the   Appellant,   the
             Respondent would have  difficulty  contesting  his  protection
             appeal. In view of that, both representatives were agreed that
             the matter should proceed by way of submissions only.  ...  it
             was considered not necessary to  formally  call  him  to  give
             evidence."

      5. The minute relied upon  by  the  SSHD  states,  in  so  far  as  is
         relevant:

             "...Judge gave an indication that he was  accepting  that  the
             SSHD had verified that the third FIR  was  genuine  at  police
             station level  and  took  it  that  this  implicitly  included
             verification of identity....

             ...

             Appellant  tendered  but  case  presented  on  the  basis   of
             submissions only on the basis of the judge's  indication  that
             he would be treating the DVR as genuine. Judge also said  that
             he did not feel it was necessary for there to be oral evidence
             in light of the home office concession as per  above.  Opposed
             that approach and it seems to me that the judge erred  in  law
             by approaching evidence in that  way.  My  opponent  was  also
             prevented from carrying out an examination in chief and kept a
             note  to  confirm  that  both  Counsel  were  prevented   from
             examining the Appellant ...

                . Relied on RFRL;

                . Accepted that  if  the  case  against  the  Appellant  was
                  genuinely brought by the AL for political  purposes  as  a
                  direct response or target to A's profile then it would  be
                  difficult to suggest he wouldn't be at risk on  the  lower
                  standard. As per above I invited the judge to  treat  that
                  DVR as merely a concession that there was an FIR with that
                  date and

                . TOEIC test

                . Two FIRs verified as non-genuine; Late receipt of  further
                  documents;

                . Third FIR verified as genuine but  not  confirmed  whether
                  the names are genuine;

                . Not credible that he could leave the country if there were
                  outstanding FIR's for him;

                . Complete lack of detail in the letter from BJC at page 48.
                  Unusual vernacular typical of a contrived  document;  none
                  of the accompanying documents one might expect if it  were
                  a genuine narrative.

                . In BD said information travels to all stations."

      6. Mr  Tarlow  acknowledged  that  the  Minute  did  not  support  the
         submission made in the grounds, which was in any event disputed  by
         Ms McCallum. He did not pursue that ground. I am satisfied that the
         ground is not made out and decline to find an error of law on  that
         basis.




         Ground 2

      7. In essence the SSHD submits that the judge failed to  consider  the
         totality of the evidence in the round when  reaching  his  decision
         that  AK  was  at  risk  of  being  persecuted  on  his  return  to
         Bangladesh. In particular it was submitted the judge had failed  to
         take into account the  fact  that  there  had  been  2  false  FIRs
         submitted and relied upon, the  judge  had  failed  to  consider  a
         British High Commission report regarding document  verification  in
         Bangladesh and specifically whether names were  checked  at  police
         station level, that AK had fraudulently used a proxy  to  take  his
         TOIEC test and the delay in claiming asylum.

      8. Mr Tarlow did not expand upon the grounds relied upon save to  draw
         attention to the fact that AK had submitted 2 FIRs which were found
         not to be genuine.

      9. There were typos in the First-tier Tribunal judge  decision  as  to
         the dates of the 3 FIRs. Having considered the bundle of documents,
         I am satisfied that the three FIRs are dated as follows: FIR 14/169
         dated 14th June 2016, FIR 19/413 dated 29th December 2008, and  FIR
         18/25 dated 9th March 2009.

     10. FIR 14/169 was the subject of a letter from the Presenting Officers
         Unit which stated, inter alia,

             "... I have recently received notification that this  document
             was verified at Police level in Bangladesh. The document  will
             now be verified at Court level during August  2017.  The  Home
             Office hope to receive a DVR in late August to early September
             2017.

             ..."

     11. Mr Easton, on behalf of the SSHD  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal
         applied for an adjournment to enable further verification  to  take
         place. The  First-tier  Tribunal  judge  refused  that  adjournment
         request. The SSHD did not seek permission to appeal on the  grounds
         that it was arguable the decision to  refuse  the  adjournment  was
         procedurally unfair.

     12. The First-tier Tribunal judge  sets  out  carefully  the  documents
         relied upon by both parties, the submissions relied  upon  by  both
         parties and the evidence before him. He summarises AK's  claim  for
         asylum and the SSHD's reasons for rejection of that  claim.  It  is
         clear that the judge had AK's previous fraudulent behaviour in mind
         in the context of the background country evidence and that the SSHD
         had drawn serious adverse credibility conclusions. In the decision,
         the judge says

             "40. The credibility issue  raised  by  the  Respondent  would
             simply indicate that the appellant was not a witness of truth.
             However he had  provided  explanations  and  comments  in  his
             witness statements on the points raised which I have no reason
             to reject and therefore find them sustainable. Furthermore the
             appellant had  stated  that  there  were  false  cases  raised
             against him in Bangladesh which had a political dimension. The
             respondent had undertaken three DVR  visits  to  the  relevant
             police station/courts in Bangladesh....Even if  I  ignore  the
             appellant's account relating to the two false cases he claimed
             were filed against him relating to the period  whilst  he  was
             still in Bangladesh (FIRs number 18 dated 09  March  2009  and
             number 19 dated 29 December 2008), the fact remains that there
             was verified evidence about the case against him in  which  he
             was implicated in the killing of the brother of  a  member  of
             the AL which killing occurred in Bangladesh on  14  June  2016
             ...However the appellant was  not in Bangladesh at  that  time
             as he had continuously resided in  the  UK  since  he  arrived
             here. Therefore, when considering the  credibility  issues  in
             the light of the evidence before me, I find that they did  not
             have a direct impact on the core of the appellant's case.

             41.  The respondent issued the  concession  letter  after  the
             hearing before Judge Walters. It was stated in the letter that
             the appellant's claim that there was a false murder case filed
             against him was genuine. It was found to  be  genuine  at  the
             police station level ... on the basis of that [other evidence]
             I accept that there was reasonable doubt about the cases being
             filed against the Appellant in 2008 and 2009. However that did
             not explain the 2006 (sic) case.

             42.  The respondent's representative  from  the  British  High
             Commission made a further  verification  visit  to  the  Chief
             Judicial Magistrate's Court, Sylhet  on  21  March  2017.  The
             representative then visited the Metropolitans Sessions Judge's
             Court and was informed that the case was a murder  case  which
             had been transferred to the Additional Sessions Judge's  Court
             Sylhet on 8 October 2017  and  was  currently  pending  for  a
             hearing.

             43.  It is clear to me from the court documentation  submitted
             by the Appellant and the respondent's own DVRs that there  was
             a false case pending against the Appellant in Bangladesh which
             linked him to a murder. The murder was alleged to  have  taken
             place on 14th June 2016 when in fact the Appellant was in  the
             United  Kingdom  since  he  first  arrived  on  18th  November
             2009....

             44.  Mr Eaton submitted in his closing submissions that it was
             not clear whether the Appellant was named in the case  as  the
             Respondent's  representative  would  not  have  on  his  visit
             revealed the Appellant's name to the authorities  when  making
             enquiries. I do not  accept  that  submission.  The  Appellant
             provided numerous other documents such as warrants which named
             and linked him with a murder case  and  the  respondent's  own
             DVRs confirmed that the case of the same type and  FIR  number
             was pending in Bangladesh....

             45.   ...  the  accusation  against  him  must  be  false  and
             politically   motivated   as   claimed   by   the   Appellant.
             Furthermore, it is clear that the Appellant was to some extent
             involved with activity on behalf of the BNP whilst he  was  in
             Bangladesh. There is also evidence before me that he had  been
             actively involved in the BNP in the United Kingdom.

             46.  I have taken the country material into account ..."

     13. The First-tier Tribunal judge considered the evidence  and  reached
         conclusions that were open  to  him  on  the  evidence  before  him
         bearing mind the appropriate  burden  and  standard  of  proof  and
         taking account of AKs fraudulent behaviour. The SSHD had had  ample
         opportunity to investigate further  but  despite  adjournments  had
         failed either to  investigate  or  failed  to  produce  information
         adverse to a potential finding that  the  2016  FIR  was  false  or
         contained  false  information.  The  judge  took  account  of   the
         submission regarding possible false names -  contrary  to  what  is
         submitted in the grounds of appeal - and discarded that submission.



     14. That AK has previously submitted false documents and has  committed
         fraud does not, given the evidence that was before  the  First-tier
         Tribunal judge, render his finding unsafe, irrational, unlawful  or
         in error. It was a finding open to him on the evidence.

     15. There is no error of law identified  in  the  grounds  such  as  to
         result in the decision being set aside.




         Ground 3

     16. The SSHD submits that the First-tier  Tribunal  judge's  conclusion
         'verges' on the perverse because AK could not  have  committed  the
         crime of which he is accused. It may be so that he could  not  have
         committed the crime, but the  fact  remains  that  the  undisturbed
         findings of the judge are that AK is named on a genuine FIR  for  a
         crime he could not have committed, and such naming  is  politically
         motivated. The SSHD did not submit during the  hearing  before  the
         First-tier Tribunal that the 'mistake' would be identified when  AK
         arrived in Bangladesh. Nor was it submitted that the trial  process
         or  prison  conditions   would   not   be   persecutory   in   such
         circumstances. The evidence before the judge  was  that  the  trial
         process for that alleged crime was proceeding.

     17. As Mr Tarlow acknowledged, it was very difficult to  challenge  the
         decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  judge  on  the  grounds  of
         perversity.

     18. The ground is not made out and I decline to find an error of law.

    Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

    I do not set aside the decision.

    The appeal by the SSHD is dismissed. The  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal stands.

    Anonymity

    The First-tier Tribunal made an  order  pursuant  to  rule  13  of  the
    Tribunal  Procedure  (First-tier  Tribunal)  (Immigration  and   Asylum
    Chamber) Rules 2014.

    I continue that order (pursuant to rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).


     Date 21st August 2019
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
