
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10173/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice Centre      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 22nd March 2019                            |On 3rd April 2019             |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL

                                   Between

                                     D E
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms N Patel of Lei Dat & Baig Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A Tan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant appeals against a decision of Judge D Alty (the judge) of
    the First-tier Tribunal (the FtT) promulgated on 15th October 2018.

 2. The Appellant is a Sri Lankan citizen born 21st June 1971.  He  arrived
    in the UK on 24th October 2009 with leave to remain as a student.   His
    leave was curtailed on 19th August 2014.   He  claimed  asylum  on  6th
    March 2018.

 3. On 6th August 2018 the Respondent refused the Appellant's human  rights
    and international protection claim.  His appeal was heard by the  judge
    on 26th September 2018.

 4. The claim for international protection was based upon  the  Appellant's
    fear of persecution and ill-treatment from the Sri Lankan government as
    a suspected supporter of the LTTE.

 5. The judge heard evidence from the Appellant and did not find him to  be
    a credible witness.  The judge found a lack of detail  and  consistency
    in the Appellant's account and found that he had  not  proved  that  he
    would be at risk if returned to Sri Lanka.  The appeal was dismissed on
    all grounds.

The Application for Permission to Appeal

 6. The Appellant's solicitors relied upon two grounds.   Firstly,  it  was
    submitted that the judge had erred at paragraph 32 in relation  to  his
    consideration of letters  from  Reverend  Fernandopulle,  and  Reverend
    Ajith.  The judge recorded that  there  was  no  reason  to  doubt  the
    sincerity of their evidence, but noted that they had not  attended  the
    hearing for cross-examination and found that they had  "by  and  large,
    given evidence of matters which have  been  reported  to  them  by  the
    appellant or his wife.  Although their evidence  has  been  taken  into
    account in my overall assessment, these matters effect the weight I can
    attribute to it."

 7. It was submitted that the judge had erred in  law  by  not  taking  the
    contents of the letters properly into account.  Reverend  Fernandopulle
    had made contact with Reverend Ajith who  is  presently  serving  as  a
    parish priest in Sri Lanka, and Reverend Ajith was able to  corroborate
    the Appellant's account and provided a letter confirming  that  he  had
    personally known the Appellant from childhood and  that  the  Appellant
    had been facing persecution from army intelligence since 2008.

 8. It was submitted that the judge had materially erred  in  finding  that
    the letters of support referred to matters which had been  reported  to
    the author by the Appellant  or  his  wife,  because  the  letter  from
    Reverend Fernandopulle states that he made contact with Reverend  Ajith
    and that this was not simply a case of relaying  information  that  the
    Appellant or his wife supplied.

 9. The second ground relates to paragraph 29 in which the judge  found  it
    surprising that the Appellant was able to leave Sri Lanka using his own
    passport  without  difficulty.   The  judge  referred  to  the  country
    guidance decision GJ (Sri Lanka) CG [2013] UKUT 319 (IAC)  noting  that
    this case indicates  that  the  authorities  in  Sri  Lanka  operate  a
    computerised "stop" list at the airport.  It  was  submitted  that  the
    judge erred, because the "stop" list applies to  persons  who  have  an
    extant arrest warrant or court order and it was not known whether  such
    paperwork exists in this case.  In  addition  the  Appellant  explained
    that he left Sri Lanka in 2009 and  computer  facilities  were  not  as
    advanced at that  time.   GJ  was  published  four  years  later.   The
    Appellant  had  explained  that  his  father-in-law  paid  a  bribe  to
    facilitate his journey out of Sri Lanka, and  therefore  there  were  a
    number of reasons why the Appellant was able to leave the airport using
    his passport which had not been taken properly into consideration.

The Grant of Permission to Appeal

10. Permission to appeal was originally refused by Judge Saffer of the  FtT
    but subsequently granted  by  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Chapman  in  the
    following terms;

         "3.  The grounds of appeal disclose arguable errors of law  in  the
             decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge.  In respect of  the
             first ground, whilst regrettably the  letter  from  Rev  Anton
             Fernandopulle is not listed in the index  to  the  Appellant's
             bundle, it does confirm that he is the parish  priest  of  the
             parishes of St Agnes and St Aidan in Liverpool and that he had
             got in touch with Rev Tyronne Ajith, presently serving as  the
             acting parish priest of Holy Rosary Church, Welikanna, Waga in
             Sri Lanka, who was able to corroborate the Appellant's  story.
             Whilst at [32] of the decision and reasons,  the  judge  makes
             reference to this letter, arguably he was required to  provide
             more by way  of  reasoning,  other  than  the  fact  that  Rev
             Fernandopulle  did  not  attend   the   hearing   for   cross-
             examination, to reject the potential import  of  this  letter,
             particularly given that it was not simply evidence of  matters
             reported to him by the Appellant.  This may, in turn, have had
             a  material  impact  on  any  assessment  of  the  Appellant's
             credibility.

         4.   The second ground of appeal also raises arguable errors of law
             in respect of the judge's  finding  at  [29]  given  that  the
             Appellant left Sri Lanka four years prior to the  promulgation
             of the CG decision in GJ [2013] UKUT  00319  (IAC)  thus  that
             decision cannot be properly relied upon as authority as to the
             ability to leave Sri Lanka in 2009, rather than evidence of an
             ability to do so at that time."

11. Directions were given that there should be an oral hearing  before  the
    Upper Tribunal to ascertain whether the FtT decision contained an error
    of law such that it must be set aside.

My Analysis and Conclusions

12. At the oral hearing  Ms  Patel  relied  upon  the  grounds  upon  which
    permission to appeal had been  granted,  together  with  the  grant  of
    permission to appeal.  It was submitted that the judge was incorrect to
    suggest that evidence given  by  Reverend  Fernandopulle  and  Reverend
    Ajith was evidence  given  by  the  Appellant  or  his  wife.   It  was
    submitted that this error was material and  had  this  error  not  been
    made, the judge may have reached a different conclusion.

13. With reference to paragraph 29 of the judge's decision it was submitted
    that GJ could not be relied upon taking into account the Appellant left
    Sri Lanka in 2009 and GJ was not  promulgated  until  2013.   Ms  Patel
    suggested the appropriate  country  guidance  case  to  be  applied  in
    relation to somebody leaving Sri Lanka in 2009  was  TK  (Tamils  -  LP
    updated) Sri Lanka CG  [2009]  UKAIT  00049.   It  was  submitted  that
    paragraph 5 of GJ confirmed that  TK  was  country  guidance  based  on
    materials up to and including 26th October 2009.

14. Mr Tan submitted that the  judge  had  not  materially  erred  and  the
    decision should stand.  With reference to paragraph 32 of  the  judge's
    decision, Mr Tan submitted that the primary source  of  information  in
    the letter written by Reverend Ajith, was provided by  the  Appellant's
    wife and the judge had not erred on that point.  In any event,  Mr  Tan
    submitted that the decision of the FtT must be considered  holistically
    and in the round.  It was contended that the judge had  given  adequate
    reasons for findings that had been made.

15. Mr Tan submitted that it was open to the judge to express surprise that
    the Appellant,  given  his  claim  to  be  wanted  by  the  Sri  Lankan
    authorities for a bombing which killed numerous  people,  was  able  to
    obtain a passport and leave Sri Lanka without any difficulties.

16. I considered the FtT decision with care,  and  deal  firstly  with  the
    challenge to paragraph 29.  I find no material error of  law  contained
    in this paragraph.  In my view, the judge has made findings which  were
    open to make on the evidence.  The judge was not making  findings  only
    on the Appellant's departure from Sri Lanka without difficulty, but was
    also considering his claim that he was suspected of being involved in a
    bombing.

17. The Appellant's claim was that the authorities suspected him  of  being
    involved in a bombing which killed 23 civilians.  The judge  noted  the
    Appellant's evidence that he was detained twice  but  quickly  released
    without any charge, and the judge noted the Appellant's claim  to  have
    been released as a result of a bribe.  According to the Appellant,  the
    authorities were still showing an active  interest  in  him  in  August
    2013, October 2015, and May 2016, even though he had left Sri Lanka  in
    October 2009.

18. The judge was entitled to find the Appellant's claim that he  had  been
    detained twice very briefly after the bombing  but  released,  was  not
    compatible with his claim to remain of interest to the authorities.  In
    my view the judge was also entitled to comment that it  was  surprising
    that  if  the  appellant  was  of  real  interest  to  the  Sri  Lankan
    authorities, as he claimed that  they  were  still  interested  in  him
    several years after he left Sri Lanka, that the Appellant  was  allowed
    to leave Sri Lanka using his own passport without difficulties.  In  my
    view it is in error to refer to GJ and the "stop" list,  as  the  judge
    notes at paragraph 27 that it was not submitted  that  the  Appellant's
    name was on a "stop" list.  This however is not a material  error,  and
    the judge has  not  erred  in  law  at  paragraph  29  in  finding  the
    Appellant's claim to be inconsistent.

19. The judge goes on in paragraph 30 to make findings, which have not been
    challenged,  that  the  Appellant's  explanation  as  to  how  he   was
    implicated in the bombing is vague.  The judge found inconsistencies in
    his evidence, and that he claimed to have been released  after  payment
    of a bribe, but also claimed that he had been  released  on  bail.   In
    addition, the judge notes that the  Appellant  claimed  in  his  asylum
    interview that his friend died in  the  bombing,  but  in  his  witness
    statement he explained that he was arrested in relation to that bombing
    with that friend, who he had claimed had died  in  the  bombing,  in  a
    cinema.  These findings, contained  at  paragraph  30,  have  not  been
    challenged.  I then turn to consider paragraph  32  and  conclude  that
    this paragraph discloses no material  error  of  law.   The  judge  was
    entitled to make reference to the letters and to record that  while  he
    did not ignore them, and he had no reason to doubt the sincerity of the
    evidence given by Reverend Fernandopulle and Reverend Ajith,  they  did
    not  attend  the  hearing  to  be  cross-examined.   Non-attendance  by
    Reverend Ajith is not surprising as he is in Sri  Lanka.   However  the
    weight to be attached to the evidence is, in the absence of  perversity
    or irrationality, a matter  for  the  judge  hearing  the  evidence  to
    decide.  I find no perversity or irrationality in this decision.

20. In my view the judge is not incorrect to record that  the  letters  "by
    and large, give evidence of matters which have been reported to them by
    the Appellant or his wife."

21. It is correct that Reverend Fernandopulle has provided a letter at page
    35 of the Appellant's bundle, in which he concludes that "Based on  the
    information I received from Rev Tyronne Ajith I can attest to the  fact
    that it would be extremely dangerous for Mr S to return to Sri  Lanka."
    In my view the judge was entitled to  place  little  weight  upon  that
    evidence.

22. The letter from Reverend Ajith is  contained  within  the  Respondent's
    bundle and contains four paragraphs.  The third and  fourth  paragraphs
    contain information given to Reverend Ajith by  the  Appellant's  wife.
    It is clear that the judge made no error in recording that  to  be  the
    case.

23. In the  first  and  second  paragraphs  Reverend  Ajith  describes  the
    Appellant as a devoted Christian and states that  he  has  been  facing
    persecution  from  army  intelligence,  police  and   local   political
    extremist groups since March 2008.   In  the  second  paragraph  it  is
    stated that the Appellant was arrested by the police in connection with
    helping Tamil victims during the years of 2008 and  2009  and  suffered
    physical abuse from both police and  army  personnel.   Reverend  Ajith
    does not explain how he has been made aware of the claimed persecution,
    arrest and physical abuse.  It may be that he was informed of  this  by
    the Appellant or his wife, but it is not clear.  The judge was entitled
    to place little weight upon this letter.

24. In my view the judge considered the evidence in  the  round,  and  made
    findings  which  were  open  to  make  on  the  evidence  and  provided
    sustainable reasons for the findings.  The  judge  did  not  take  into
    account  irrelevant  evidence,  and  did  take  into  account  material
    evidence.   I  do  not  find  that  the  judge  acted   perversely   or
    irrationally.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the FtT does not disclose a  material  error  of  law.   The
appeal is dismissed.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 26th March 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal is dismissed.  There is no fee award.


Signed                              Date 26th March 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall
