
                                    [pic]

S-T

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10541/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated         |
|On 2 October 2018                     |On 10 October 2018                     |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FROOM


                                   Between

                                SAKAYARAJ [R]
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms V Laughton, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. The appellant appeals with the  permission  of  the  Upper  Tribunal
       against a  decision  of  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Welsh
       dismissing his appeal against a decision of the respondent, dated 26
       May 2017, refusing his protection claim.


    2. The appellant is an adult Sri Lankan national. He came to the UK  in
       April 2010 in order to study and he held valid leave  as  a  student
       until this was curtailed in February  2015.  In  September  2017  he
       claimed asylum.


    3. The appellant's account was, in summary,  as  follows.  He  said  he
       fears the government who were looking for  him  on  account  of  his
       involvement with the LTTE. He had become involved with the  LTTE  in
       2006 and  he  was  involved  in  transporting  goods  and  providing
       accommodation. He also carried out some banking and computing tasks.
       His problems began in 2006 when he was detained at a checkpoint.  He
       was questioned by the CID  who  told  him  that  they  knew  he  was
       involved with the LTTE. The appellant denied this and was beaten up.
       The appellant's release was secured by the payment of a  bribe  paid
       by his mother. After this experience an agent was found  to  arrange
       for his travel to India. He  went  to  India  in  January  2007  and
       remained there until he came to the UK. His family told him  it  was
       not safe return because the CID were  still  looking  for  him.  The
       appellant had joined the TGTE in July  2017  although  he  had  been
       involved with them for a year before that. He had  attended  various
       demonstrations and a sports event as a steward.


    4. Judge Welsh found the appellant had not given  a  credible  account.
       She did not accept he had been involved with the LTTE in  Sri  Lanka
       and therefore she did not accept that he had been arrested, detained
       or abused. She did not accept that the reason he went to  India  was
       to escape adverse attention and she did not  accept  the  reason  he
       came to the UK was similar. She did not accept that the  Sri  Lankan
       authorities continued to look for him. In relation to the sur  place
       activities, she found that his involvement was limited to  observing
       at a few events and acting as a steward at a sports meeting. He  had
       joined the TGTE but was a "passive member" and his decision to  join
       had not been motivated by genuine interest or commitment but  rather
       had been calculated to bolster his asylum claim.

    5. Permission to appeal was refused  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  but
       granted by the Upper Tribunal. It was arguable the judge  had  erred
       in relying on her own post  hearing  research  without  putting  the
       evidence to the parties. She also arguably erred in her approach  to
       the medical evidence. The grounds which could  be  argued  were  not
       restricted.

    6. No rule 24 response has been filed by the respondent.

    7. I heard submissions from the representatives as to whether the First-
       tier Tribunal Judge made an error of law in her decision.

    8. Ms Laughton made four points which are helpfully set  out  fully  in
       her skeleton argument. She prefaced her arguments by suggesting that
       the adverse credibility findings made by the judge,  when  analysed,
       were  either  peripheral  or  erroneous.  There  were  no  "knockout
       points". The judge acknowledged  that  the  account  given  was,  in
       general terms, plausible when set against the  background  evidence.
       Therefore,  if  the  decision  was  based  on  the  accumulation  of
       relatively small points, it followed that if some  of  those  points
       were found to be erroneous the decision would stand to be set aside.

    9. The first ground of appeal argues that the judge's approach  to  the
       medical evidence gave rise to two discrete errors of law. The  judge
       failed to consider the corroborative effect of the medical  evidence
       and she also failed to take it into consideration as a  factor  when
       assessing the appellant's evidence. I shall consider these arguments
       in turn but, before doing so, I shall set out the evidence which was
       before the judge and what she said about it.

   10. The appeal was heard on 13 February 2018.  The  judge  was  provided
       with a letter, dated 12 February 2018, written  by  the  appellant's
       family doctor, Dr Fernandes, and addressed to the appellant's  legal
       representatives. It stated that  he  had  met  the  appellant  on  9
       February 2018 and  reviewed  his  medical  problems.  The  appellant
       complained he was suffering from insomnia, bad dreams  and  feelings
       of guilt in relation to his mother who was  in  Sri  Lanka.  He  had
       described  anxiety  associated  with  sweating  at  night  and  this
       contributed  to  his  difficulty  sleeping.  He  had   been   taking
       citalopram for his  anxiety  and  depression.  However,  the  doctor
       advised that he change this to mirtazapine. He  also  suggested  the
       appellant contact psychological services and gave him an information
       leaflet. Some blood samples were taken in order to exclude  physical
       problems. Attached to the letter was  a  single  page  from  the  GP
       notes.

   11. The judge noted  the  medical  evidence  at  [35]  to  [37]  of  her
       decision. At [49] she returned  to  it  under  the  heading  of  her
       approach to the assessment of credibility and,  although  she  noted
       that the only evidence related to a visit to a GP over a year  after
       the interview and the appellant had not taken any  medication  prior
       to November 2017, she said that she kept in mind that the  appellant
       had told his interviewer that he was  suffering  from  psychological
       fear and worries. She said that, if his account were  true,  he  had
       suffered a terrible experience and this might be difficult  to  talk
       about. At [64] she concluded the medical evidence  did  not  provide
       any independent support  for  the  credibility  of  the  appellant's
       account.

   12. I have carefully considered the arguments put forward by Ms Laughton
       but I do not agree with her that  the  judge  applied  an  erroneous
       approach. It is not a fair criticism in this  case  to  suggest  the
       judge imposed her  own  expertise  over  that  of  the  doctor.  The
       evidence  was,  by  any  standards,  both  slim  in   quantity   and
       superficial in content and  the  judge  was  perfectly  entitled  to
       consider that  it  did  not  deserve  significant  weight.  She  was
       entitled to note that the appellant had not sought  treatment  until
       November 2017. The letter from Dr Fernandes was not  intended  as  a
       medico-legal report in which an expert's reasoned opinions  are  put
       forward by reference to the Istanbul Protocol criteria. It is  plain
       that Dr Fernandes accepted what the appellant  said  about  himself.
       There is nothing unusual about that. However, it is right to say, as
       the judge observed, that the evidence is "limited".

   13. I do not consider the judge erred by diminishing the  weight  to  be
       given to the report  simply  because  it  was  a  retelling  of  the
       appellant's evidence. Reference to cases such as Y and Z (Sri Lanka)
       v SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ 362 and AM v SSHD [2012] EWCA Civ 521 is  not
       instructive in  this  case  because,  as  said,  the  single  letter
       produced was not comparable to a medico-legal  report.  Nor  is  the
       general guidance on  reports  set  out  in  JL  (medical  reports  -
       credibility) China [2013] UKUT 00145 (IAC), relied on by Mr Tufan as
       well, particularly helpful because  that  case  was  also  based  on
       consideration of a report from the  Medical  Foundation.  The  judge
       recognised that the brief letter from Dr Fernandes, apparently based
       on an initial appointment, whilst consistent with what the appellant
       had told the interviewer about himself  and  his  fears,  could  not
       carry significant weight as corroboration for the reasons she gave.

   14. For similar reasons, I see no error  in  the  judge  failing  to  go
       further in  recognising  the  appellant's  mental  health  may  have
       affected his ability to answer questions.  Ms  Laughton  argued  the
       judge erred by not treating the appellant as a vulnerable witness in
       accordance with the Joint Presidential Guidance Note No 2  of  2010:
       Child, Vulnerable Adult and Sensitive Appellant Guidance.  I  reject
       that submission because, although  the  appellant's  representatives
       made a written request to that effect, the record of proceedings  of
       the oral case management review hearing suggests it was  not  raised
       by counsel. No  reasonable  adjustments  or  ground  rules  for  the
       hearing were discussed. That is entirely consistent  with  the  fact
       that, at the date of the case management review hearing,  there  was
       no medical evidence at all. The letter  from  Dr  Fernandes  is  not
       sufficient to show that Judge Welsh erred by failing  to  treat  the
       appellant as a vulnerable witness, particularly  as  this  does  not
       appear to have been suggested by counsel. There is no error  in  the
       manner in which the judge proceeded.

   15. Ms Laughton's second ground consists of a list of pieces of evidence
       which she said the judge had overlooked. She argued  the  judge  had
       not given sufficient consideration to the  evidence  such  that  her
       findings were unsafe. These arguments amount  to  little  more  than
       disagreement with the decision and an attempt to reargue it. Read as
       a whole, it is perfectly clear that this judge had close  regard  to
       the evidence before her, understood the case and made findings based
       on the evidence. It is a thorough and logically reasoned decision.

   16. It is  argued  the  judge  ignored  the  explanation  given  by  the
       appellant at his interview of his reasons for supporting the aims of
       the LTTE. I have looked at questions  39  to  42  of  the  interview
       transcript. It is correct  that  the  appellant  explained  that  he
       supported the Tamil cause  but  did  not  want  to  join  the  LTTE.
       However, the judge's point was that this might not be sufficient  to
       lead to the LTTE to try to recruit him, as he claimed.  The  judge's
       reasoning here may not be the strongest  but  it  is  certainly  not
       eroded by the challenge as put forward.

   17. Arguments that the judge erred at [55] by placing reliance  on  what
       the appellant  failed  to  say  at  his  interview  about  providing
       accommodation to the LTTE and  in  so  doing  the  judge  failed  to
       recognise that the interview was led by the interviewing officer  do
       not get very far  given  the  appellant  appears  to  have  had  the
       opportunity to give lengthy answers if he wanted to.  Moreover,  the
       judge relied mainly on the points set out in [54] that the appellant
       failed to mention until prompted important things which he had  said
       at the screening interview.

   18. The challenge to the judge's reliance on the appellant's failure  to
       mention being  released  by  means  of  a  bribe  at  the  screening
       interview is also without merit.  The  judge  expressly  noted  that
       comparisons with the screening interview record should be dealt with
       cautiously  because  of  the  "brief  nature  of   the   preliminary
       interview". Furthermore, the judge's point was not simply  that  the
       appellant had not mentioned the bribe  before  but  that  the  later
       account and the earlier account were, in her view, incompatible.

   19. At [59] the judge noted the appellant travelled to  India  and  then
       the UK, after transiting in Sri Lanka,  without  being  apprehended.
       The grounds  seize  on  this  as  the  judge  ignoring  the  country
       guidance,  which  explained  that  the  prevalence  of  bribery  and
       corruption meant that leaving Sri Lanka without difficulty  was  not
       probative of a lack of adverse interest (see GJ  and  Others  (post-
       civil war: returnees) Sri Lanka  CG  [2013]  UKUT  00319  (IAC),  at
       paragraph 170). However,  the  ensuing  paragraphs  of  the  judge's
       decision show she was fully cognisant of the  point  but  had  other
       reasons for doubting the appellant's account. The argument is simply
       not made out.

   20. The last matter concerns the judge's finding  that  the  appellant's
       involvement with the TGTE was not based on  genuine  commitment  and
       was passive. Ms Laughton queried what was meant by 'passive'  but  I
       consider it clear that the judge had in mind someone  who  would  be
       perceived as  a  mere  'hanger-on'  by  any  interested  person,  as
       described by Sedley LJ in YB (Eritrea)  [2008]  EWCA  Civ  360  (see
       paragraph 18). The grounds suggest the judge failed to  have  regard
       to the appellant's evidence in his witness statement that he  wanted
       to help the Tamil cause. However, it is plain the  judge  recognised
       what the appellant's case was because she rejected it.  Her  reasons
       for doing so are cogent and fully explained in [66].


   21. The third ground is the main one on which UTJ Kekic' granted  leave.
       At [63] the judge considered and rejected  the  appellant's  account
       that he left India in 2010 because he was told by  the  police  that
       all Sri Lankans had to leave. At subparagraph 63(3)  the  judge  set
       out the results of her consideration of the respondent's  2010  COIR
       report. This information  appeared  to  contradict  the  appellant's
       account because the UNHCR report  showed  that  many  refugees  were
       returning voluntarily to Sri Lanka and a few were still arriving  in
       India. Thousands remained in India.

   22. In the Presidential decision in EG (post-hearing internet  research)
       Nigeria [2008] UKAIT 00015, Hodge J said as follows:

         "5. It is, however, most unwise for a judge to conduct post-hearing
         research, on the internet or otherwise,  into  the  factual  issues
         which have to be decided in a case.  Decisions  on  factual  issues
         should be made on the basis of the evidence presented on behalf  of
         the parties and such additional evidence as the parties  are  aware
         of as being before the judge.  To conduct post-hearing research  on
         the internet and to  base  conclusions  on  that  research  without
         giving the parties the opportunity to comment on it is  wrong.   If
         such research is conducted, and this determination gives absolutely
         no encouragement to such a  process,  where  an  immigration  judge
         considers the research may  or  will  affect  the  decision  to  be
         reached, then it will be the judge's duty to reconvene the  hearing
         and supply copies to the parties, in order that the parties can  be
         invited to make such submissions as they might have on it."


   23. Ms Laughton argued the judge had fallen squarely  into  this  error.
       The point had not been taken against the appellant  in  the  reasons
       for refusal letter. Neither party had submitted the 2010 COIR report
       and no opportunity was given to the parties to comment on  it.  This
       was "grossly  unfair"  (referring  to  Schiemann  LJ's  judgment  in
       Maheshwaran [2002] EWCA Civ 173).


   24. The challenge is a powerful one as far as it goes. Mr Tufan  rightly
       acknowledged that a judge should  not  rely  on  her  post  decision
       research to make an adverse credibility finding.  It  is  a  classic
       error. However, despite this, I do not consider it is enough to  set
       aside the decision. That is because it is only one item on a list of
       three reasons given by the judge at [63] for finding that this  part
       of the appellant's account lacked credibility. Her other two reasons
       (that the appellant was in India legitimately in order to study, not
       as a refugee, and, that nothing in the background evidence which had
       been submitted supported the appellant's evidence) are  sound  ones.
       The second reason shows that there was evidence before  her  on  the
       issue of returns from India. In other words, the issue  was  already
       in the contemplation of the parties.

   25. It is also right to see this finding in the context of the preceding
       paragraph in which the judge found the appellant's account of  being
       unable to fly directly to the UK from India doubtful.

   26. I find the judge made an  error  of  law  in  relying  on  her  post
       decision research but, in the particular circumstances of the  case,
       it has not been shown that the error was a material one in that  the
       outcome of the appeal might have been different had  the  judge  not
       erred.

   27. The final ground challenges the judge's treatment of  the  issue  of
       the risk on return arising from the appellant's sur place activities
       with the TGTE. She found at [73] that he  was  a  mere  observer  at
       three events and a volunteer steward at a fourth. Even  if  observed
       by the Sri Lankan authorities, these activities were not  indicative
       of someone who was a threat to the integrity of Sri Lanka,  which  I
       take to be an intended reference to the country  guidance  given  at
       paragraphs 336 and 354 of GJ and Others (post-civil war:  returnees)
       Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC). The judge gave cogent  reasons
       for regarding his membership as passive in [66] of her decision.

   28. Ms Laughton's challenge was that the judge misunderstood  the  Court
       of Appeal's decision in UB (Sri Lanka) v SSHD [2017]  EWCA  Civ  85.
       She erred because she failed to have regard to the evidence set  out
       in that case.

   29. In UB (Sri Lanka) the Court of Appeal considered  the  duty  of  the
       respondent to have disclosed to the tribunal her own policy guidance
       document (a COI report  entitled  Tamil  Separatism,  issued  on  28
       August 2014), to which were annexed letters from  the  British  High
       Commission in Sri Lanka. Those letters stated that the  TGTE  was  a
       proscribed organisation and that government sources had stated  that
       individuals belonging to that organisation would face  arrest  under
       anti-terrorism laws. There had been no arrests to date but returnees
       may be questioned on arrival about involvement  with  such  diaspora
       groups. This was "normal practice". A returnee may be detained after
       questioning. The court found there was "the clearest obligation"  on
       the respondent to serve relevant material and ensure it  was  before
       the tribunal. It was not sufficient to say  that  the  material  was
       available online.

   30. The issue in this appeal was the consequence for  the  appellant  of
       being  questioned  on  arrival  about   diaspora   activities   and,
       specifically,  activities  with  a  proscribed  organisation   which
       expressly seeks Tamil independence. He could not be expected to  lie
       when questioned (RT (Zimbabwe) [2012] UKSC 38).

   31. The judge's decision  contains  a  very  clear  recognition  of  the
       argument being mounted, set out at [73]  to  [75].  However,  having
       found for reasons which are not  successfully  challenged  that  the
       appellant was merely a passive member, she found the appellant  fell
       within the category of persons described in paragraph  24  of  Irwin
       LJ's judgment in which he gave  reasons  for  finding  the  evidence
       which had not been disclosed was material. He said as follows:

         "24. In truth, consideration of the risk to the Appellant turns not
         merely on him showing that he was actually a member  of  the  TGTE,
         but relies on his membership  being  detected  on  arrival  in  Sri
         Lanka. There is no suggestion that this Appellant is on any list of
         individuals of interest  to  the  authorities  in  Sri  Lanka.  The
         objective findings by the FTT are clear that any  activity  by  the
         Appellant in this country, even if observed or  recorded,  was  low
         level and not likely to carry risks. That activity itself would not
         demonstrate membership of the TGTE. In addition, I bear in mind the
         very clear findings that the  Appellant  lied  and  exaggerated  in
         alleging mistreatment during his last visit to Sri Lanka, and  thus
         his credibility is low."

   32.  Ms  Laughton  pointed  out  that  the  Court   of   Appeal   found,
       notwithstanding  these  reservations,  that  a   different   outcome
       remained a possibility and therefore allowed  the  appeal,  quashing
       the tribunal's decision. No findings had been made by the First-tier
       Tribunal about whether the appellant in that case was  a  member  of
       the TGTE (although it was found he had undertaken  military  service
       with the LTTE). The issue of materiality was distinct from  guidance
       as to risk factors.


   33. However, on my reading of the case, it is plain that the  court  was
       intending to show that mere membership of the TGTE  was  not  always
       enough to show a real risk on return and, therefore, I  consider  it
       was open to the judge to regard the appellant as  falling  within  a
       category of TGTE members who were not at risk.

   34. In any event, I note that the judge went on to consider the position
       in case she was wrong about the appellant not being on a watch list.
       She found that the RT (Zimbabwe) argument would  not  apply  because
       the appellant had nothing to lie about (see [77]).

   35. The fourth ground does not disclose a material error of law either.


   36. There are no other grounds. The appellant's appeal is dismissed.


NOTICE OF DECISION

     The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal did not make a material  error  of
    law and her decision dismissing the appeal shall stand.


Signed                                  Date 3 October 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Froom
