
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10099/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 8 December 2020                            |On 3 March 2021               |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT


                                   Between

                                    a q a
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Ali, Counsel, instructed by Maliks and Khan
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008
Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

 1. This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Robertson issued on 23  January  2020  which  refused  the  appellant's
    asylum and human  rights  claim  brought  against  a  decision  of  the
    respondent dated 8 August 2019.

 2. The appellant is a national of Bangladesh and was born in 1980.

Immigration History

 3. The appellant maintains that he arrived in the UK  illegally  in  March
    2005.  He  was  encountered  working  illegally  by   the   immigration
    authorities and arrested on 14 October 2006, at which point he  claimed
    asylum.  His application was refused on 22 November 2006 and he did not
    appeal that decision.

 4. On 23 September 2009 the appellant applied for leave to remain on human
    rights grounds. That  application  was  refused  on  14  January  2010.
    Further submissions made on 26 September 2013 were  refused  on  1  May
    2015.

 5. Further submissions made on 18 August 2015 were refused on  13  October
    2015. The appellant lodged a judicial review against the decision of 13
    October 2015 which led to a new decision refusing leave on 21  November
    2016 affording an in country right of appeal.  The  appellant  appealed
    the decision of 21 November 2016 but his appeal was refused  by  First-
    tier  Tribunal  Judge  Thomas  on  26  January  2018.   The   appellant
    challenged the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal. In a decision dated 11 May 2018, Deputy Upper Tribunal  Judge
    Hall found an error of law in the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal,
    set it aside and  remade  the  decision  refusing  the  appeal  on  all
    grounds. The appellant became appeal rights exhausted  on  18  November
    2018.

 6. The appellant made further submissions  on  18  June  2019  which  were
    refused on 18 August 2019. The appellant again appealed  that  refusal.
    His appeal was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Robertson in  the
    decision dated 23 January 2020 which is under challenge here.

Asylum Claim

 7. The appellant maintains that he  was  a  supporter  of  the  Bangladesh
    Jatiya Party (BJP) from 2000, that he became a member and then that  he
    became secretary of the Biswanath Department of  the  party  from  2001
    onwards.  As result of his activities, he was attacked on two occasions
    in 2004 and he reported both incidents to the police.  He was also  the
    subject of a false allegation or "ghost case" which was  filed  against
    him on 8 June 2008 even though, by that time, he had been in the UK for
    4 years. The appellant also maintains that the false allegation led  to
    an arrest warrant being issued against him  on  10  February  2009.  He
    submits that he will be targeted on return because the "ghost" case and
    arrest warrant are outstanding and the BJP and other opposition parties
    are being threatened and harassed  by  the  ruling  Awami  League  (AL)
    party. He also maintains that he is at  risk  from  another  opposition
    party, the Bangladesh National Party (BNP).

First-tier Tribunal Decision

 8. It was common ground before First-tier Tribunal Robertson that positive
    findings from the decision dated 11 May 2018 of Deputy  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Hall remained extant. The  preserved  findings  are  set  out  in
    paragraph 3 of the decision of Judge Hall:

         "3.  The FTT accepted that  the  Appellant  had  given  a  credible
             account and made factual findings at  paragraphs  22-29  which
             are summarised below;

               a) The Appellant held the position of  general  secretary  of
                  the BJP Party in his home area of Biswanath from  2001  to
                  2004.




               b) The Appellant was the victim of two attacks in  Bangladesh
                  which  occurred  in  October  and  November  2004.   These
                  attacks were carried out by  local members of the BNP  and
                  Awami League.




               c) Documentary evidence produced by the Appellant,  which  he
                  received from Bangladesh, was reliable.


               d) After the Appellant's departure from Bangladesh his family
                  were made the subject of false charges  which  were  found
                  not proven by the Judicial Magistrate.


               e) An arrest warrant has been issued  for  the  Appellant  in
                  Bangladesh.


               f) The Appellant has not had any political  involvement  with
                  the BJP or otherwise since he left Bangladesh in 2005  and
                  has not continued his political activities in the UK.


               g) The Appellant's credibility was damaged with reference  to
                  Section 8 of the  Asylum  and  Immigration  (Treatment  of
                  Claimant's, etc.) Act 2004 as he entered the UK  illegally
                  using a false passport and did not seek to regularise  his
                  immigration status for  nineteen  months,  and  only  then
                  after  he  was  detained  for  working  illegally.    This
                  behaviour weighs against the Appellant's  credibility  but
                  is not fatal to his appeal.


               h) The Appellant suffered persecution and serious harm in his
                  home area of Biswanath."

 9. Before First-tier Tribunal Judge  Robertson  the  appellant  maintained
    that Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hall had erred in other parts  of  his
    decision, however, such  that  it  should  be  distinguished  following
    Devaseelan (Second Appeals, ECHR, Extra-Territorial Effect) Sri Lanka *
    [2002] UKIAT 00702 and the appeal allowed.

10. The appellant maintained that Judge Hall erred when  finding  that  the
    arrest warrant was issued by the BNP who, by the time  of  the  hearing
    before Judge Hall, were in opposition and found not to be in a position
    to continue a false prosecution against the appellant. The  appellant's
    evidence before Judge Hall had been that opposition party  members  had
    issued the arrest warrant rather than  referring  specifically  to  the
    BNP.  Also, Judge Hall had failed to address correctly the fact of  the
    arrest warrant being issued by the AL who were in power at the time  of
    the hearing before him.

11. Judge Robertson referred to this point in paragraph 18 of her  decision
    and set out in paragraphs 32 to 45 why it was  not  accepted.  Firstly,
    Judge Hall's decision had not been subject to a successful challenge to
    the Court of Appeal on that or any other basis. His findings  therefore
    remained the starting point for Judge Robertson  unless  something  new
    was provided forming a basis on which they could be distinguished;  see
    paragraph 33.

12. Secondly, Judge Hall had not found that the arrest warrant  was  issued
    by the BNP but had stated that the complaint or "ghost" case  that  led
    to the arrest warrant was issued by the BNP. That was  correct  on  the
    basis of the  appellant's  evidence  that  had  been  before  him;  see
    paragraph 34.

13. Thirdly, Judge Robertson set out in paragraphs 35 and 36 why she  found
    that Judge Hall's findings on insufficient risk arising from the arrest
    warrant being issued by the AL were not shown to  be  unsound  or  that
    they should be distinguished.

14. Fourthly, Judge Robertson set out in paragraphs 41 to 49  why  she  did
    not find that the expert report showed that the findings of Judge  Hall
    on there being  no  risk  on  return  should  be  distinguished.  Judge
    Robertson said this in paragraphs 42 to 47:

         "42.  Mr  Mahbub  was  specifically  instructed  to  consider   the
             Appellant's risk on return.  However, he did not  refer  to  a
             single specific case of a false or 'ghost'  case  being  filed
             and maintained against a BJP member.  Whilst opposition  party
             members may be at risk, and the terms is used to indicate  all
             opposition party members, those who appear to be targeted  are
             BNP and Jamaat-e-Islami Bangladesh  (JI)  members.   There  is
             little reference in the CPIN to violence against BJP  members.
             For example, it is stated at page 279  of  AB  at  para  6.1.9
             that:

                  'AL members and activists have  also  reportedly  extorted
                  BNP business owners in rural areas, threatening them  with
                  violence if they fail to comply with  demands  for  money.
                  DFAT understands that JI members are  generally  subjected
                  to greater levels  of  harassment  and  intimidation  than
                  members of the BNP.   According  to  the  Internal  Crises
                  Group  the  AL  pressured  Jatiya   Party   leaders   into
                  contesting  general  elections  in  2014  to  create   the
                  appearance of a competitive contest.'

         43.  Apart from the instances listed above, DFAT is  not  aware  of
             any other, credible reports  of  authorities  hassling  Jatiya
             Party members or relatives and associates of Jatiya,  BNP  and
             JI members. Violence  during  election  times  appears  to  be
             between AL, BNP and JI members (see p281 of AB,  at  paragraph
             8.2.1).

         44.  I have considered the evidence at pp 174 - 257 of AB, and this
             evidence in general, in relation to human rights abuses by the
             authorities against human rights activists.  Mr  Ali  did  not
             refer to action taken by the AL against BJP members as set out
             in this  background  evidence.   I  note  that  there  is  one
             reference to a  false  or  'ghost'  case  against  Maniru  Huq
             Chowdhury, the coordinator of the Jatiya Oikya Front,  but  no
             reference to any false cases against BJP members.

         45.  On the evidence before me, I find that it is  not  established
             that there is a  reasonable  degree  of  likelihood  that  the
             current government in Bangladesh will actively pursue a  false
             case against the Appellant on his return to Bangladesh.  In so
             deciding, I have considered the expert report  but  find  that
             (i) there is little support within it for any  assertion  that
             the AL actively pursue false cases against  BJP  members:  and
             (ii) there is very little by way  of  specific  'ghost'  cases
             against members of the BJP.  There is some  useful  background
             in the second report (dated 29 May 2019, at pp 23 - 60 of  AB)
             at  paras  18  -  23  regarding  the  BJP,  but  much  of  the
             information regarding arrests and mistreatment  and  false  or
             'ghost' cases related  to  BNP,  Jatiya  Oikya  Front  and  JI
             members (see paras 43 - 53 and 59 - 62 of the expert  report).
             There is reference within the  report  to  "the  BJP's  recent
             uncompromising stance against the ruling party" increasing the
             chances of the Appellant and fellow party  men  being  singled
             out but there is little within the report that highlights  how
             this 'uncompromising stance' is evidenced or the singling  out
             of BJP members as a result.  I bear in mind that  the  purpose
             of the report  was  to  provide  clarity  on  the  Appellant's
             position on return.  As such, I find that if there had in fact
             been any evidence which directly supported the assertion  that
             the AL would target a former BJP member on  return,  it  would
             have been provided within the body of the report.  I therefore
             find  that  whilst  the   expert   has   the   expertise   and
             qualifications to provide an opinion, in this case his opinion
             is not transparently linked to the information provided within
             the  body  of  his  report  and  therefore  I  cannot   attach
             significant weight to it.  I therefore attach some  weight  to
             it but it does not add significantly to the Appellant's  case.
             This, I find, does not go behind any concession in the  RL  at
             paras 12 - 17.

         46.  I find that I cannot go behind the findings of the UT Judge as
             to risk on return from the AL as set out above at para 35.  It
             therefore follows that the assertion  set  out  in  the  fresh
             submissions (that is, that the UT Judge, having found that  if
             the Appellant was  arrested,  he  would  be  detained,  should
             simply have found that internal relocation was not  an  option
             as it was the AL that the Appellant feared  and  they  are  in
             government) is not made out.

         47.  Mr Ali submitted that to hold that the Appellant would not  be
             at risk on return is to go against  the  positive  credibility
             findings made by the FTT.  This is  obviously  not  the  case.
             The UT Judge's decision that the Appellant  would  not  be  at
             risk on return was made against the backdrop of  the  positive
             credibility findings made by the FTT, which the Judge set  out
             in detail.  It is possible to hold that there  was  past  ill-
             treatment but that there is no reasonable degree of likelihood
             that this would be repeated on  return  provided  reasons  are
             given for so finding.  I remind myself that an application for
             permission  to  appeal  against  the  UT  decision   was   not
             successful."

    The references to "DFAT" are to a report of the Department for  Foreign
    Affairs and Trade of Australia





Grounds

15. The first  ground  maintains  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  took  an
    incorrect approach to the expert evidence. The judge applied too high a
    standard when looking at the expert report and finding it  insufficient
    because there were no details of specific difficulties for BJP members.
    It was not disputed that the expert report and country evidence  showed
    mistreatment of the "opposition" by the AL. This included the BJP.  The
    respondent used the term "opposition" BJP in  her  own  Country  Policy
    Information Note issued in January 2018  to  refer  to  harassment  and
    mistreatment of "all  opposition".  Specific  examples  would  be  more
    likely to concern the BNP which was a much larger party than  the  BJP.
    The expert's report set out in paragraph 21 that the BJP had  contested
    the 2001, 2008 and 2018  general  elections  as  part  of  the  BNP-led
    alliance. This showed that the BJP would be associated in the minds  of
    the AL with the BNP.

16. Further, the expert report set out that the BJP profile  in  opposition
    had been raised by the party withdrawing  from  the  BNP  led  alliance
    because it did not feel that the BNP were sufficiently  strong  in  its
    opposition to the AL. The expert stated in paragraph 23 that:

         "The BJP's opposition to the government is so strong  that  it  has
         severed ties with the BNP as it felt  the  BNP  was  appeasing  the
         government by  withdrawing  its  boycott  of  the  recent  election
         results."

    The expert also referred to the 'BJP's recent, uncompromising  position
    against the ruling party' in paragraph 87 of the report.

17. The second ground maintained that the  First-tier  Tribunal  failed  to
    address the appellant's claim that he was also at risk on  return  from
    the BNP.

Discussion

18. It is not my view that First-tier Tribunal Judge Robertson erred in her
    approach to the expert evidence. As she noted in paragraph  45  of  her
    decision, the expert report did refer to members  of  specific  parties
    other than  just  the  BNP  being  subject  to  false  allegations  and
    mistreatment but there was almost no information about mistreatment  of
    BJP members. Where that was so  she  was  entitled  to  find  that  the
    absence of specific references to BJP members facing  difficulties  was
    significant. In the same paragraph she specifically considered the fact
    of the BJP having left the BNP Alliance and was entitled to  find  that
    the expert report did  not  provide  examples  that  this  had  led  to
    specific difficulties for BJP members. As Judge Robertson  pointed  out
    in paragraph 45, the purpose of the expert report was to show why Judge
    Hall's decision on the appellant's profile being insufficient to show a
    risk on return should be distinguished. Where the expert report did not
    set out details of specific difficulties for members of  the  BJP,  she
    was entitled to find that the report was not sufficient  to  show  that
    Judge Hall's findings should be distinguished and that it did not  show
    a risk on return for the appellant.

19. For these reasons, I concluded that First-tier Tribunal Judge Robertson
    took a lawful approach to the expert evidence. Judge Robertson was also
    correct to take into account the  extant  findings  from  the  previous
    appeal, that the appellant was a low-level member of the BJP,  that  he
    had been absent for many years, and that his family were  also  subject
    to  false  allegations  but  had  been  able   to   defend   themselves
    successfully before a  magistrate  with  there  being  no  evidence  of
    mistreatment during or as a result of those proceedings; see paragraphs
    49 to 53.

20. I also did not find that the First-tier Tribunal made a material  error
    of law in failing to make a specific finding on the  appellant's  claim
    that he would be at risk on return from the BNP.  The  basis  for  this
    claim is that the BNP brought a false complaint against  the  appellant
    in 2008 at a time when they were in power. It will be evident from  the
    discussion above that the BNP are no longer in power in Bangladesh. The
    country evidence showed, rather than the BNP acting  against  the  BJP,
    that the parties were in an alliance for some years.  Nothing  was  put
    forward showing that the decision of the BJP to leave the alliance  had
    led to mistreatment of BJP members by the BNP. The expert  report  says
    nothing on this aspect  of  the  appellant's  claim.  In  my  judgment,
    therefore, there was simply no material before the First-tier  Tribunal
    showing that the appellant would be at risk from the BNP on return  and
    it is not an issue that appears to have  been  argued  with  any  force
    before the First-tier Tribunal. No error arises where  this  aspect  of
    the claim could not succeed on the basis of what was before the  First-
    tier Tribunal.

21. For these reasons, I do not find that there is an error of law  in  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

22. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not disclose an error on a
    point of law and shall stand.


Signed:  S  Pitt                                         Date:  21  February
    2021
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt



