
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10416/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                  |Determination & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 2nd August 2019                   |On 27th August 2019                  |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                 NOREEN [A]
                       (ANONYMITY direction not MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs U. Sood (Counsel), Allied Law Chambers
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D. Mills (Senior HOPO)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge James, promulgated on 15th November 2018, following a hearing  at
    Birmingham on 25th September 2018.  In  the  determination,  the  judge
    allowed the appeal of the Appellant on  Article  8  ECHR  grounds,  but
    rejected it on asylum and humanitarian  grounds,  following  which  the
    Respondent Secretary of State made an application for, and was granted,
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal, and thus the  matter  comes
    before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan, born on 8th April 1976, and  is
    a  female.   She  appealed  against  the  decision  of  the  Respondent
    Secretary of State, dated 6th  August  2018,  refusing  her  claim  for
    asylum and for humanitarian protection.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The essence of the Appellant's claim is that  she  has  a  well-founded
    fear of persecution on the basis of being  a  member  of  a  particular
    social group, namely, a woman, in that  she  would  be  killed  by  her
    family members on  return  to  Pakistan,  upon  whom  she  has  brought
    dishonour by marrying outside her caste.  The claim  was  an  extensive
    and elaborate one.

The Judge's Determination

 4. The judge rejected the asylum claim.  As she explained,  the  Appellant
    had "provided an extensive and complicated narrative".  The judge noted
    that the principal assertion from the Appellant was that "she  will  be
    subject to honour crimes on her return to Pakistan", and her "secondary
    assertion is that her return to Pakistan would breach her rights  under
    the ECHR" (paragraph 27).  The judge held that, "at first view it reads
    like a soap opera, but I have noted the Appellant has provided a  great
    deal of detail that would not usually be found had the  narrative  been
    entirely fictional" (paragraph 28).  Nevertheless, the judge went on to
    say that "while these claims were raised during  her  asylum  interview
    the Appellant has  not  referred  to  them  in  her  asylum  statement"
    (paragraph 34).

 5. In the end, the judge held that, "I do not find her to be credible" and
    moreover the judge noted that the Appellant had provided "no reasonable
    explanation why she did not claim asylum on arrival in the UK  in  2006
    if her circumstances were  as  bad  as  she  claimed"  (paragraph  34).
    Indeed, the judge went on to say that the Appellant accepted that  "she
    is not a refugee" and that looking at the evidence in  the  round,  the
    judge was satisfied that "the Appellant has not shown  that  there  are
    substantial grounds for believing that, if returned, she would  face  a
    real risk of suffering serious harm ..." (paragraph 35).  The claim was
    rejected also on human  rights  grounds  as  well  as  on  humanitarian
    protection grounds.

 6. Where the judge did  allow  the  Appellant's  claim,  however,  was  on
    Article 8 grounds.  The judge observed that the Appellant's husband was
    a person who was born and brought up in the UK.   He  was  a  full-time
    employee for a cleaning company and he held a position of  distribution
    manager on site.  He had worked for this company for more  than  twenty
    years.  He was a homeowner for  more  than  twenty  years.   He  was  a
    British national.  Indeed, the whole of his immediate family  lived  in
    the UK.  The judge observed  that  "his  primary  language  is  English
    although he can speak a little Patwari" and  that  "he  can  understand
    Urdu but cannot speak it".  In his witness statement,  the  Appellant's
    husband "tells me that he has never lived in Pakistan although  he  has
    made four visits - the first being in 2002".  His  last  visit  was  in
    2016.  He  had  visited  his  grandparents'  graveside.   He  had  been
    providing care and support for his mother but  not  of  the  kind  that
    could not be supplied by other persons.   (Paragraph  37).   The  judge
    concluded that,

         "I am satisfied that that he is  to  all  intents  and  purposes  a
         British person both legally and socially.  He has  known  no  other
         country apart from brief visits.  His whole immediate family  lives
         in the UK and would not be able to provide him with direct  support
         on return to Pakistan.  He has some language skills  but  they  are
         limited.  I accept that it is unlikely that he  would  be  able  to
         rely upon any support from the Appellant's family." (Paragraph 38).

 7. The appeal was allowed.

Grounds of Application

 8. The Grounds of Appeal from the  Respondent  Secretary  of  State,  were
    described by the First-tier Tribunal which granted permission, as being
    "unnecessarily long".  Essentially what this said was that there was  a
    lack of adequate reasoning for the conclusion  as  to  the  significant
    obstacles that the  Appellant's  husband  would  face  upon  having  to
    relocate to Pakistan.  There was also inconsistency  with  the  adverse
    credibility findings made in  relation  to  the  Appellant's  evidence.
    Moreover, there was a failure to apply the appropriately high threshold
    to significant obstacles.   The  judge  had  also  failed  to  consider
    Article 8 in the round in the context of Section 117B.

 9. On 11th December 2018 permission to appeal was granted.  Two  essential
    reasons were given for the grant of permission.   First,  there  was  a
    finding about the husband's inability to speak Urdu, or to continue his
    current employment remotely from Pakistan, and this was held to  amount
    to very significant obstacles which could  not  be  overcome.   It  was
    arguable that this was an  error.   Second,  the  judge  erred  in  not
    considering Section  117B,  and  the  public  interest  in  immigration
    control, in particular the fact that  the  Appellant  and  her  husband
    married Islamically during the  period  when  she  was  in  the  United
    Kingdom unlawfully.

Preliminary Matters

10. A preliminary issue that arose at the hearing on 2nd August  2019,  was
    the submission of a Rule 24 response by Mrs Sood,  which  purported  to
    resurrect  before  this  Tribunal  issues  that  either  had  not  been
    previously considered, or had been considered in  the  Hearing  by  the
    judge below, but in relation to which there had been no appeal from the
    Appellant herself.  For example, what the Rule 24 response  stated  was
    that the judge had failed  to  consider  the  impact  of  honour  based
    violence on the Appellant from her  first  forced  marriage.   This  is
    because she had earlier  married  and  it  was  likely  that  the  non-
    recognition of the "Khula" (Islamic female divorce), together with  her
    Sharia - illicit cohabitation  with  the  Sponsor,  since  her  Islamic
    marriage to him in January 2015, would expose her to risk in  a  manner
    that humanitarian protection ought to have been granted to her.

11. Secondly, the judge had simply failed to set out  the  details  of  the
    oral evidence, which was the Appellant's unchallenged  testimony,  that
    she had undergone  multiple  miscarriages,  and  that  the  couple  was
    seeking advice from the NHS so that she could conceive.  The  Appellant
    was age 43 and her husband was age 47.  Time was running out for  them.
    The matter had been raised during the asylum process (see question  73)
    and yet it had not been dealt with.  Mrs Sood, as Counsel,  had  relied
    upon this in her submissions on Article  8  and  12  before  the  judge
    below.

12. Mr Mills submitted that this was an argument that ought  to  have  been
    raised by way of an appeal after the decision of Judge  James  on  15th
    November 2018.  Instead, it had not  been  raised  within  a  month  as
    required by the Rules, but was raised more than six  months  after  the
    original decision.  It ought to have been lodged on 11th  January  2019
    as an appeal.  Instead today seven months after  the  decision  it  was
    being raised in oral submissions before this Tribunal today.

13. Mrs Sood submitted that she had on her part acted  as  quickly  as  she
    could but she had not been instructed earlier in this regard, but  that
    in any event, the Rule 24 response had been sent in by 20th July  2019,
    which was more than a month ago before this hearing.  Both sides placed
    reliance upon the case of Smith [2019] UKUT 216 (IAT) which deals  with
    the ability  of  this  Tribunal  to  indeed  consider  arguments  that,
    although properly  speaking  the  subject  of  an  appeal  before  this
    Tribunal, were being raised for the first time by  way  of  a  Rule  24
    response.

14. I reserved the matter to the end of the hearing.  Having done so, I can
    give my decision on this as follows.  I reject the application  by  Mrs
    Sood, although it is well-presented and made, that the Rule 24 response
    should be allowed to resurrect issues that ought to have been raised by
    way of an appeal.  There are two reasons for this.  The first reason is
    simply the inordinate delay.  Even if I accept  Mrs  Sood's  submission
    that the Rule 24 response had gone on 20th July 2019,  this  was  still
    some five months after it ought to have gone in on 11th  January  2019.
    In any event, there is no proper reason for the delay in  this  regard.
    Second, the matters that are now being raised  had  indeed  been  dealt
    with by the judge, in a  proper  and  way.   Insofar  as  there  is  an
    argument that the Appellant would be subject to an "honour crime" it is
    not the case that this was neglected by the judge.  As the  judge  made
    clear "the principle assertion from the Appellant is that she  will  be
    subject to honour crimes on her return  to  Pakistan"  (paragraph  27).
    The judge had not found the Appellant to be a credible witness in  this
    regard (see paragraphs 34 to 35).  Insofar as there is an argument that
    the  Appellant  was  undergoing  IVF  treatment  and  there  had   been
    considerable difficulties, even if this had  not  been  considered,  it
    would not amount to a material error of law on the part of  the  judge.
    The issue was considered in Agyarko [2017] UKSC 11,  as  Mr  Mills  has
    helpfully pointed out.  In any event, the judge had  used  a  different
    basis for the objection of the claim.   The  inclusion  of  this  claim
    would not have made any difference to the eventual decision.

15. In the judgment in Smith [2019] it was made clear that:

         "There  is  no  jurisdictional  fetter  on   the   Upper   Tribunal
         entertaining an application for permission to appeal,  even  though
         the First-tier Tribunal has not refused (wholly or partly)  or  has
         not refused to admit, an application for permission to appeal  made
         to that Tribunal ..." (paragraph 51).

16. The Tribunal referred to the case of Ved [2014]  UKUT  150,  where  the
    Upper Tribunal had held that:

         "the existence of Rule 7(2)(a) is not in any way to be regarded  as
         excusing Appellants from first applying to the First-tier  Tribunal
         for permission to appeal, before approaching  the  Upper  Tribunal.
         Indeed, we cannot envisage a situation  where  the  Upper  Tribunal
         would be likely to accept an  application  for  permission  from  a
         party to proceedings in the First-tier Tribunal who has chosen  not
         to make any prior application to that Tribunal, whether or not such
         an application would be out of time.  The same is likely to be true
         where  no  such  prior  application  is  made,  as  a   result   of
         inadvertence."  (Paragraph 25).

17. In the case of Smith this year, the Tribunal went on to say that,

         "The Upper Tribunal is very unlikely to be sympathetic to a request
         that it should invoke Rule 7(2)(a), where a person  who  could  and
         should have applied for permission  to  appeal  to  the  First-tier
         Tribunal  against  an  adverse  decision  of  that  body  seeks  to
         challenge that adverse decision only after the other party has been
         given permission  to  appeal  against  the  decision  in  the  same
         proceedings which was in favour of  the  first  mentioned  person."
         (Paragraph 54).

    This is indeed the situation here.  Indeed, for the reasons that I have
    given above the application made by Mrs Sood falls for a refusal in any
    event.

Submissions

18. In his  appeal  before  me,  Mr  Mills,  appearing  on  behalf  of  the
    Respondent Secretary of State, submitted that the judge had  failed  to
    provide a reasoned basis for why the Appellant's husband, who was  said
    not to be able to  speak  Urdu  but  could  understand  it,  could  not
    relocate to Pakistan if he had to.  The judge's  determination  of  the
    Article 8  issues  simply  accepted  the  narrative  presented  by  the
    Appellant and her husband  at  paragraph  37  without  setting  out  to
    explain why, on  those  facts,  there  would  be  "very  insurmountable
    obstacles".  This being so, the eventual conclusion (at  paragraph  39)
    that, "I conclude  that  the  Appellant  and  Mr  Banharas  would  face
    insurmountable obstacles to enjoying their family life in Pakistan" was
    irrational.

19. For her part, Mrs Sood submitted that the judge had accepted  that  the
    Appellant and her husband had a genuine  and  subsisting  relationship.
    They had been living with a disabled parent.  The  Appellant's  husband
    was providing her with care and  support.   She  was  his  mother.   In
    addition, the  Appellants  had  undergone  multiple  miscarriages  (see
    paragraph 3 of the Rule 24 response).  The appeal was properly  allowed
    on Article 8 grounds outside the Rules.  They  were  suffering  from  a
    handicap "now not an insuperable handicap".

Error of Law

20. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007) such that I should set aside the decision.   My  reasons  are  as
    follows.  This is a case where, even if the judge  does  take  at  face
    value what is being said in terms of the Article 8 aspect of the  claim
    by the Appellant's husband (at paragraph 37), the actual assessment  is
    not undertaken in the context of Section 117B, which requires the judge
    to  factor  in  the  strong  public  interest  in  the  maintenance  of
    immigration  control.   This  is  important  because  the  husband  had
    undergone an Islamic marriage with the Appellant at a time when she was
    in the United Kingdom unlawfully.  The failure to refer to Section 117B
    is a material error of law.

21. Secondly, the judge's conclusion that, "I am satisfied that  he  is  to
    all intents and purposes a British person, both legally  and  socially"
    at paragraph 38, when referring to the Appellant's  husband,  does  not
    necessarily mean, that by virtue of that  fact  alone,  that  the  high
    threshold  standard  of  there  being  "insurmountable  obstacles",  is
    satisfied.  In the same way,  the  fact  that  the  husband's  language
    skills were limited (paragraph 38) did not necessarily  mean  that  the
    appeal would succeed on this basis.

22. All in all, although there are conclusions reached at paragraphs 37  to
    38, these are reached in the absence of factoring in the  Section  117B
    considerations, and moreover do not disclose a properly reasoned  basis
    for accepting the claim as made on the Appellant's side in relation  to
    Article 8 considerations.

Notice of Decision

23. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law.  I set aside the decision of the original judge.   I
    remake the decision as follows.  This appeal is remitted  back  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal to be determined by a judge other than Judge  James
    pursuant to practice statement 7.2(b) of the Practice Directions.

24. No anonymity direction is made.

25. This appeal is allowed.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 23rd August 2019


