
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/10184/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                      |Decision & Reason Promulgated  |
|on 26th October 2018                  |On 8th November 2018           |
|                                      |                               |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DEANS


                                   Between

                                  WAIL [E]
                        (No anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr D Katani, Katani & Co, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A Govan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This is an appeal against a decision by Judge of the First-tier
      Tribunal Mozolowski dismissing an appeal on protection and human
      rights grounds.

   2. The appellant is a national of Sudan and of Berti ethnicity.
      According to his account he lived near Khartoum on the farm where he
      was brought up and worked as a waiter in a restaurant.  The owner of
      the restaurant was collecting donations of food and clothing.  The
      restaurant was visited by Sudanese intelligence officials, who
      arrested the appellant.  The appellant was accused of being a member
      of a Darfuri organisation and then of belonging to an armed group.  He
      was mistreated and tortured but released subject to conditions.

   3. The judge did not believe the appellant because of inconsistencies and
      discrepancies in his account.  The judge was not satisfied that the
      Sudanese authorities had any interest in the appellant because he was
      implicated in the separatist cause in Darfur or because of his Berti
      ethnicity.

   4. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that it was arguable the
      judge should have allowed the appeal on the basis of the appellant's
      tribal membership in accordance with the country guideline cases of AA
      (Non-Arab Darfuris: relocation) Sudan CG [2009] UKAIT 00056 and MM
      (Darfuris) Sudan CG [2015] UKUT 00010.

   5. There was an error of law hearing on 7th September 2018 before Upper
      Tribunal Judge Macleman.  At this hearing the respondent accepted that
      paragraph 15 of the decision of the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal
      amounted to an insufficient resolution of whether the sources of
      information relied upon by the Secretary of State justified departure
      from country guidance.  In other words the judge did not give adequate
      reasons, or indeed any reasons, to justify not following the country
      guideline decisions, in terms of which, as a non-Arab Darfuri the
      appellant would be entitled to international protection.

   6. Having found there was an error of law in the decision of the First-
      tier Tribunal, Judge Macleman adjourned the hearing and issued
      directions in preparation for a further hearing.  The further hearing
      was to hear submissions only on the question of whether the country
      guideline cases should be followed in re-making the decision.

   7. The hearing was listed for 26th October 2018.  Unfortunately owing to
      unforeseen circumstances Judge Macleman was not available on this
      date.  A transfer order was made and I heard the appeal in his place.

   8. A day before the hearing an adjournment application was considered by
      an Upper Tribunal Judge at Field House in London.  The application was
      made on behalf of the appellant.  An expert witness, Dr Verney,
      engaged by the appellant to prepare a report for the resumed hearing,
      had been unable to complete the report owing to personal
      circumstances.  The application was refused, largely on the basis that
      the time scale for the resumed hearing had been clearly set out in the
      directions and adequate time had been allowed for preparation.

   9. At the hearing before me Mr Katani sought to renew the application.
      He explained the difficulties Dr Verney had faced.  I was not
      unsympathetic but explained that I thought an adjournment might not be
      necessary.  I indicated that I would hear submissions and would
      adjourn only if I considered that the appeal could not be decided
      without unfairness to the appellant.

  10. Although the appeal to the Upper Tribunal was brought by the
      appellant, I heard first from Mr Govan for the respondent.  It was the
      respondent who was seeking to show why the country guideline decisions
      should not be followed in respect of this appellant.  I am grateful to
      Mr Govan for providing me with a written submission and with a copy of
      the Home Office Country Policy and Information Note (CPIN) of
      September 2018 on Sudan: Non-Arab Darfuri.  Having heard the
      respondent's case I did not consider it necessary to hear a detailed
      submission from Mr Katani.

Discussion

  11. The essence of the Home Office position is that those Darfuris who
      reside in parts of Sudan other than Darfur itself, particularly those
      who reside in Khartoum and its surrounding area, are not at risk of
      persecution.  More information about the wider position of Darfuris in
      Sudan is now available.  The country guideline case of AA reached the
      finding that all Darfuris were at risk simply because there was
      insufficient information at that time about the risk to Darfuris
      outside Darfur.  The position has improved since the country guideline
      case of MM, as reflected in IM and AI (Risks - membership of Beja
      Tribe, Beja Congress and JEM) Sudan CG [2016] UKUT 00188.  The
      Tribunal might depart from a country guideline case where there was
      sufficiently cogent evidence to allow new findings to be made,
      provided these were supported by adequate reasoning.

  12. The CPIN of September 2018 has the appearance of an informative and
      balanced document.  It addresses not only the position in Darfur but
      also in Khartoum.  Of particular significance for the present appeal
      is Chapter 8, entitled "Return of rejected asylum seekers from
      Darfur".

  13. In the country guideline case of MM the Tribunal did not add much
      detail to the findings made in AA.  The Tribunal which heard MM had
      before it, however, an expert report by Dr Verney, who was the expert
      chosen by the appellant in the present appeal to provide a report.
      One of the issues raised by Dr Verney was the risk to failed asylum
      seekers of Darfuri ethnicity who were being removed to Khartoum
      airport.  The Tribunal did not expressly adopt Dr Verney's view on
      this risk but it was not necessary for it do so as it accepted all non-
      Arab Darfuris were at risk in Sudan.  In order to justify departing
      from the conclusions of MM, however, it would be necessary to take
      into account any risk on arrival in Sudan to failed asylum seekers of
      non-Arab Darfuri origin.

  14. It seems clear from chapter 8 of the CPIN that there is a higher risk
      to Sudanese nationals returning to Sudan directly from Israel then to
      those returning from Europe.  Opinion is divided, however, on the risk
      to failed asylum seekers forcibly returned from Europe.  The consensus
      view among western diplomats is that failed asylum seekers are not at
      risk of persecution on return unless they already have an anti-
      government or opposition profile.  On arrival Darfuris might be
      treated impolitely and asked to pay a bribe but would not face "any
      difficulties" if they were not already flagged by the National
      Security Intelligence Service (NISS).  It was reported that persons
      returning without travel documents or under escort would be subject to
      questioning at Khartoum airport.  It was also suggested that there was
      an absence of independent organisations at the airport to monitor
      forcible returns, although IOM would be present for voluntary returns.



  15. A number of NGOs are reported as taking a different view from western
      diplomats as to the risk faced by returning Darfuris.  It is reported
      at 8.1.15 that testimony from a number of Sudanese repatriated from EU
      countries, including Italy, France and the UK, mentioned arrest, ill
      treatment and, in some cases, torture.  According to the Home Office
      most of these testimonies were given by Sudanese from conflict areas
      or by politically active Sudanese.  An organisation called "Waging
      Peace" described at 8.1.8 the mistreatment of five people, one of whom
      was a Darfuri, returned in 2015-16 from Jordan, Israel and Italy.  It
      was pointed out that there was an absence of further testimony due to
      restricted access to the affected populations.

  16. A number of views are set out at 8.1.11.  One HRW researcher said that
      possible discrimination against a Darfuri at Khartoum airport would
      depend on the profile of the person and discrimination would be
      unlikely merely because the person was from Darfur.  A similar view
      was expressed by a contact of German organisation "Bread for the
      World".  A third source suggested treatment is highly variable and
      depends upon the nature of the documentation the person is carrying
      and whether a bribe has been paid in advance to a security official.
      A named independent researcher stated that on arrival at Khartoum
      airport a Darfuri person was likely to be interrogated by security and
      possibly beaten/tortured, detained and even killed.

  17. A disturbing report was quoted at 8.1.12.  This referred to the return
      around September 2016 of a group of 48 Sudanese migrants from Italy.
      One of the group of returnees described the migrants as seemingly
      having been identified by the Sudanese authorities before their
      departure from Italy.  This particular individual was beaten so
      severely by the security authorities on his arrival in Khartoum that
      he was unable to lie down.  He has since been living in hiding.  He
      said the migrants were from Darfur.

  18. In the same section an Amnesty International statement of November
      2016 reported that individuals from conflict-affected areas such as
      Darfur are at serious risk of persecution upon repatriation,
      particularly from the NISS, who have often been accused of serious
      human rights violations, including arbitrary detention and torture.
      In some cases the NISS appeared to have beaten people on arrival in
      Khartoum, particularly people from conflict areas, under the suspicion
      they might be supporters of armed groups.

  19. Although the Amnesty International statement refers to returnees from
      Darfur, rather that all returnees of non-Arab Darfuri ethnicity, there
      seems to be an arbitrariness about the behaviour of NISS.  At 8.1.15
      it is reported that according to Waging Peace not only Darfuris are at
      risk but also members of other ethnic groups, suggesting that it is
      ethnicity which gives rise to a risk, not only residence in a conflict-
      affected area.  A number of Sudanese repatriated from the UK were
      reported as having been ill-treated.  While several reports suggest
      that only those with a political profile will be at risk, it is noted
      at 8.1.15 that some non-governmental sources giving evidence to the
      Upper Tribunal stated that the mere fact of applying for asylum was
      enough to create a political profile.

  20. I have, of course, taken account of the British Ambassador's letter of
      29 September 2016 attached to the CPIN.  This letter states that
      "neither we nor our international partners are aware of substantiated
      cases of returnees, including failed asylum seekers, being mistreated
      on return to Sudan."  The difficulty with this letter is that this one
      brief sentence simply does not engage in any detail with the variety
      of accounts and sources recorded in the CPIN.

  21. It is accepted by the respondent that I would require cogent evidence
      to depart from the conclusions of the relevant country guideline
      cases.  The evidence in the CPIN about the treatment of returnees at
      Khartoum airport is far from compelling in terms of showing a low risk
      of serious harm to a failed Darfuri asylum seeker subject to forced
      removal.  There is a possibility that the risk to those who are not
      from a conflict-affected area may be below the threshold of a
      reasonable likelihood of persecution.  The evidence before me,
      however, does not establish this, although in due course a tribunal
      with more evidence before it, including expert evidence, may be in a
      position to depart from the current country guideline cases.  Given
      the uncertainties in the available evidence relating to the risk to
      returnees at Khartoum airport I do not consider that I have proper
      reasons to depart from the country guideline cases.

  22. Having reached these conclusions in relation to the risk at Khartoum
      airport, it is not necessary for me to consider whether the current
      risk to non-Arab Darfuris residing in or around Khartoum requires
      departure from the current country guideline cases.  This is a matter
      which may more appropriately be considered in due course by a tribunal
      convened for this purpose with access to all the available evidence.

  23. So far as this appeal is concerned it remains the position that, in
      terms of MM, as an ethnic Darfuri the appellant faces a real risk of
      persecution on return.  His appeal will therefore succeed on
      protection grounds.

Conclusions

  24. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the
      making of an error on a point of law.

  25. The decision is set aside.

  26. The decision is re-made by allowing the appeal.

Anonymity
Notwithstanding what is stated on the front page of its decision, the First-
tier Tribunal did not make an anonymity direction.  I see no reason of
substance for doing so.

Fee award           (N.B. This is not part of the decision)
No fee has been paid or is payable so no fee award is made.





M E Deans
                              31st October 2018
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge



