
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10897/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 10 April 2019                     |On 01 May 2019                       |
|                                     |                                     |


                                   Before
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FINCH

                                   Between
                                    [N I]

                                                               Appellant
                                     and
                  THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                     Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:                 Ms C.Z. Bessi of counsel, instructed by
Hope Project Ltd
For the Respondent:                 Mr. N. Bramble, Home Office Presenting
Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS






BACKGROUND TO THE APPEAL

1.   The Appellant is a national of Bangladesh. She arrived  in  the  United
    Kingdom on 10 March 2012, as a  visitor,  and  applied  for  indefinite
    leave to remain on 18 July 2012. Her application was refused on 10 June
    2013 and her subsequent appeal was dismissed  on  14  April  2014.  She
    became appeal rights exhausted on 28 April 2014.

 2.  She applied for asylum on 2 December 2014 on the basis that  she  would
    face persecution in Bangladesh as someone who was  stateless,  a  widow
    and a lone woman. She also stated that she feared her husband's  family
    in Bangladesh.    Her application was refused on 26 June 2015  and  her
    subsequent appeal was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Conway  on
    4 April 2016.

3.   She made further representations on  6  October  2017.  The  Respondent
    accepted that she had made a fresh claim but refused her application on
    29 August 2018. She appealed against this decision on  the  basis  that
    she feared persecution in Bangladesh, as an  Urdu-speaking  lone  woman
    with mental and physical health problems. Her appeal came before First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Taylor who dismissed it in a  decision  promulgated
    on 29 November 2018. She appealed against this decision and First- tier
    Tribunal Judge O'Callaghan granted  her  permission  to  appeal  on  16
    December 2018. This was on the basis  that  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Taylor  had  failed  to  consider  the  expert  report  by  Dr.   Hoque
    adequately.





ERROR OF LAW HEARING

4.   Counsel for the Appellant relied on  a  detailed  and  useful  skeleton
    argument and sought permission to rely  on  a  further  new  ground  of
    appeal. It was not necessary to reach a decision as to whether to grant
    her permission to amend the Appellant's grounds of appeal, as the  Home
    Office Presenting Officer accepted that there was merit in  ground  one
    of the grounds of appeal.

ERROR OF LAW DECISION

5.   In SA (Divorced women - illegitimate child) Bangladesh CG  [2011]  UKUT
    00254 the Upper Tribunal found that:

    1) "There is a high level of domestic violence in Bangladesh.   Despite
       the efforts of the government to improve the situation, due  to  the
       disinclination of the police to act upon complaints, women subjected
       to domestic violence may not be able to obtain an effective  measure
       of state protection by reason of the fact that they  are  women  and
       may be able to show a risk of serious harm for a Refugee  Convention
       reason.  Each case, however, must be determined on its own facts.

    (2) Under Muslim law, as applicable in Bangladesh, the  mother,  or  in
       her absence her own family members, has the right to custody  of  an
       illegitimate child.

    3) In custody and contact disputes the decisions of the superior courts
       in Bangladesh indicate a  fairly  consistent  trend  to  invoke  the
       principle of the welfare of  the  child  as  an  overriding  factor,
       permitting departure from the applicable personal law but  a  mother
       may  be  disqualified  from  custody  or  contact   by   established
       allegations of immorality.

    4) The mother of an illegitimate child may face  social  prejudice  and
       discrimination if her circumstances and the fact of her  having  had
       an illegitimate child become known but she is not likely to be at  a
       real risk of serious harm in urban centres by reason  of  that  fact
       alone.

    5) The divorced mother of an illegitimate child without family  support
       on return to  Bangladesh  would  be  likely  to  have  to  endure  a
       significant degree of hardship but she may well be  able  to  obtain
       employment  in  the  garment  trade  and   obtain   some   sort   of
       accommodation, albeit of a low standard.  Some degree of rudimentary
       state aid would be available to her and she would be able  to  enrol
       her child in a state school.  If in need of urgent  assistance,  she
       would be able to seek temporary accommodation in a woman's  shelter.
       The conditions which she would have  to  endure  in  re-establishing
       herself in Bangladesh would  not  as  a  general  matter  amount  to
       persecution or a breach of her rights under article 3 of  the  ECHR.
       Each case, however, must be decided its own facts having  regard  to
       the particular circumstances and disabilities, if any, of the  woman
       and the child concerned. Of course, if such  a  woman  were  fleeing
       persecution in her own home area the test  for  internal  relocation
       would be that of undue harshness and not a breach of her  article  3
       rights.

6.   The Appellant is a lone woman, but she is  not  a  divorced  woman  and
    does not have an illegitimate child and is not the mother of any  minor
    children. Therefore, this case is  not  applicable  to  her  particular
    circumstances.

7.   When reaching his decision, First-tier Tribunal Judge Taylor  correctly
    reminded himself that the  previous  findings  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Conway should be taken as his starting point, in accordance  with
    Devaseelan v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2002]  UKIAT
    000702*.  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Conway  had  accepted  that  the
    Appellant had been born in India and had been married at thirteen to  a
    citizen of Bangladesh. She went with him to Bangladesh at  the  age  of
    fifteen and acquired Bangladeshi citizenship.   Her  relationship  with
    her husband was found to be one of domestic servitude.

8.   He also accepted that in 1977 the Appellant accompanied her husband  to
    Dubai where she was employed as a domestic worker until  his  death  in
    1986. By that time, she had had four children and she remained in Dubai
    to care for her children and supported them by  working  as  a  driving
    instructor. However, when she became sixty, the  authorities  in  Dubai
    would not renew her residence permit and that is why she came to  visit
    one of her daughters who lived in the United Kingdom.

9.   First-tier Tribunal Judge Conway also found that none of  her  children
    were providing her with any form of support and that she did not have a
    sister in Bangladesh. It was against this background that  any  further
    evidence should have been assessed.

10.  However, First-tier Tribunal Judge Taylor then went on  to  effectively
    ignore the fact that at paragraph 26 of her supplementary statement the
    Appellant explained that she now suffered from mini strokes about  five
    times a month and that consequently she could no longer work. The  fact
    that she has suffered mini-strokes was confirmed in a letter  from  the
    Meridian Practice, dated 2 October 2018.

11.  First-tier Tribunal Judge Taylor failed to apply this  further  medical
    evidence in paragraph 19 of his decision. He merely accepted First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Conway's previous finding that the  Appellant  had  been
    employed as a driving instructor in Dubai and had been able to  support
    her four children on her own after her husband died.  This ignored  the
    fact that the medical evidence  of  blackouts,  precluded  any  similar
    employment and clearly indicated that her circumstances had  materially
    changed since 2014. In  addition,  although  he  did  accept  that  the
    Appellant now had some mobility  problems,  he  did  not  consider  the
    impact of these mobility problems in any detail, despite the fact  that
    there  was  a  letter,  dated  14  February  2017,  from  the  Coventry
    Muscolskeletal Service, which confirmed that  she  was  suffering  from
    Osteoarthritis in her knees and lower back. It  also  stated  that  the
    pain in her lower back was aggravated  by  walking  for  more  than  30
    minutes and that the referred  pain  in  her  legs  was  aggravated  by
    walking for more than 15 minutes.  It was also noted  that  there  were
    severe degenerative changes in her knees and that her clinicians  would
    like to operate on her back.

12.  The Appellant had also relied on an  expert  report  by  Dr.  Ashraf-ul
    Hoque, which was not before First-tier Tribunal Judge Conway, as it was
    only completed on  19  July  2017.  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Taylor
    referred to some of its contents at paragraphs 8 to 10 of his  decision
    but he did not provide any analysis of this content. He went no further
    than to find at paragraph 17:

     "I am entitled to take into account all of the findings  of  fact  made
    by Judge Conway save for the Bihari issue and the mental  and  physical
    health of the appellant. These are, taken together, insufficient to tip
    the balance from  a  situation  amount  to  harassment,  discrimination
    and/or societal displeasure to one of persecution and/or  a  breach  of
    Article 3".

13.  Given the seriousness of the  Appellant's  current  medical  conditions
    and  her  age,  detailed  reasons  to  support  any  finding  that  her
    circumstances had not materially changed  since  the  previous  hearing
    before First-tier Tribunal Judge Conway should have been made.

14.  For the above reasons I find that there were material errors of law  in
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Taylor's decision.

DECISION

(1)  The Appellant's appeal is allowed.

(2)  The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard  de  novo
    before a First-tier Tribunal Judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge
    O'Callaghan, Taylor or Conway.


Nadine Finch


Signed                                  Date 25 April 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Finch


