
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10491/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 4 April 2019                         |On 29 April 2019                    |
|                                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     G H
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Howells, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms L King instructed by NLS Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
      2008 (SI 2008/2698) I make  an  anonymity  order.   Unless  the  Upper
      Tribunal or court directs otherwise, no report  of  these  proceedings
      shall directly or  indirectly  identify  the  respondent  (GH).   This
      direction applies to both the appellant and to the  respondent  and  a
      failure to comply with this direction could lead to contempt of  court
      proceedings.

   2. Although this is an appeal by the Secretary of State, for  convenience
      I will refer to the parties as they  appeared  before  the  First-tier
      Tribunal (the "FtT").

Introduction

   3. The appellant is a citizen of Iraq who was born on 5 March  2001.   He
      arrived in the United Kingdom in December  2017  and,  on  6  February
      2018,  he  claimed  asylum.   That  application  was  refused  by  the
      Secretary of State on 16 August 2018.

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

   4. The appellant appealed to the FtT.  In a determination promulgated  on
      22 October 2018, the FtT (Judges Lloyd-Lawrie and  Page)  allowed  the
      appellant's appeal on asylum grounds.

   5. The FtT rejected the appellant's account to be at risk  on  return  to
      Iraq as a Christian or as a result of that he was  at  risk  from  the
      family of a girl with whom he had had a relationship  in  the  IKR  in
      Iraq.

   6. Nevertheless, the FtT found that the  appellant  was  a  member  of  a
      particular social group (namely a minor) and that if  he  returned  to
      Baghdad, which was the place to which he would be returned even though
      his home area  was  the  IKR,  he  would  likely  face  "destitution".
      Following the Country Guidance decision of AAH (Iraqi Kurds - internal
      relocation) CG [2018] UKUT 212 (IAC), in order to travel back  to  the
      IKR or remain in Baghdad he would need to be in possession of a  CSID.
      The FtT found that the appellant was not in contact  with  his  family
      and, without their assistance, he would not be able to obtain a CSID.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

   7. The Secretary of State  sought  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
      Tribunal which was granted by the First-tier Tribunal (D J Manuell) on
      7 December 2018.

   8. The appellant did not file a rule 24 response.

The Submissions

   9. On behalf of the Secretary of State, Mr Howells  accepted  that  there
      were inaccuracies in the grounds of appeal.  First, he  accepted  that
      the grounds had been wrong to identify that the  appellant  came  from
      Kirkuk when, in fact, he came  from  the  IKR  (Dokan  in  Sulaymaniya
      Governorate).  Secondly, Mr Howells accepted that  the  FtT  had  been
      correct to assess the appellant's claim on the basis  that  he  was  a
      child at the date of the hearing and to assess  the  risk  to  him  on
      return on that basis.  Thirdly, Mr Howells accepted that  the  grounds
      were wrong to aver that the appellant had spoken to his father a month
      before, in effect, the hearing.  Mr Howells accepted that  the  social
      worker's evidence (referred to by the FtT at para 41) was that he  had
      spoken to his father a month before he was interviewed on 11  December
      2017, in other words some ten to twelve months prior to the hearing in
      September 2018.

  10. Finally, Mr Howells acknowledged that the Presenting  Officer  at  the
      hearing had conceded that there were no direct flights to the IKR  and
      so the appellant's claim had to be considered  on  the  basis  of  his
      return to Baghdad.  However, he pointed out that the  CPIN  Report  at
      para 2.7.2 (at page 94 of the bundle) identified that  direct  flights
      to the IKR had, in fact, commenced prior to the hearing.  However,  Mr
      Howells indicated that this was, in all probability irrelevant to  the
      outcome of the appeal, since if  an  individual  did  not  voluntarily
      return to Iraq,  he  had  to  be  returned  to  Baghdad  first  before
      travelling to the IKR.

  11. With those initial points set out, Mr Howells refined the  grounds  of
      appeal, which are undoubtedly discursive, into two points of law.

  12. First, Mr Howells submitted that the FtT had been  wrong  to  take  at
      face value the evidence from  the  appellant  and,  indeed,  from  the
      social worker that the appellant had  no  contact  and,  therefore  no
      knowledge of the whereabouts  of  his  family  in  Iraq.   Mr  Howells
      submitted that the FtT had failed to bring forward, in assessing  that
      evidence, the earlier finding  that  the  appellant's  claim  was  not
      credible in respect of his  claimed  fears  on  return  to  Iraq.   Mr
      Howells submitted that in  the  context  of  a  comprehensive  adverse
      credibility finding, the FtT had failed to give adequate  reasons  why
      it accepted the evidence that the appellant did  not  know  where  his
      parents were.  He submitted that the FtT had effectively reversed  the
      burden of proof in para 41 when it has observed  that  there  was  "no
      evidence provided by the respondent to disprove the  appellant's  case
      that he does not know where his family are".  Further, in  stating  in
      para 41, that the social worker would have stated that  the  appellant
      had been in contact with his family more  recently  if  that  was  the
      case, the FtT failed to have regard to the fact that  the  appellant's
      evidence was disbelieved by the FtT and that, therefore, the appellant
      had not been honest with the social worker.  Given  that  his  account
      was not accepted, Mr Howells submitted that there  was  no  reason  to
      believe that his family had been forced to flee their home area.

  13. Secondly, Mr Howells submitted that the FtT  had  failed  to  consider
      whether the appellant could apply for a CSID at the Iraqi  Embassy  in
      the UK consistently with AAH.  However, Mr Howells  acknowledged  that
      this ground was, in effect, contingent upon ground  1.   In  order  to
      apply for a CSID at the Iraqi Embassy in the UK  the  appellant  would
      require documentation or information from his family in Iraq which  he
      could not obtain if, as the FtT found, he was not  and  would  not  be
      able to contact them.

  14. Mr Howells accepted that if the  FtT's  finding  in  relation  to  the
      appellant's inability to contact his family stood, then there  was  no
      basis for overturning the FtT's finding that the  appellant  succeeded
      in his asylum claim based upon the risk to him as a member  of  a  PSG
      (as a returning minor) in Baghdad as he would likely face  destitution
      in the absence of possessing a CSID and he would be unable  to  return
      to the IKR.

  15. On behalf of the appellant, Ms King submitted that the FtT's  findings
      in relation to his contact, or ability to  contact  his  family,  were
      sustainable.   She  submitted  that  simply  because   he   had   been
      disbelieved in relation to his claim based upon Christianity  and  his
      relationship with a girl in Iraq did not necessarily mean that he  had
      to be disbelieved in relation to other matters.  That  turned  upon  a
      specific consideration of the evidence in relation to that  which,  Ms
      King submitted, the FtT had done.  She submitted that the FtT had  not
      shifted the burden of proof to the  respondent  in  para  41  but  had
      merely noted the  absence  of  any  contradicting  evidence  from  the
      respondent.  She submitted that the FtT was entitled to  rely  on  the
      fact that the Home Office had sought to trace the  appellant's  family
      but without success and to find at para 40:

         "that as the Home Office have been unable to find  the  appellant's
         family, it is  unlikely  that  the  appellant  could  contact  male
         members of his family to assist him in securing him a new CSID."

  16. There was no suggestion in the decision letter or otherwise  that  the
      appellants had been obstructive with the Home Office in providing them
      with information to trace his family.  Ms King submitted that  it  was
      reasonably open to the FtT to conclude that the appellant did not know
      where his family were and that he is, and would be, unable to  contact
      them such that he would be unable to obtain a CSID and, applying  AAH,
      the FtT was entitled to find that he was likely to face  "destitution"
      as a member of a PSG and to allow his claim on asylum grounds.

Discussion

  17. Having carefully considered the submission of both representatives,  I
      accept in substance those of Ms King and reject those of  Mr  Howells.
      In my judgment, the FtT was  entitled  reasonably  and  rationally  to
      reach its finding that the appellant has been, and  would  be  in  the
      future, unable to contact his family and thereby obtain the  necessary
      documentation or support to obtain a CSID.   The consequence  of  that
      finding is, as Mr Howells conceded, given the other  findings  of  the
      FtT and AAH, that  the  appellant's  claim  for  asylum  was  properly
      allowed.

  18. First, simply because  the  appellant  had  been  disbelieved  in  his
      primary  asylum  claim,  namely  based   on   his   Christianity   and
      relationship with a girl in  the  IKR,  did  not  mean  that  the  FtT
      necessarily had to reject all other parts of his  evidence,  including
      what he said about contact with his family in Iraq.  Even if  the  FtT
      had  made  a  specific  finding  that  the  appellant  was  lying  and
      untruthful, providing that  the  FtT  bore  in  mind  its  finding  in
      relation to the credibility issue, it was properly open to the FtT  if
      adequate reasons were given, to find that  it  accepted  the  evidence
      concerning his lack of knowledge  of  his  family's  whereabouts  and,
      therefore, his inability to contact them to assist in obtaining a CSID
      or other support.  Merely because the appellant lied about one  aspect
      of his claim, did not require a finding that he had lied  about  every
      aspect of his claim.  In fact, the FtT did not make a positive finding
      that the appellant was lying.  Nevertheless, its reasons at paras 35 -
      36 should, in all probability, be taken as an  implicit  finding  that
      the appellant was being untruthful.  However, there is  no  reason  to
      assume that the FtT failed to have regard to  that  finding  when,  at
      paras 40 onwards, it found that it accepted the  appellant's  evidence
      about  his  lack  of  knowledge  of  his  family's  whereabouts.   The
      determination has to be read as a whole and  there  is  no  reason  to
      consider that the FtT forgot its findings in paras 35 - 36 by the time
      it came to assess the other aspects of the appellant's claim at  paras
      40 onwards.

  19. Secondly, I do not accept Mr Howell's submission that at para  41  the
      FtT wrongly shifted the burden of proof to the respondent.  There  the
      FtT said this:

         "The Tribunal find that  there  is  no  evidence  provided  by  the
         respondent to disprove the appellant's case that he does  not  know
         where his family are and that therefore they cannot be relied  upon
         to support the child, a minor, on his return".

  20. The FtT had previously clearly directed itself (at para 28)  that  the
      burden of proof lay upon the appellant.  The reference to the  absence
      of any evidence by the respondent is simply that: there was an absence
      of any evidence presented by the respondent to contradict the evidence
      of the appellant and, indeed, the social worker.  It does not,  in  my
      judgment, reflect an impermissible shifting of the burden of proof.

  21. Thirdly, the FtT was entitled to  take  into  account  that  the  Home
      Office had been unable to trace the appellant's family.  Whilst it  is
      unclear, and I explored this at  the  hearing,  what  information  the
      appellant told the Home Office in order for them to seek to trace  his
      family, there is no suggestion in the  decision  letter  or  elsewhere
      that the appellant, in the words  of  Ms  King,  was  obstructive  and
      failed to  provide  appropriate  information.   At  para  113  of  the
      decision letter, the Home Office acknowledges that it  was  unable  to
      trace the appellant's family whilst noting that "other channels"  such
      as the British Red Cross may be able to do so.  Nevertheless, the Home
      Office's failure to trace his family was a factor which  the  FtT  has
      taken into account in reaching its finding that  the  appellant  would
      not be able to contact male members of his family to assist him.

  22. Fourthly, the evidence of the social worker was that the appellant had
      spoken to his father about a month  before  11  December  2017.   That
      evidence is set  out  at  para  10  of  the  social  worker's  witness
      statement as follows:

         "On 11 December  2017,  (the  appellant)  has  informed  the  Local
         Authority that he has not had any contact with his family  and  the
         last time he had spoken to his father a  month  ago  for  a  minute
         through  the  agent/smuggler  [the  appellant]  stated   that   the
         agent/smuggler phoned his father to transfer more money."

  23. That witness statement is dated 20 September 2018, a week  before  the
      hearing.  Whilst, of course, the FtT did not  accept  the  appellant's
      account of why he feared return to the IKR, he  had  told  the  social
      worker (perhaps in part to his disadvantage),  that  he  had  been  in
      contact with his father a month before December 2017.  If he had  told
      the social worker of any  subsequent  contact,  no  doubt  the  social
      worker would have said so in her witness statement.  The FtT was fully
      entitled to accept that the appellant  had  not  done  so.   That,  in
      itself, did not establish that he had not made subsequent contact with
      his family.  But, in para 41 the FtT did not conclude that, therefore,
      he had not had subsequent contact with his  family.   Having  set  out
      what the social worker said in para 10 of her witness  statement,  the
      FtT at para 41 said this:

         "The Social Worker, while silent on the issue, does  not  say  that
         the appellant has been in contact with his family since this  point
         and would  be  expected  to  have  contradicted  that  point  in  a
         statement should the appellant have had any contact with her family
         that she was aware of".

  24. The important words were "that she was aware of".  Whilst it might not
      be a strong piece of evidence or, in itself, a convincing  reason  for
      the FtT's finding, it was part  of  the  evidential  background  that,
      having previously told the social worker of contact with  his  family,
      the appellant had not told her of any subsequent contact.  It is worth
      nothing that even the earlier contact was not  made  directly  by  the
      appellant with his father but rather by the agent/smuggler.

  25. In my judgment,  the  FtT  was  entitled  to  accept  the  appellant's
      evidence that he did not know the whereabouts of his  family  in  Iraq
      having taken into account the Home Office's unsuccessful  attempts  to
      trace his family, the social worker's  evidence  concerning  what  the
      appellant had, or had not subsequently, told  her  about  his  contact
      with his family, and having reached that  finding  having  taken  into
      account that the FtT had not accepted as credible his claimed fears on
      return to Iraq.   Neither the FtT's reasons nor its finding based upon
      those reasons was unreasonable or irrational.

  26. In the light of that, as Mr Howells accepted, his second ground  falls
      away.  On the basis of  the  FtT's  findings,  in  the  light  of  the
      sustainable finding that he does not know  there  whereabouts  of  his
      family, it is accepted that the FtT was entitled to reach its  finding
      that the appellant would not be able  to  obtain  a  CSID  and,  as  a
      result, he would likely face destitution on return to Iraq as a member
      of a PSG (namely a child).

  27. Consequently, for these reasons the First-tier Tribunal did not err in
      law in reaching its decision to allow the appellant's appeal on asylum
      grounds.

Decision

  28.  For the above reasons, the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to
      allow the appellant's appeal on asylum grounds  did  not  involve  the
      making of an error of law.  That decision stands.

  29. Accordingly, the Secretary of State's appeal to the Upper Tribunal  is
      dismissed.



                                                                      Signed
                                                                       [pic]
                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                                        Dated 23, April 2019

