
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10676/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Liverpool                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 27th September 2017              |On 12th January 2018                  |
|                                    |                                      |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     MSN
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:         Mr. J Harrison; Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms. R Evans;  WTB Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. The appellant before me, is the Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
       Department. However, for ease of reference, in the  course  of  this
       decision I shall adopt the parties' status  as  it  was  before  the
       First-tier Tribunal ("FtT").  I shall in this decision, refer to MSN
       as the appellant and the Secretary of State as the respondent.


    2. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules
       2008 (SI 2008/269) I make  an  anonymity  order.  Unless  the  Upper
       Tribunal  or  a  Court  directs  otherwise,  no  report   of   these
       proceedings or any form of publication  thereof  shall  directly  or
       indirectly identify the original appellant. This  direction  applies
       to, amongst others, all parties. Any failure  to  comply  with  this
       direction could give rise to contempt of court proceedings.


    3. This is an appeal against a  decision  by  FtT  Judge  Norton-Taylor
       promulgated on 2nd March 2017.  The  Judge  allowed  the  appeal  on
       asylum, Article 3 and humanitarian protection grounds.


 Background


    4. The appellant is a national of Libya.   He first entered the  UK  in
       2010 with a visit visa.  In 2012, he claimed asylum.  That claim was
       refused and an appeal to the FtT (AA/07245/2013) was  dismissed  for
       the reasons set out in a  decision  promulgated  on  13th  September
       2013.  The conclusions of  the  FtT  Judge  in  the  September  2013
       decision are summarised at paragraphs [4] to [6] of the decision  of
       FtT Judge Norton-Taylor and I  do  not  repeat  them  here.   It  is
       sufficient to note that  the  FtT  Judge  made  adverse  credibility
       findings and  roundly  rejected  the  account  relied  upon  by  the
       appellant.


    5. On 9th February 2014, the appellant was  removed  to  Tripoli.   The
       appellant returned to the  UK,  using  his  own  passport,  on  14th
       October 2014 and claimed asylum on 27th October 2014.  The claim was
       refused for the reasons set out in a decision dated  16th  September
       2016 and it was that decision that was the  subject  of  the  appeal
       before FtT  Judge  Norton-Taylor.   A  summary  of  the  appellant's
       account of events when he returned to Tripoli in 2014, is set out at
       paragraph [10] of the FtT Judge.










 The decision of the First-tier Tribunal


    6. The appellant was represented and gave  evidence.   The  appellant's
       evidence is set out at paragraphs [18] to [25] of  the  decision  of
       the FtT Judge.  The Judge's findings and conclusions are to be found
       at paragraphs [34] to [92] of the decision.    The  Judge  noted  at
       paragraph [34] of his decision, that the findings of the  FtT  Judge
       previously in 2013 represent the starting point for  his  assessment
       of the  claim  and  the  appellant's  credibility.  The  Judge  then
       addressed in his decision  the  evidence  now  relied  upon  by  the
       applicant.


    7. The FtT Judge found, at [41], that the  arrest  warrant  now  relied
       upon by the appellant, is not a reliable document for  the  numerous
       reasons set out at paragraphs [42] to [52]  of  his  decision.   The
       Judge found that the burial document  relating  to  the  appellant's
       brother takes his claim no  further  for  the  reasons  set  out  at
       paragraph [53] of  his  decision.   At  paragraph  [54],  the  Judge
       states:


             "Taking all of the above into account, I find for myself  that
             the  Appellant's  account  of  past  events  relating  to  his
             circumstances and those  of  his  father,  together  with  the
             claimed adverse consequences  arising  therefrom,  is  untrue.
             There is nothing  to  indicate  that  the  2013  findings  are
             flawed, and there is in reality no new reliable evidence."


    8. At paragraphs [55] to [74] of his decision, the Judge addresses  the
       appellant's account of events upon return to Tripoli in 2014 and his
       subsequent return to the UK on 14th October 2014.  The Judge  found,
       at [56], that the appellant  was  removed  to  Tripoli  on  his  own
       passport and at [57], found that the appellant would have been  sent
       back with his possessions including papers relevant  to  his  failed
       asylum claim in the UK.  The Judge found, at [58] to [61],  that  it
       is reasonably likely that the appellant  was  initially  stopped  on
       arrival and taken by members of the Zintan militia, as claimed,  and
       a baggage search was likely. At  [63],  the  Judge  found  that  the
       militia would not have been able to read most  if  not  all  of  the
       English-language documents in the appellant's possession, but it  is
       credible that someone would have  been  sought  to  translate  these
       documents.  The Judge found, at [64], that the  militia  would  also
       have found in the appellant's possession,  the  identity  cards  and
       employer's letter  that  stated  that  the  appellant  had  been  an
       employee of the Gaddafi regime.


    9. At paragraph [67] of his decision, the Judge states:


             "I find that it is reasonably likely that  the  Appellant  was
             held for a relatively short time and ill-treated in  terms  of
             being hit. I find that the presence of the  documents  in  the
             Appellant's possession, in combination with a  general  desire
             to check all returnees and the ability to act arbitrarily  and
             with impunity, go  to  make  this  particular  aspect  of  the
             Appellant's case credible."


   10. For the reasons set out at paragraphs [69] to [74],  the  Judge  did
       not accept that the  appellant  was  as  badly  treated  as  he  had
       claimed, and  he  rejected  the  appellant's  account  of  what  had
       occurred after his brief detention by the militia.  The Judge states
       at [68]:


             "However, I do not accept that  the  Appellant  was  as  badly
             treated as he claims, nor  do  I  accept  any  other  material
             aspect of what he claims occurred after his brief detention by
             the militia. I do not accept that the militia said anything to
             him about is father, nor do I accept that he  was  accused  of
             being a Gaddafi spy. I do not accept that he was hospitalised.
             My reasons for these findings are as follows."


   11. The Judge's conclusions on the  protection  claim  are  set  out  at
       paragraphs [75] to [92] of his decision.  At paragraph [85]  of  his
       decision, the Judge concluded that the appellant would be at risk of
       persecution, Article  3  ill-treatment  and/or  serious  harm  under
       Article 15(b) and/or Article 15(c) violence  on  return.  The  Judge
       states at paragraphs [88] and [89]:


             "The Appellant would return to Libya as someone who  does  not
             have a high profile past with the Gaddafi regime. He  is  not,
             on his own account, anti-Gaddafi. He is, though, a person  who
             has left Libya twice and been removed from the United  Kingdom
             twice. He has claimed, twice, that he is pro-Gaddafi, and  has
             documents in support of this. He must tell the truth about why
             he has been in the United Kingdom and what has  occurred  here
             to whomever asks. It is of course the  case  that  his  claims
             have been rejected in this country. In  many  countries,  this
             would not necessarily  raise  any  problems  on  return  to  a
             country: an individual must be truthful about what happened to
             his case. However, this Appellant would walk into a  situation
             of opposing armed and extremely dangerous militia, all  acting
             with arbitrary violence and impunity.


             It is likely that he will be stopped and questioned on return.
             This is significantly more likely now than  it  was  in  2014,
             given  the  deteriorating  security  situation.  There  is   a
             reasonable likelihood that the Zintan militia are in charge of
             the airport.  They  would  perceive  the  Appellant  as  being
             sympathetic to  the  old  regime  because  of  his  previously
             employment (even at a  low  level),  the  nature  of  his  two
             protection claims, and/or his repeated desire  to  'flee'  the
             country, the implication being that he was either  failing  to
             support the Zintan cause  or  was  trying  to  escape  adverse
             interest from them."


   12. At paragraph [91], the  Judge  found  that  if  detained,  there  is
       clearly a risk of ill-treatment and a sufficient nexus  between  the
       ill-treatment and perceived political opinion to engage the  Refugee
       Convention. In any event, Article 3  and  Article  15(b)  apply,  or
       alternatively, by a narrow margin, the appellant can  stand  himself
       out from the civilian  population  as  a  whole  and  succeed  under
       Article 15(c).


 The appeal before me


   13. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Page on
       28th June 2017.


   14. The respondent contends that the FtT Judge  has  failed  to  provide
       adequate reasons for concluding that the appellant will be  at  risk
       upon return to Libya. It is said that in light  of  the  credibility
       findings made, the Judge erred in concluding that the appellant will
       be at risk upon return for a Convention reason and  that  the  Judge
       fails to identify anything beyond the two failed asylum claims  made
       by the appellant in the UK, that would place the appellant  at  risk
       upon return, such that the Judge erred in his  conclusion  that  the
       appellant is entitled to protection under the Refugee Convention  or
       requires Humanitarian Protection.  Before  me,  Mr  Harrison  relied
       upon the grounds of appeal  and  submitted  that  the  appellant  is
       someone against whom there have been a number of adverse credibility
       findings. He maintains the Judge fails to  give  sufficient  reasons
       for his conclusion that the refugee convention is  engaged  or  that
       the appellant is exposed to a risk upon return.


   15. The appellant has filed a rule 24 response dated 20th September 2017.
        The appellant  submits  that  although  the  Judge  did  not  accept
       everything that was said by the appellant, the FtT  Judge  has  given
       sufficient reasons as to why the appellant faces  a  real  risk  upon
       return to Libya, and why that risk is for a convention  reason.   The
       appellant submits that the Judge identifies  that  there  is  a  real
       likelihood from the appellant's profile  that  he  would  upon  being
       stopped and questioned by the  Militia  in  Tripoli,  come  to  their
       adverse interest, and the Judge found  that  there  is  a  sufficient
       nexus between the ill-treatment  that  the  appellant  will  face  if
       detained, and his perceived political opinion, to engage the  Refugee
       Convention.  Ms Evans  submits  that  the  Judge  made  a  number  of
       findings in the course of his decision, accepting some aspects pf the
       appellant's account of events  following  his  return  in  2014,  and
       rejecting some aspects of that account. She  submits  that  upon  the
       findings made  at  paragraphs  [88]  and  [89]  of  the  decision  in
       particular, it was open to the Judge to conclude  that  if  detained,
       there is clearly a risk of ill-treatment, and there is  a  sufficient
       nexus  between  that  ill-treatment  and  the  appellant's  perceived
       political opinion so as to engage to Refugee Convention.


Discussion


   16. It is right to note that although the Judge of the FtT rejected  part
       of the account relied upon by the appellant of events  in  2014,  the
       Judge found that the Appellant was initially stopped on  arrival  and
       taken by members of the Zintan militia, as he had claimed.   Although
       the Judge did not accept that the appellant had been treated as badly
       as he had claimed, the Judge found that the appellant was held for  a
       relatively short time, and ill-treated in terms of  being  hit.   The
       Judge found that upon return now, the appellant  would  walk  into  a
       situation of opposing armed  and  extremely  dangerous  militia,  all
       acting with arbitrary violence and impunity.  The  Judge  found  that
       "..It is likely that he will be stopped and questioned on return...",
       and that this is significantly more likely now, than it was in  2014,
       given the deteriorating security situation.  The Zintan militia would
       perceive the Appellant as being sympathetic to the old regime because
       of his previous employment (even at a low level), the nature  of  his
       two protection claims, and/or  his  repeated  desire  to  'flee'  the
       country. The findings made by the FtT Judge are not challenged.


   17. In my judgement, the FtT  Judge  carefully  considered  the  evidence
       before him. Having found,  at  [89],  that  it  is  likely  that  the
       appellant will be stopped and questioned on return, in  my  judgement
       it was open to the Judge to find that if detained, there is clearly a
       risk  of  ill-treatment.  In  reaching  that  conclusion,  the  Judge
       considered the objective evidence before him.  It  was  open  to  the
       Judge to find that there is  a  sufficient  nexus  between  the  ill-
       treatment and the perceived political opinion  of  the  appellant  to
       engage the Refugee Convention.


   18. It is now well established that although there is  a  legal  duty  to
       give a brief explanation of the conclusions on the central  issue  on
       which the appeal is determined, those reasons need not  be  extensive
       if the decision as a whole makes sense, having regard to the material
       accepted by the Judge. Here, it  cannot  be  said  that  the  Judge's
       analysis of the evidence is irrational or perverse.  I  am  satisfied
       that the Judge's findings and conclusions are sufficiently  reasoned,
       and it was open to him on  the  evidence,  to  allow  the  appeal  on
       refugee, Article  3  and  humanitarian  protection  grounds  for  the
       reasons given.


   19. I should add that since the decision of the FtT Judge, and the  grant
       of permission, there  has  been  further  Country  Guidance.  In  ZMM
       (Article 15(c) Libya CG [2017] UKUT 00263 (IAC), the  Upper  Tribunal
       held as follows:


             The violence in Libya has  reached  such  a  high  level  that
             substantial grounds are shown for believing that  a  returning
             civilian would, solely on  account  of  his  presence  on  the
             territory of that country or region, face a real risk of being
             subject to a threat to his life or person.


   20. The question of whether a person is at risk in Libya for the purposes
       of Article 15(c) must be determined on the basis of the  evidence  in
       the appeal.  On any view of the facts as found by the FtT  Judge,  it
       cannot in my judgement be said that the appellant  would  not  be  at
       real risk of being subject to a threat to his life or  person  solely
       on account of his presence in Libya. ZMM was not decided until  after
       the  decision  was  promulgated,  but  has  held  that  there  is   a
       generalised risk to Libyan  citizens  such  that  they  ought  to  be
       granted humanitarian protection.


Notice of Decision


   21. The appeal is dismissed.


Signed                                  Date       6th January 2018



       Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia



FEE AWARD


No fee is payable and there can be no fee award.


Signed                                  Date    6th January 2018


    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia




