
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10789/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 18th August 2020                |On 22nd September 2020             |
|                                   |                                   |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA

                                   Between

                                     HAH
                         (Anonymity Direction Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Islam, Fountain Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008


An anonymity direction was made by the First-tier Tribunal ("the FtT").  As
the appeal raises matters regarding a claim for international protection,
it is appropriate for an anonymity direction to be made.  Unless and until
a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the appellant is granted anonymity.
No report of these proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify him or
any member of his family.  This direction applies both to the appellant and
to the respondent.  Failure to comply with this direction could lead to
contempt of court proceedings.


Introduction


 1. The appellant is a national  of  Iraq.  He  appealed  the  respondent's
    decision dated 24th October 2019 to refuse his claim for  international
    protection. The appeal to the First-tier Tribunal ("FtT") was dismissed
    by FtT Judge Obhi for reasons set out in a decision promulgated on  7th
    February 2020.


 2. Permission to appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  was  granted  by  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Sheridan on 2nd July 2020.  The matter comes  before  me
    to determine whether the decision of FtT Judge Obhi is  vitiated  by  a
    material error of law.


 3. The hearing before me on 18th August 2020 took the  form  of  a  remote
    hearing using skype for business. Neither party objected.  I sat at the
    Birmingham Civil Justice Centre and the hearing room and building  were
    open to the  public.  The  hearing  was  publicly  listed,  and  I  was
    addressed by the representatives in exactly the same  way  as  I  would
    have been, if the parties had attended the  hearing  together.   I  was
    satisfied: that this constituted a hearing in open court; that the open
    justice principle has been secured; that no party has been  prejudiced;
    and that, insofar as there has been  any  restriction  on  a  right  or
    interest, it is  justified  as  necessary  and  proportionate.   I  was
    satisfied that it was in the interests of  justice  and  in  accordance
    with the overriding objective to proceed with a remote hearing  because
    of the present need to take precautions against the spread of Covid-19,
    and to avoid delay.  I was satisfied that a remote hearing would ensure
    the  matter  is  dealt  with  fairly  and  justly  in  a  way  that  is
    proportionate to the importance of the  case,  the  complexity  of  the
    issues that arise, and the  anticipated  costs  and  resources  of  the
    parties.  At the end of the hearing I was satisfied that  both  parties
    had been able to participate fully in the proceedings.


Background


 4. The background to the appellant's claim for international protection is
    summarised at paragraph  [2]  of  the  decision  of  Judge  Obhi.   The
    respondent accepts the appellant is an Iraqi  national.  The  appellant
    claims that he was born in Mala Abdulla, in Kirkuk.   He  claimed,  and
    the respondent accepted, that his father was killed when he fought as a
    volunteer with the Peshmerga in their fight against ISIS in July  2015.
    The appellant claims that he left Iraqi in August  2015  and  that  his
    mother and his paternal uncle sent him  to  the  UK  because  ISIS  had
    entered Kirkuk, and they feared for his safety.


 5. The appellant claims that he has not had any contact  with  his  family
    since December 2015 when he was in Finland. He claims his  mother  told
    him that she, her brother and two of the  appellant's  paternal  uncles
    were also planning to leave Kirkuk and travel to Europe.


 6. The evidence of the appellant is set out at paragraphs [15] to [22]  of
    the decision of  Judge  Obhi.   The  appellant  also  relied  upon  the
    evidence of [Mr T], and his evidence is set out at paragraphs [23]  and
    [24] of the decision.


 7. Judge Obhi noted the circumstances which caused the appellant to  leave
    his home are not disputed by the respondent.  She noted that  there  is
    little evidence that ISIS have any particular interest in the appellant
    based on his father's involvement with the Peshmerga and she found  the
    appellant cannot prove that case, even on the lower standard. She  went
    on to consider whether the appellant will be at risk of  indiscriminate
    violence and noted that country guidance previously provided that there
    were areas of Iraq in which the  situation  was  so  volatile  that  an
    individual may face a real risk on return of  indiscriminate  violence.
    She considered the more recent country guidance set out in SMO,  KSP  &
    IM (Article 15(c); identity documents) CG Iraq [2019]  UKUT  400  (IAC)
    ("SMO & Others") in which the Tribunal held that the situation  in  the
    Formerly Contested  Areas,  including  the  governorate  of  Kirkuk  is
    complex and whether the return of an individual to such an  area  would
    be contrary to Article 15(c) requires a fact-sensitive, "sliding scale"
    assessment.  She noted the Upper Tribunal had said:


         "The  impact  of  any  of  the  personal   characteristics   listed
         immediately below must be carefully assessed against the  situation
         in the area  to  which  return  is  contemplated,  with  particular
         reference to the extent of ongoing ISIL activity and the  behaviour
         of the security  actors  in  control  of  that  area.   Within  the
         framework of such an analysis, the other  personal  characteristics
         which are capable of being relevant, individually and cumulatively,
         to the sliding scale analysis required  by  Article  15(c)  are  as
         follows:


          . Opposition to or  criticism  of  the  GOI,  the  KRG  or  local
            security actors;


          . Membership of a national, ethnic or religious  group  which  is
            either in the minority in the area in question, or  not  in  de
            facto control of that area;


          . LGBTI individuals, those not conforming to  Islamic  mores  and
            wealthy or Westernised individuals;


          . Humanitarian or medical staff and those associated with Western
            organisations or security forces;


          . Women and children without genuine family support; and


          . Individuals with disabilities."


 8. Judge Obhi noted that although the appellant originates from Kirkuk, he
    does not have any of  the  personal  characteristics  listed,  and  she
    concluded that he cannot succeed in his claim that he will be  at  risk
    of indiscriminate violence, or that he comes within  Article  15(C)  of
    the Qualification Directive.


 9. She went on to consider the appellant's claim that he has  no  identity
    documents. She noted the appellant will be  returned  to  Baghdad,  and
    referred to headnote [9] of the country guidance in SMO & Others,  that
    an international protection claim cannot succeed by  reference  to  any
    alleged risk of harm arising from an absence of a  current  or  expired
    Iraqi passport or a Laissez passer, if  the  Tribunal  finds  that  the
    person's return is not currently feasible on account of a lack  of  any
    of those documents.


10. Judge Obhi noted, at paragraph [37], that although the appellant  is  a
    Kurd, he does not originate from the Kurdish area. She  concludes  that
    internal relocation to the IKR  is  possible  for  the  appellant.   At
    paragraphs [38] to [40] of her decision, Judge Obhi states:


         "38. The appellant is a fit and healthy young man. He has travelled
         throughout Europe and therefore is perhaps not as vulnerable as  he
         portrays himself  to  be.  I  note  that  he  has  been  prescribed
         antibiotics and antidepressants, but the evidence,  including  that
         from Lets Talk suggests that his depression is  well  managed  with
         his medication. Furthermore, he does have support,  including  that
         of [Mr T] who is himself a former national of  Iraq  and  who  upon
         acquiring British nationality has returned to Iraq  for  a  holiday
         and clearly does not consider it  a  dangerous  place  for  him  to
         return to for a holiday. I found [Mr T]'s evidence in  relation  to
         his trip to Iraq to be guarded, he denied that he has family  still
         in Iraq, I do not accept that. It is more likely than not  that  he
         returned to visit family even though he claims that he stayed at  a
         hotel. To return to a country from which he fled  through  fear  of
         persecution for a holiday without the attraction of a family member
         is not, in my view, credible.


         39.   Although the appellant claims that he has no contact with any
         family member in Iraq those claims  have  to  be  taken  with  some
         caution, as he clearly does not want to return and from what he has
         said, his family did not want him to return  and  he  is  therefore
         bound to say that he has no-one to return to. It is likely that  he
         has contact with  family  members  in  Iraq  and  he  could  obtain
         replacement ID documents. Similarly, he could attend at a  CSA  and
         provide  details  of  the  page  reference  in  the  Family   Book,
         information that he is likely to have or be able to obtain.


         40.  In terms of his private life, the appellant has provided  very
         little evidence of any integration into the wider community in  the
         UK. He has  been  in  the  UK  for  a  limited  time  and  has  not
         established either a private  or  a  family  life  which  would  be
         significantly interfered with if he were required to return to  his
         country of origin. I do not find the appellant to be a  refugee  or
         to be  at  risk  of  indiscriminate  violence  under  article  15c;
         therefore, there are no insurmountable obstacles to his return.


11. The appellant advances two grounds of  appeal.  First,  the  judge  has
    failed to provide adequate reasons as  to  why  the  appellant's  human
    rights claim was not made out. Second, the judge reached an  irrational
    decision and/or failed to provide adequate reasons for her decision.


12. Mr Islam submits the appellant left  Iraq  as  a  child  and  last  had
    contact with his family in December 2015.  He submits the Judge has not
    adequately considered what has  happened  to  the  appellant's  family,
    including the possibility that they may have been killed,  and  whether
    the appellant will be able to  obtain  the  CSID  documents  to  enable
    travel from Baghdad to the IKR.  Mr Islam submits the Judge  failed  to
    properly consider the country guidance set out in SMO & Others and that
    a more detailed assessment of the evidence was  required.   He  submits
    the key issue is whether the appellant can obtain a CSID, and there  is
    a risk that the appellant's family do not remain in Iraq.  Furthermore,
    even upon return to the IKR, there is a risk that the  appellant  would
    be destitute and thus internal relocation would  be  unduly  harsh.  Mr
    Islam submits that if the appellant  cannot  obtain  a  CSID  document,
    internal relocation to the IKR would not be  possible  and  it  follows
    that there would be  very  significant  obstacles  to  the  appellant's
    integration in Iraq.  Mr Islam accepts the outcome  of  the  Article  8
    claim stands and falls with the claim for international protection.


13. In reply, Mrs Aboni relied upon the respondent's Rule  24  reply  dated
    30th July 2020 and submits the Judge gave  adequate  reasons  and  made
    findings that were open to  her  on  the  evidence.   She  submits  the
    findings and conclusions reached by the Judge are in line with the most
    recent country guidance set out in SMO & Others.   She  refers  to  the
    country guidance in  which  the  Tribunal  noted  that  the  number  of
    individuals who do not know and could not ascertain  their  volume  and
    page reference in the civil register would be quite small because it is
    a piece of information which is of significance to the  individual  and
    their family from the moment of their birth.  It is entered on  various
    documents and is ever present in  that  person's  life.   At  paragraph
    [392], the Upper Tribunal also said:


         "There will of course be those who can plausibly claim not to  know
         these details.  Those who left Iraq at a  particularly  young  age,
         those who are mentally  unwell  and  those  who  have  issues  with
         literacy or numeracy may all be able to make such a claim plausibly
         but we consider that it will be very much  the  exception  that  an
         individual would be unaware of a matter so fundamental to their own
         identity and that of their family.  The  letter  from  the  Embassy
         also suggested that most  Iraqis  would  be  able  to  obtain  this
         information easily.  Again, that  assertion  is  unsurprising  when
         viewed in its proper context.  As is clear from AAH(Iraq), Iraq  is
         a collectivist society in which the family is all important.  It is
         also a country with a high prevalence  of  mobile  telephone  usage
         amongst the adult population.  Even when we bear in mind the  years
         of conflict and displacement in Iraq, we would expect there  to  be
         only a small number of cases in which an individual could plausibly
         claim to have no means of contacting a family member from whom  the
         relevant volume and page reference  could  be  obtained  or  traced
         back."


14. Mrs Aboni  submits  the  appellant  has  not  given  credible  evidence
    regarding the loss of contact with his family and it was  open  to  the
    judge to conclude that his claim that he has no contact with any family
    member in Iraqi, must be taken with caution.  She submits it  was  open
    to the Judge to conclude the appellant has been in the UK for a limited
    time and has not established either a private or a  family  life  which
    would be significantly interfered with if he were required to return to
    Iraq.  She submits it was open to the judge to conclude that there  are
    no very significant obstacles to the appellant's reintegration in Iraq.


15. Although many of the criticisms  made  by  the  appellant  have  little
    merit, in my judgement, Judge Obhi failed  to  adequately  address  the
    risk upon return.  I reject the claim made by the appellant that  Judge
    Obhi failed to have regard to the fact the appellant is a Sunni  Muslim
    Kurd, who lived outside the IKR.  Contrary  to  what  is  said  by  the
    appellant, at paragraph  [2]  of  her  decision  the  Judge  noted  the
    appellant was born in Kirkuk and at paragraph [32], she noted  that  in
    relation to formerly contested area such as Kirkuk, there needs to be a
    fact sensitive "sliding  scale"  assessment  based  upon  a  number  of
    factors set out in the country guidance. Judge  Obhi  noted,  at  [33],
    that the appellant does not have any of  the  personal  characteristics
    that would  put  him  at  risk  and  again  noted  that  the  appellant
    originates from Kirkuk, which is a formerly contested area.  Judge Obhi
    does not however make an express finding that the appellant  would  not
    be at risk upon return to Kirkuk and thus  could  return  to  his  home
    area.


16. At paragraph [37], Judge Obhi noted the appellant is a  Kurd  but  does
    not originate from the Kurdish area.  She states that relocation to the
    Kurdish area is possible  for  the  appellant,  but  does  not  address
    whether it would be unduly harsh for the appellant to relocate  to  the
    IKR, how the appellant would travel from Baghdad to the  IKR,  and  the
    circumstances in which he would be living in the IKR.  The support that
    Judge Obhi refers to as being available  to  the  appellant,  including
    that of [Mr T] is not identified.  Although Judge Obhi states that  the
    appellant's claim that he has no contact with  any  family  members  in
    Iraq must be  taken  with  some  caution,  she  does  not  reject  that
    evidence.  She does say, at [39], that it is likely the  appellant  has
    contact with family members in Iraq, but she does not give reasons  for
    reaching that finding.


17. I quite accept that at paragraph [391] of the country guidance in SMO &
    Others the Upper Tribunal noted that the number of individuals  who  do
    not know and could not ascertain their volume and page reference  would
    be quite small. The details were said to appear  on  numerous  official
    documents, including an Iraqi passport, wedding certificate  and  birth
    certificate, as well as the CSID.   The Upper Tribunal  had  noted  the
    volume and  page  reference  in  the  civil  register  is  a  piece  of
    information which is of significance to the individual and their family
    from the moment of their birth.  It is entered on various documents and
    is ever present in that person's life.  That however must be considered
    in light of what was said by the Upper  Tribunal  at  paragraph  [392].
    That is, there will be those who can plausibly claim not to know  these
    details.  Those who left Iraq at a particularly young  age,  those  who
    are mentally unwell,  and  those  who  have  issues  with  literacy  or
    numeracy may all be able to make such a claim plausibly, even though it
    will be very much the exception that an individual would be unaware  of
    a matter so fundamental to their own identity and that of their family.
     These are not matters that are in my judgement adequately addressed at
    paragraph [39] of the decision.


18. It follows that in my judgement the decision of Judge Obhi is  vitiated
    by a material error of law and must be set aside.  As  to  disposal,  I
    have decided that it is appropriate to remit this appeal  back  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal, having considered  paragraph  7.2  of  the  Senior
    President's Practice Statement of 25th September 2012.  In my view,  in
    determining the appeal, the nature and extent  of  any  judicial  fact-
    finding necessary will be extensive.


19. The parties will be advised of the  date  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    hearing in due course.


    Notice of Decision


20. The appeal is allowed and the decision of FtT Judge Obhi promulgated on
    7th February 2020 is set aside.


21. The appeal is remitted to the FtT for a fresh  hearing  of  the  appeal
    with no findings preserved.


22. I make an anonymity direction.

Signed   V. Mandalia   Date: 11th September 2020
             Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia






