
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10081/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                  |Decision and Reasons Promulgated    |
|On: 8 February 2019                    |On: 22 February 2019                |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     DS
                         (Anonymity Direction made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr D Chirico, instructed by Birnberg Peirce &
Partners


                            DECISION AND REASONS

This is an appeal by the Secretary of State for the Home Department  against
the decision of the First-tier Tribunal allowing DS's appeal, to  a  limited
extent, against the respondent's  decision  to  refuse  his  protection  and
human rights claim further to a decision to deport him pursuant  to  section
32(5) of the UK Borders Act 2007.

For the purposes  of  this  decision,  I  shall  hereinafter  refer  to  the
Secretary of State as the respondent and DS  as  the  appellant,  reflecting
their positions as they were in the appeal before the First-tier Tribunal.

The appellant is a citizen of Jamaica, born on 7 November 1994.  He  arrived
in the United Kingdom on a visitor visa on 9 August 2004, aged 10 years,  to
join his mother in the UK. No applications for further leave to remain  were
made.  From  July  2009  to  January  2014  the  appellant  accumulated   10
convictions relating to 16 offences. On 3  June  2011  he  was  served  with
notice of liability to deportation and responded by claiming to be  at  risk
on return to Jamaica. He was interviewed about his  claim  and  then  served
with a further notice of liability to deportation on 14 October 2013.

 On 15 January 2014 the appellant was convicted of blackmail,  possessing  a
knife blade/ sharp pointed article in public and theft  from  a  person  and
was sentenced to a total of 6 years' imprisonment. On 2  July  2014  and  26
August 2014 the respondent invited  the  appellant  to  seek  to  rebut  the
presumption under section 72 of the Nationality, Immigration Act  2002  that
he had been convicted of a particularly  serious  crime  and  constituted  a
danger to the community. The appellant failed  to  respond.  On  14  January
2015 the respondent issued a deportation order pursuant to section 32(5)  of
the 2007 Act and on 15 January  2015  the  respondent  made  a  decision  to
refuse the appellant's protection and human rights  claim.  The  respondent,
in that  decision,  certified  the  appellant's  human  rights  claim  under
section 94B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002.  Following
a judicial review  claim  challenging  the  certificate,  the  decision  and
certification were maintained  in  a  further  decision  of  16  June  2015.
However, the respondent subsequently withdrew the decision  to  certify  the
appellant's claim under section 94B following the Supreme Court decision  in
Kiarie and Byndloss, R (on the applications of) v  Secretary  of  State  for
the Home Department [2017] UKSC 42 and in light of the  appellant's  medical
condition.

A new decision was made by the respondent on  21  September  2017,  refusing
the appellant's protection and human rights claim, but  not  certifying  the
claim under section 94B. In that decision the respondent certified that  the
presumption in section 72(2) of the 2002 Act applied to him and  his  asylum
claim was refused on that basis. The  respondent  considered  in  any  event
that the appellant was at no risk on return to  Jamaica,  that  he  was  not
entitled to humanitarian protection and that his removal  would  not  breach
his Article 3 human rights. The respondent considered submissions made on  5
September 2016 in regard  to  the  appellant's  health,  noting  that  on  1
September 2015 he had contracted TB meningitis whilst serving his  custodial
sentence, that he had been admitted  to  hospital  with  a  life-threatening
condition on 26 August 2015 and that he had been placed in an induced  coma.
He had had a shunt inserted in his head in a procedure on 14  October  2015,
to relieve pressure from the TB meningitis, and had  been  receiving  follow
up treatment  from  a  neurosurgeon.  The  respondent  considered  that  the
appellant no longer had TB and that he could receive adequate  treatment  in
Jamaica. It was considered that Article 3 was not engaged on that  basis  or
on the claimed risk of suicide. As for Article 8, the respondent noted  that
the appellant had no claim to  any  relationships  in  the  UK  and  had  no
children and that he had been living in the UK without any lawful leave.  It
was considered that  there  were  no  very  compelling  circumstances  which
outweighed the public interest in his deportation and that  his  deportation
would not, therefore, breach his Article 8 rights.

The appellant appealed against that decision. In the grounds  of  appeal  to
the First-tier Tribunal it was asserted that the appellant was  at  risk  on
return to Jamaica from gang members, that his  Article  3  rights  would  be
breached if he were deported on health  grounds  and  that  his  deportation
would breach his Article 8 rights on the grounds of family and private  life
as well as his serious mental  and  physical  health  issues.  It  was  also
asserted that the appellant  had  ongoing  civil  proceedings  for  clinical
negligence due to him contracting TB  meningitis  whilst  imprisoned,  which
required him to be present in the UK to meet with his legal team and  to  be
assessed by medical experts, and that his removal whilst  those  proceedings
were pending would breach his Article 6 rights.

The appellant's appeal was adjourned on more than one occasion in  order  to
await medical reports which had been requested for  the  civil  proceedings.
The appeal then came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Onoufriou on  11  July
2018. The appellant was represented  at  that  hearing  by  Mr  Chirico.  Mr
Chirico produced a skeleton argument for the hearing in which  he  submitted
that the appellant's deportation would be  in  breach  of  the  respondent's
obligations under the Human Rights Act 1998, in particular the  decision  to
remove the appellant prior to the conclusion of his civil  litigation  would
breach his Article 6 rights; the decision to remove the appellant  prior  to
the conclusion of his civil litigation would breach  his  Article  3  and  8
procedural rights and the decision to remove the appellant was a  breach  of
the respondent's duty to investigate in the context of his Article 3  and  8
claims.

Mr Chirico submitted, as a preliminary matter, that the appellant's  removal
whilst the civil proceedings were ongoing  would  breach  his  rights  under
Article 6 of the ECHR as he  would  not  have  the  opportunity  of  a  fair
hearing if he had to conduct that hearing from Jamaica.  He  submitted  that
the  appellant's  civil  proceedings  had  not  been  referred  to  by   the
respondent in the refusal letter. Mr Chirico also submitted that  there  was
a potential breach of the appellant's Article 8 rights in  respect  of  both
proceedings, the civil proceedings and the deportation proceedings, as  both
required the procurement of the same experts' reports  regarding  his  brain
damage and mental health. Mr Chirico relied on the case of MS (Ivory  Coast)
v Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department  [2007]  EWCA  Civ  133  in
submitting that the appellant should be granted a short period of  leave  to
remain in the UK in order to pursue his civil action. He confirmed that  the
appellant was withdrawing his  asylum  claim.  The  Home  Office  Presenting
Officer, Ms Syed is recorded in the  judge's  decision  at  [11]  as  having
accepted that the refusal letter did not address  the  appellant's  need  to
remain in the UK to pursue his civil proceedings and having  agreed  not  to
oppose Mr Chirico's request that the appellant be allowed limited  leave  to
remain in the UK in order to pursue his  civil  claim  provided  his  asylum
claim was conceded.

Judge  Onoufriou  had  regard  to  the  evidence  relating  to   the   civil
proceedings  and  the  current  situation  as  regards  the  procurement  of
relevant expert reports and referred to the case of Quaquah [2000] INLR  196
in relation to Article 6. He found that the appellant's removal from the  UK
before his civil litigation had concluded would breach his Article 6  rights
to a fair trial and allowed the  appeal  to  the  limited  extent  that  the
appellant was to be granted discretionary leave to enable him to pursue  his
civil proceedings. The judge said that the appellant's claims under  Article
3 of the ECHR based on his medical condition and Article  8  in  respect  of
private and family life were extant.

The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal,
asserting that it was not clear what the judge meant  when  concluding  that
the appellant's claims under Article 3 and 8 were extant, as he  was  seized
of determining the appeal at the date of the hearing. It was  asserted  that
the judge had made insufficient findings as to why the appellant  could  not
pursue his civil claim from  Jamaica  and  it  was  not  clear  how  Quaquah
applied to the appellant's case. It was also  asserted,  with  reference  to
the case of Ullah, R (on the Application of) v  Special  Adjudicator  [2004]
UKHL 26, that whilst Article 6 could  be  engaged  in  immigration  appeals,
there would have to be a flagrant violation of  that  right  which  had  not
been shown in the appellant's case.

Permission was granted in the First-tier Tribunal on 15 August 2018,  albeit
in a contradictory and incomplete decision.

In a Rule 24 response dated 24 September 2018, Mr Chirico, on behalf of  the
appellant submitted that the respondent's grounds failed  to  refer  to  the
concession recorded at [11] of the judge's decision in which the  Presenting
Office had conceded that there was no objection to the appeal being  allowed
to the extent that leave be  granted  to  the  appellant  whilst  his  civil
proceedings were pending. The judge was entitled to rely on that  concession
and allow the appeal on the basis that he did. Mr Chirico also  objected  to
the reference in the respondent's grounds to Article 6  having  been  raised
belatedly at the hearing, when that was not the  case  and  the  matter  had
been raised in the previous judicial review proceedings in relation  to  the
section 94B  certificate  and  the  grounds  of  appeal  to  the  First-tier
Tribunal. Mr Chirico asserted that it was not  open  to  the  respondent  to
advance the argument made in the grounds, that the  appellant  could  pursue
his civil claim from Jamaica,  without  applying  to  withdraw,  and  having
consent to withdraw, the concession. As for the reliance in the  grounds  on
Ullah, that was not a matter advanced before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  it
was inconsistent with  the  concession  made  at  the  hearing  and  it  was
misconceived as Ullah related to foreign claims.

Appeal hearing and submissions on 19 November 2018

The appeal came before me initially on 19 November 2018.  At  that  hearing,
the appellant was  represented  by  Mr  Furner  and  the  respondent  by  Mr
Lindsay. Mr Furner produced a witness statement from Mr Chirico in  relation
to the proceedings before the First-tier Tribunal.

In that statement Mr Chirico confirmed that  [8]  to  [11]  of  the  judge's
decision  was  entirely  consistent  with  his  own  recollection   of   the
proceedings. Mr Chirico confirmed that the issue of the appellant's  Article
6 rights was before the Secretary of State as part of the appellant's  human
rights claim long before the decision in the current proceedings and  formed
part of the grounds of appeal before the  First-tier  Tribunal.  Mr  Chirico
confirmed that he informed the judge at the hearing that he did not  seek  a
further adjournment but was asking that the appeal be  allowed  outright  on
Article 6 and other procedural grounds. He confirmed  that  the  judge  then
asked the Home Office Presenting Officer, Ms Syed,  whether  the  respondent
would oppose the appeal being allowed on limited Article 6 grounds,  with  a
view to a grant of leave for the period of the  civil  claim.  He  confirmed
that she had accepted that the  most  recent  decision  did  not  deal  with
Article 6 at all and she was clearly aware of  the  Article  6  issue.  When
asked by the judge to confirm whether the Secretary of State would agree  to
allowing the  appeal  on  limited  Article  6  grounds,  she  provided  that
confirmation. The judge then confirmed that the appeal would be  allowed  on
that basis and  as  a  result  no  further  submissions  were  made  on  the
evidence. Mr Chirico confirmed that when  chatting  to  Ms  Syed  after  the
judge had left the courtroom it was perfectly clear that both of  them  were
aware that the appeal had been allowed and no objection  was  raised  by  Ms
Syed.

Mr Lindsay appeared before me at the hearing for the Secretary of State  and
said that he had not seen the Rule 24 response prior to the hearing and  was
unaware of the issue relating  to  a  concession.  He  produced  the  appeal
hearing record sheet  completed  by  Ms  Syed  on  11  July  2018  which  he
submitted did not indicate  that  there  had  been  any  concession  by  the
respondent. He submitted that [11] of the judge's decision was not a  record
of a concession that the appeal  be  allowed,  but  that  the  appellant  be
allowed to argue the Article 6 point as Ms Syed may have  believed  that  it
had only been raised at the hearing. Mr Lindsay submitted  that  if  it  was
considered that there had been such a concession, then it was  a  concession
of law and not fact and had been wrongly made on the law and  therefore  did
not bind the Secretary of State. It had been wrongly made because  the  test
of flagrant denial of justice, as set out in Ullah, had  not  been  reached.
If it was considered that an application needed to be made to  withdraw  the
concession, then such an application was made. The key point  was  that  the
appellant could pursue his civil claim from  Jamaica  and  it  was  for  the
appellant to show why he could not do so. The test in Ullah was not met.

Mr Furner submitted that it was not possible to read  [11]  in  the  way  Mr
Lindsay suggested as it was clear that Article 6 had been raised  previously
and not only at the hearing itself. It was clear that a concession had  been
made that the appellant be granted a period of leave. The note from Ms  Syed
was not clear and there was no statement from her. There  was  no  ambiguity
given the Tribunal's record of proceedings and Mr  Chirico's  statement.  If
there had been no concession, then it was difficult to understand why  there
were no further submissions about the expert evidence.  Mr  Furner  accepted
that the Tribunal was not always bound to accept a concession  made  by  the
Secretary of State, but submitted that  it  would  only  be  in  exceptional
circumstances that a concession could be withdrawn. Mr Furner relied on  the
case of AK (Sierra Leone) v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
[2016] EWCA Civ 999 in submitting that in this case the  concession  was  as
to the outcome of the appeal and therefore was not a concession  of  law  as
Mr Lindsay suggested. The  judge  did  not  err  in  law  by  accepting  the
concession. At [20], when referring to the Article  3  and  8  claims  being
extant, the judge was simply recognising that the substantive Article 3  and
8  claims  could  not  be  determined  until  the  outcome  of   the   civil
proceedings. The procedural protection in Article 8 was, however,  the  same
as in Article 6. The judge did not err, therefore, by  not  determining  the
substantive Article 3 and 8 claims. The respondent's reliance on  Ullah  was
misconceived as that case was referring to "foreign"  cases  and  there  was
therefore no flagrancy threshold in this case.

In response Mr Lindsay submitted that the Home Office was not aware  of  the
Rule 24 notice and there  was  no  evidence  of  it  having  been  received.
Therefore the Home Office was not on notice of any need to obtain a  witness
statement from  Ms  Syed.  The  Tribunal  was  not  bound  by  the  asserted
concession.

In a decision of  28  November  2018  I  made  the  following  findings  and
directions:

         "18. I deal firstly with a preliminary matter which  was  addressed
         at the commencement of the  hearing  in  regard  to  the  grant  of
         permission, in that the decision made by  the  First-tier  Tribunal
         granting permission was in substance contradictory,  suggesting  in
         parts that permission would not be granted but in  others  that  it
         should. It was agreed by all parties that permission would be taken
         as having been granted and the matter therefore  proceeded  on  the
         basis that the Upper Tribunal was seized of the matter.


         19.  Turning to the  respondent's  grounds  seeking  permission,  I
         agree with Mr Furner that the author of the grounds appears to have
         had limited understanding of the evidence before the  Tribunal  and
         the issues arising  at  the  hearing  when  drafting  the  grounds.
         Paragraph 5 of the grounds refers to the issue of Article 6  having
         only been raised at the hearing and it appears that it was  on  the
         basis of that misunderstanding  that  the  author  of  the  grounds
         considered, at  paragraph  5,  that  the  concession  made  by  the
         Presenting Officer was an acceptance that Article 6  grounds  could
         be raised and argued by Mr  Chirico  at  the  hearing.  However  Mr
         Lindsay quite rightly accepted that Article 6  had  been  a  matter
         before the Secretary of State for  some  time,  that  it  had  been
         included in the grounds of appeal before  the  First-tier  Tribunal
         and that it had not been raised only at the hearing.


         20.  Nevertheless Mr Lindsay sought to pursue that argument and  to
         rely on such an explanation for the concession recorded at [11]  of
         the judge's decision, submitting that that was consistent  with  Ms
         Syed's appeal hearing record sheet, and that there had in fact been
         no concession by the respondent that the appeal should be  allowed.
         However I agree with Mr Furner that that simply cannot explain  the
         concession recorded at [11], given that  it  was  absolutely  clear
         that Article 6 was already a ground of appeal before  the  Tribunal
         and there was therefore no need for any concession to  be  made  to
         permit Mr Chirico to argue the matter. The judge's record  at  [11]
         was of a clear concession by Ms Syed that she  did  not  oppose  Mr
         Chirico's request that the appeal be allowed on the  limited  basis
         that the appellant be granted a period of leave to pursue his civil
         claim. That is entirely consistent with the extract I read  out  to
         the parties from the judge's  handwritten  record  of  proceedings,
         which states as follows:


             "Ms Syed: ...If  PA  claim  fallen  away  to  be  recorded  in
             Determination. In those circs I would not oppose Mr  Chirico's
             request that app. allowed under Art. 6 to ltd  extent  that  A
             can conclude his clinical neg claim."


         21.  It is also consistent with Mr Chirico's detailed  recollection
         of what happened at the appeal hearing, as set out in  his  witness
         statement and the attached attendance notes. It is also consistent,
         as  Mr  Furner  submitted,  with  there  having  been  no   further
         submissions made and with the judge allowing  the  appeal  at  that
         point without hearing further from the parties. As  for  Ms  Syed's
         note, upon which Mr Lindsay relies, whilst there  is  no  reference
         therein to a concession, the note does not make her position clear.
         Mr Lindsay relies upon the record of Ms Syed's submission,  in  her
         note, that the civil proceedings  could  still  be  continued  from
         Jamaica, but on the other hand the  penultimate  paragraph  of  her
         note refers to her acceptance of the judge's indication that he was
         minded to allow the appeal. I do not agree  with  Mr  Lindsay  that
         such an ambiguous record can support the respondent's position that
         there was no concession as to  the  outcome  of  the  appeal,  when
         considered in the light of the judge's handwritten  record  of  the
         proceedings, Mr Chirico's statement and  attendance  note  and  the
         judge's record at [11] of his decision. I am therefore entirely  of
         the view that there was  an  unequivocal  concession  made  by  the
         respondent at the hearing before Judge Onoufriou that the appeal be
         allowed to the extent that the appellant be  granted  a  period  of
         limited leave in order to pursue the civil proceedings.


         22.  The second issue to be determined is  whether  the  respondent
         could, however, now withdraw the concession. It  was  Mr  Lindsay's
         case that the concession was a concession of  law  which  had  been
         wrongly made and should therefore be withdrawn. He  submitted  that
         the concession was contrary to the legal position set out in Ullah,
         that there would have to be shown to have been a  "flagrant  denial
         of justice", which the appellant had not  done.  However  I  am  in
         agreement with Mr Furner that the respondent's reliance upon  Ullah
         is misconceived, since Ullah was concerned with "foreign" cases, as
         the extract quoted  in  the  grounds  clearly  shows:  "It  can  be
         regarded as settled  law  that  where  there  is  a  real  risk  of
         flagrant denial of justice in the country to which an individual is
         to be  deported  article  6  may  be  engaged."  That  is  entirely
         different to the appellant's case, which involved civil proceedings
         in the UK and was thus a "domestic" case. I  therefore  reject  the
         respondent's grounds in that respect.


         23.  However, there is a further matter which appears not  to  have
         been considered by the judge  or  the  parties  at  the  First-tier
         Tribunal and which was  not  raised  in  the  respondent's  grounds
         seeking permission or by the parties  in  the  hearing  before  me.
         Indeed, the respondent's grounds at [9] are to the  contrary.  That
         is, that the judge could not have allowed the appeal under  Article
         6. The appellant and the judge had regard to the case of Quaquah in
         that respect, but subsequent jurisprudence confirms that Article  6
         is not applicable in immigration decisions.


         24.  In Maaouia v. France - 39652/98 [2000] ECHR 455, the ECHR held
         at [40] that: "The Court concludes  that  decisions  regarding  the
         entry,  stay  and  deportation  of  aliens  do  not   concern   the
         determination of an applicant's civil rights or obligations or of a
         criminal charge against him, within the meaning of Article 6 � 1 of
         the Convention."


         25.  The House of Lords, in RB (Algeria) v Secretary of  State  for
         the Home Department [2009] UKHL 10, relied upon the  ECHR  judgment
         in Maaouia at [172] and found at [175] that: "It is clear that  the
         criterion for the ECHR in deciding whether article 6 is engaged  is
         the  nature  of  the  proceedings  and  not  the  articles  of  the
         Convention which are alleged to be  violated.  If  the  proceedings
         concern deportation, article 6 is not engaged,  whatever  might  be
         the other articles potentially  infringed  by  removal  to  another
         country."


         26.  The question  therefore  arises  whether  the  respondent  was
         correct in submitting that the concession was one of law which  had
         been wrongly made, albeit for different reasons than  those  argued
         by Mr Lindsay. It seems to me that, whilst the concession  referred
         to Article 6, what was in fact conceded was  that  the  appellant's
         removal would breach his human rights on the basis  that  it  would
         deprive him of the opportunity to have a fair trial  in  regard  to
         the civil proceedings. That was similar to the issue in  MS  (Ivory
         Coast) which was relied upon by Mr Chirico as recorded  at  [9]  of
         the judge's decision and which was followed by Ms Syed's concession
         as recorded at [11], that the  appellant  ought  to  be  granted  a
         period leave in order to pursue his  civil  claim.  Accordingly  it
         seems to me that the concession was not one of law but was in  fact
         a concession of the type referred to at [48] and [49] of AK (Sierra
         Leone), to which Mr Furner referred, in that  it  was  such  as  to
         determine the entire appeal. That is  because  the  effect  of  the
         concession is that the exceptions to deportation are  met  and  the
         appellant cannot be deported.


         27.  Therefore, whether or not the respondent had had sight of  the
         appellant's Rule 24 response to the grant of  permission  referring
         to the concession, and thus had not had an opportunity  to  make  a
         formal application for the concession to be  withdrawn,  I  do  not
         consider there to be any grounds justifying  a  withdrawal  of  the
         concession and I see no justification for permitting a resurrection
         of the Secretary of State's case that the  appellant  could  pursue
         his civil claim from Jamaica.  The  respondent  made  a  clear  and
         unequivocal concession at the hearing and it was on that basis that
         the appeal was allowed. The judge  did  not  err  by  allowing  the
         appeal in line with the concession and the  respondent  cannot  now
         resile from that concession.


         28.  As to the judge's comment at [20], that the appellant's claims
         under Article 3 and 8 are extant,  Mr  Furner  explained  that  the
         appellant had  effectively  withdrawn  his  grounds  of  appeal  on
         substantive Article 3 and 8 grounds. That was on the basis that the
         intention was that an application  would  then  be  made  on  those
         grounds prior to the end of the period of discretionary leave which
         was to be  granted,  since  those  matters  could  not  be  decided
         currently as it was necessary to await the  outcome  of  the  civil
         proceedings. Mr Furner explained that the procedural aspects of the
         protection provided by Articles 3 and  8  were  the  same  as  that
         afforded by Article 6. I therefore  see  nothing  material  arising
         from the judge's comment at [20], although it could have been  more
         clearly expressed.


         29.  That then brings me to the disposal of this appeal.  Whilst  I
         have no hesitation in concluding that the judge made  no  error  of
         law in allowing the appeal on the limited basis that the  appellant
         be granted a period of discretionary leave to enable him to  pursue
         his civil proceedings, I do find that he erred in law  by  allowing
         the appeal under Article 6, for the reasons given above. In view of
         the fact that the respondent's concession, and  the  judge's  basis
         for allowing the appeal, was effectively that the  public  interest
         did not lie in removing the appellant and, consequently, as long as
         Article 8 was engaged, removal would be  disproportionate  at  that
         point in time, my preliminary view is that the decision can  simply
         be re-made by  allowing  the  appeal  on  Article  8  private  life
         grounds, to the limited extent stated by the judge  at  [18].  That
         would be consistent with the outcome in MS (Ivory Coast)  and  with
         Mr Chirico's submission, relying on the  case  of  Gudanaviciene  &
         Ors, R (on the application of) v The Director of Legal Aid Casework
         & Or [2014] EWCA Civ 1622, that the procedural protection  provided
         by Article 8 was in practice indistinguishable from  that  provided
         in civil proceedings by Article 6 and would be  consistent  with  a
         finding that the Article 6 aspect of the appellant's case  provided
         very  compelling  circumstances  under   paragraph   398   of   the
         immigration rules.


         30.  However, I am mindful that this is a matter  that  has  arisen
         after the hearing without the parties being given an opportunity to
         make  submissions.  Accordingly  it  is  appropriate  for  such  an
         opportunity to be given by way of oral or written submissions.  The
         appeal will therefore be listed for a resumed  hearing  before  the
         Upper Tribunal  and  I  make  the  following  directions  for  that
         hearing.


         Directions


          1) The parties may make written submissions in the alternative to
             attending the hearing, provided  that  those  submissions  are
             filed with this Tribunal and served on the opposing  party  no
             later than 14 days before the hearing.


          2) Any further documentary evidence is  to  be  filed  with  this
             Tribunal and served on the opposing party, not  less  than  14
             days before the date of the resumed hearing."

Appeal Hearing and Submissions on 8 February 2019

In response to the directions  above,  both  parties  made  further  written
submissions and both appeared before me at  the  hearing  and  made  further
submissions in person.

Mr Jarvis accepted that if the Tribunal was against him  in  regard  to  the
relevance of Article  6,  that  would  dispose  of  the  appeal,  given  the
Tribunal's view on the respondent's concession. However the  respondent  did
not accept that Article 6 applied and any concession by Mr  Lindsay  to  the
contrary was withdrawn. Mr Jarvis did not accept that there were  two  types
of Article 8 claims, namely procedural and substantive, and therefore  there
had been a failure  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  to  determine  the
Article 3 and 8 grounds of  appeal,  which  he  had  referred  to  as  being
extant. He considered there  to  be  concerns  about  the  Upper  Tribunal's
jurisdiction in the appeal as a result of  the  failure  of  the  First-tier
Tribunal to determine all the grounds before it. Mr  Jarvis  submitted  that
there was no domestic or EU jurisprudence subsequent to  Quaquah  supporting
the claim that Article 6 was applicable and he referred additionally to  the
case of Mohan v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2012]  EWCA  Civ
1363 in that regard. He submitted that the concession made before the First-
tier Tribunal was wrong in law and therefore could  not  stand,  as  in  the
case of Koori & Ors v The Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2016]
EWCA Civ 552. The concession could not be read as accepting  that  the  case
succeeded under Article 8 as there had not been a full Article 8  assessment
including consideration  of  section  117A  to  D.  The  question  of  "very
compelling circumstances" still needed to be determined.

I advised Mr Chirico at that point that I had some difficulty  with  my  own
previous indication at [26] to [29] of my previous  decision  in  regard  to
the reach of the concession, and that I  needed  to  be  persuaded  that  my
previous view was correct, namely that the concession determined  the  whole
proceedings and would have  necessitated  the  appeal  being  allowed  under
Article 8 in the event that Article 6 could not be relied upon.

Mr Chirico accepted that if  Article  6  could  not  apply,  the  presenting
officer's concession before the First-tier Tribunal had  been  wrongly  made
in law. However it was his case that Article 6 did apply  and  that  Quaquah
remained good law and was  not  inconsistent  with  subsequent  caselaw.  He
relied in particular on Ullah and RB (Algeria). He  submitted  that  if  the
Tribunal was against him in that regard, it was his  case  that  a  decision
allowing the appeal under Article 8 could be substituted and he asked me  to
maintain the previous position  I  had  held  in  that  regard.  Mr  Chirico
submitted that if it was  found  that  Article  6  did  not  apply  and  the
findings could not be transferred into an Article 8  decision,  there  would
need to be a hearing de novo in the First-tier Tribunal.

With regard to the applicability of Article 6,  it  was  Mr  Chirico's  case
that there were two types of human rights claims and that it  was  only  the
first type that recent jurisprudence considered fell outside  the  scope  of
Article 6. Those were challenges to the fairness of immigration  proceedings
and included issues such as challenges  to  section  94B  certification  and
closed hearings. Maaoui was such a case which involved a  challenge  on  the
basis of the length of the immigration proceedings. However there were  type
2 claims which were challenges  to  removal  on  the  basis  that  it  would
prevent the enjoyment of fair proceedings and there was  nothing  preventing
claims being brought under Article 6 on that basis, as  in  the  appellant's
case. In cases such as Ullah it was found that Article  6  could  be  relied
upon in immigration  cases  in  such  circumstances,  although  Ullah  dealt
specifically with out of country breaches in which there had to be  shown  a
flagrant breach. Mr Chirico referred to RB  (Algeria)  which  involved  both
type 1 and type 2 claims. The House of Lords found that Article  6  did  not
apply to the challenge to closed proceedings, as that was  a  type  1  claim
and was consistent with the  decision  in  Maaoui.  However,  the  appellant
Othman's case also involved a type 2 claim and Article 6  was  found  to  be
applicable with  respect  to  the  question  of  the  fairness  of  criminal
proceedings, albeit in Jordan.  That  was  not  inconsistent  with  Quaquah.
Therefore, if it was accepted that Article 6  could  apply,  the  First-tier
Tribunal was entitled to accept  the  respondent's  concession.  Mr  Chirico
submitted that if the Tribunal was not with him in  that  regard,  then  the
appellant's case should  be  considered  to  fall  within  the  scope  of  a
physical integrity Article 8 case and  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision
should be substituted with a decision allowing the appeal under  Article  8.
If not, the case needed to be remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a
fresh hearing.

Mr Jarvis, in response, submitted that Ullah and RB (Algeria)  were  looking
at the extra-territorial effect of civil proceedings and therefore  did  not
apply  to  the  appellant's  circumstances.  There  was  no  answer  to  the
appellant's claim in respect of domestic  proceedings  such  as  those  that
arose in the cases of Mohan and Ciliz v. The Netherlands -  29192/95  [2000]
ECHR 365, which proceeded on Article 8 grounds. Article 6 was therefore  not
applicable and the concession made by the presenting officer  was  wrong  in
law. Mr Chirico responded by submitting  that  those  were  all  family  law
cases, in which it may have been decided that it was appropriate to  proceed
under Article 8, but the appellant's case was not a family  case.  If  there
was no authority on the point,  then  Quaquah  remained  good  law  and  the
Tribunal ought to follow it.


Discussion

As I informed the parties at the appeal, I  am  not  in  agreement  with  Mr
Jarvis's suggestion that the Upper  Tribunal  had  no  jurisdiction  in  the
matter. Whilst he  argued  that  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Onoufriou  had
failed to determine all the grounds of appeal before him, namely  Article  3
and 8, it is the case that the judge made a decision on the  appeal  and  it
seems to me that the manner in which he dealt with the grounds of appeal  on
Article 3  and  8  forms  part  of  the  Upper  Tribunal's  jurisdiction  in
determining the error of law.

However, I am otherwise  in  agreement  with  the  submissions  made  by  Mr
Jarvis. I am grateful to Mr Jarvis  for  presenting  a  clear  and  properly
reasoned argument for the respondent  and  it  is  indeed  unfortunate  that
there was not such clarity at the earlier stages  in  this  case  where  the
respondent's position lacked consistency.

Whilst I understand the arguments Mr Chirico was presenting, also in a  very
clear and comprehensive way, I am not in agreement with his  submissions  on
the applicability of Article 6. As Mr Jarvis submitted, aside  from  Quaquah
there is no domestic or European jurisprudence  supporting  the  appellant's
position on Article 6. It is also the case, in my view, that Quaquah  is  in
any event limited in its support of the appellant's case on  Article  6  for
various reasons, including the fact that it pre-dated the  incorporation  of
the rights set   out in the   European   Convention   on Human
Rights (ECHR) into domestic British law and thus pre-dated by many years
the growing jurisprudence in that subject, that it  was  a  judicial  review
application rather than a full statutory appeal and that it went no  further
than deciding that the Secretary of State's  approach  to  the  question  of
granting exceptional leave was unlawful and failed to take  account  of  all
relevant considerations. It was not a  case  of  a  statutory  appeal  being
successfully resolved on Article 6 grounds.

As for Mr Chirico's reliance on the cases of Ullah and RB  (Algeria),  those
were "foreign cases" in which the impact on  removal  of  the  applicant  of
unfair proceedings in the receiving country was the relevant  consideration.
 I take  Mr  Chirico's  point  that  RB  (Algeria)  involved  two  types  of
challenges, type 1 challenging the legality of the  proceedings  themselves,
including the use of closed proceedings, where the findings in Maaouia  were
specifically relied upon in  concluding  that  Article  6  was  not  engaged
(paragraph 175) (with which Mr Chirico has  no  quarrel),  and  type  2,  in
particular in the case of Abu Qatada, challenging the lawfulness of  removal
in the light of unfair proceedings, which Mr Chirico relies  upon  as  being
relevant in the appellant's case before me.  However  neither  RB  (Algeria)
nor Ullah involved any consideration of removal in the case  of  outstanding
domestic civil or criminal proceedings in the UK and I do not agree with  Mr
Chirico that the findings in RB (Algeria) can  be  extrapolated  to  include
such circumstances. The issues involved and the impact on the appellant  are
entirely different. In any event I find nothing in the findings  of  any  of
the Judges in the House of Lords or in  [197]  relied  upon  by  Mr  Chirico
endorsing such an approach. Neither do  I  agree  with  Mr  Chirico  that  a
lacuna in the jurisprudence means that Quaquah should be followed.

On the contrary, I agree with Mr Jarvis that such considerations  have  been
addressed by subsequent caselaw, such as Ciliz, MS (Ivory Coast) and  Mohan,
through the prism of Article 8 and that that is by way of a full  Article  8
assessment rather than there being a separation, as Mr Chirico argued, of  a
procedural and substantive Article 8 element. Indeed, in Mohan, at [6],  the
Court of Appeal specifically considered  arguments  that  deportation  would
infringe the claimant's Article 6, as well as his Article 8  rights,  having
regard to unfinished  family  law  proceedings,  concluding  that  "Although
reference was made to article 6 and article 8, it is common ground  in  this
court that article 6 does not avail the claimant." I do not  agree  with  Mr
Chirico's submission that these cases were different to  this  case  because
they  were  family  cases  involving  family  law   proceedings.   That   is
immaterial. What is material is that they involved the  issue  of  separate,
outstanding non-immigration proceedings and addressed  how  that  fitted  in
with a consideration of the question of the  applicant's  removal  from  the
UK.

It seems to me that, in relying upon  Article  6,  Mr  Chirico  is  in  fact
confusing a challenge to the fairness of the  civil  proceedings  themselves
on the basis of them taking place in the appellant's  absence,  which  could
engage Article 6, and a challenge to the immigration  proceedings  involving
Article 8 and deportation, which  cannot  engage  Article  6,  as  found  in
Maaoui. The relevance of the fairness of proceeding with the civil  case  in
the appellant's absence  has  to  be  one  of  the  many  considerations  in
considering Article 8 and proportionality, rather than  determinative  of  a
human rights claim on Article 6 grounds.

Accordingly I do not agree Mr Chirico that it is possible to invoke  Article
6  in  the  current  immigration  proceedings.  First-tier  Tribunal   Judge
Onoufriou erred in law in concluding that it  was  and  in  determining  the
appeal on such a basis. As I indicated to the parties, I do not  agree  with
the position I took at [26] and [27] of my previous decision of 28  November
2018 as to the reach of Ms Syed's concession.  Indeed  Mr  Chirico  accepted
that if I found against him in regard to the application of  Article  6  and
found that it could  not  be  engaged,  then  the  concession  made  by  the
presenting officer before the First-tier  Tribunal  was  wrong  in  law  and
could not be maintained. That is consistent with the  findings  in  Koori  v
Secretary of State for the Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ 552, as  referred
to at [37] of AK (Sierra Leone), upon which Mr Jarvis properly relied.

Neither do I maintain the previous, preliminary view I took in  my  decision
of 28 November 2018, that  the  decision  wrongly  made  by  the  First-tier
Tribunal Judge in Article 6 could simply be transferred over to  Article  8,
such that the appeal could, without more, be allowed on Article  8  grounds.
I agree with Mr Jarvis that a full assessment of Article  8  would  have  to
take account of all relevant matters including the public  interest  factors
in section 117A to D of the 2002 Act.  The  fairness  or  otherwise  of  the
civil proceedings  without  the  appellant's  physical  presence  would,  of
course, be a significant matter for  consideration  but  would  need  to  be
assessed against the other relevant  factors  in  a  proper  proportionality
exercise.

Accordingly I conclude that the third scenario suggested by  Mr  Chirico  is
the correct one, namely that the case has to be remitted to  the  First-tier
Tribunal for a full human rights assessment under Article 8, and  Article  3
if that is also pursued, since those matters have not yet  been  determined.
I appreciate, as Mr Cherico said, that such a  decision  will  be  upsetting
for the appellant who had understood that he had  succeeded  in  his  appeal
and that the decision was a final one with  which  the  Secretary  of  State
agreed. However the law was not properly applied by the First-tier  Tribunal
and the decision has to be re-made upon a proper application of the law.


DECISION

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making
of an error on a point of law. The decision is  set  aside.  The  appeal  is
remitted to the First-tier Tribunal,  to  be  dealt  with  afresh,  with  no
findings preserved,  pursuant  to  section  12(2)(b)(i)  of  the  Tribunals,
Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 and Practice Statement  7.2(b),  before  any
judge aside from Judge Onoufriou.



    Anonymity

    The First-tier Tribunal made an  order  pursuant  to  rule  13  of  the
    Tribunal  Procedure  (First-tier  Tribunal)  (Immigration  and   Asylum
    Chamber) Rules 2014. I continue that order pursuant to rule 14  of  the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.






Signed   [pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede                               Dated: 12
February 2019


