
                                    [pic]
IAC-BH-PMP-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10695/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford by Skype for       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|business                             |                                     |
|On the 22nd July 2020                |On 03 August 2020                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

                                     AM
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     AND

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J. Holt, Counsel instructed on behalf of the
respondent
For the Respondent:    Ms. R. Petterson, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction:

      1. The appellant, a citizen of  Afghanistan  appeals  with  permission
         against the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Andrew)
         (hereinafter referred to as the "FtTJ") who dismissed his appeal in
         a decision promulgated on the 23 January 2020.

      2. I make a  direction  regarding  anonymity  under  Rule  14  of  the
         Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal  Rules)  Rules  2008  as  the
         proceedings relate to the  circumstances  of  a  protection  claim.
         Unless  and  until  a  Tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise  the
         appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
         shall directly or indirectly identify him. This  direction  applies
         both to the appellant and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
         with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

      3. The hearing took place on 22nd July 2020, by  means  of  Skype  for
         Business. which has been consented to and not objected  to  by  the
         parties. A face to face hearing was not held  because  it  was  not
         practicable and both  parties  agreed  that  all  issues  could  be
         determined in a remote hearing.  I conducted the hearing from court
         at  Bradford  IAC.  The  advocates  attended  remotely  via  video.
         Although there  was  an  intermittent  issue  regarding  sound,  no
         substantial technical problems were encountered during the  hearing
         and  I  am  satisfied  both  advocates  were  able  to  make  their
         respective cases by the chosen means. I am grateful to Mr Holt  and
         Ms Petterson for their clear oral and written submissions.

Background:

      4. The appellant's immigration history is summarised in  the  decision
         of the FtTJ at paragraphs 2-8. The appellant arrived in the  United
         Kingdom on 23 August 2011 as an unaccompanied minor. He applied for
         asylum on 20 September  2011  and  the  claim  was  refused  on  22
         November 2011, but he was given discretionary leave expiring  on  1
         March 2012.

      5. The appellant made an application for further  discretionary  leave
         on 1 March 2012 which was refused in a decision issued  on  the  14
         September 2012.

      6. The appellant appealed against this decision and it  was  dismissed
         by the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Baker) in a decision  promulgated
         on the 7 December 2012.

      7. In that decision FtTJ Baker rejected his claim to have been at risk
         of persecution or serious harm from the Taliban in his  home  area.
         The judge did not find that the core of his count was credible  and
         did not accept his claim that he would have been left living in the
         home with other family members if he was in  any  danger  from  the
         Taliban as a result of his father's death (see paragraph  17).  The
         judge concluded that this was a "made up  account"  (see  paragraph
         19). The judge concluded that he would be able  to  return  to  his
         home province in Afghanistan would not be at risk  of  persecution,
         or serious harm on return.

      8. The appellant applied for permission to appeal  the  decision,  but
         permission was refused on 7 December 2012 it is recorded  that  the
         appellant became "appeal rights exhausted" on 18 January 2013.

      9. Judicial review proceedings were  issued  challenging  the  removal
         directions and a claim for unlawful detention was issued on  7  May
         2013. However, the proceedings were withdrawn on 19 September 2014.

     10. Further submissions were submitted on 23  August  2019  which  were
         refused in a decision letter of  15  October  2019.  The  appellant
         appealed that decision to the FtT.

     11. The basis of the case advanced  before  the  FtTJ  summary  of  the
         appellant's claim before the FtT was  "whether  the  appellant  can
         return to his home province of Laghman or whether this would breach
         Article 15 (c). If he can, it was accepted that the appeal  failed.
         If not, is an internal relocation reasonable? (see paragraph 9).

     12. The analysis of the evidence and the findings of fact made  by  the
         FtTJ are set out at paragraphs 18 - 35. The judge directed  himself
         to the decision in Devaseelan at paragraph 19 on the basis  of  the
         previous decision made by Judge Baker where the judge concluded the
         appellant had not given a credible account  and  that  he  had  not
         demonstrated that there was a reasonable likelihood  or  real  risk
         that he was in danger from the Taliban. The  judge  also  concluded
         that he could return to Laghman province because he did not have  a
         profile which would make him of any interest to any group and  that
         he could relocate.

     13. On the first issue identified by Counsel on behalf of the appellant
         and whether the appellant could return to his home area or  whether
         Laghman Province was in such a  state  of  indiscriminate  violence
         that to require him to do so would bring about a breach of  Article
         15 (c), the judge considered the matters set out  in  the  decision
         letter at paragraphs 14 - 21 and the country guidance  referred  to
         (AK and AS ). The judge also considered the EASO  report  contained
         within the respondent's bundle at paragraphs 22 - 24. At page 28 of
         that report the judge noted the following:

             "Provinces where "mere presence" in  the  area  would  not  be
             sufficient to establish  a  real  risk  of  serious  harm  and
             Article 15 ( c) QD, however, indiscriminate violence reaches a
             high level  and,  accordingly  a  lower  level  of  individual
             elements is required to show substantial grounds for believing
             that a civilian, return to the territory, would  face  a  real
             risk of serious harm within the meaning of Article 15 ( c) QD.
             This includes the following provinces: Laghman."

     14. At paragraph 24, the judge made reference to Laghman  province  and
         pages 107 - 108 of the EASO report which concluded that "looking at
         the indicators it can be concluded that mere presence in  the  area
         would not be sufficient to establish a real risk  of  serious  harm
         however  indiscriminate  violence  reaches   a   high   level   and
         accordingly a lower level of individual  elements  is  required  to
         show substantial grounds for believing that a civilian,  return  to
         the territory would face a real risk of harm within the meaning  of
         Article 15 (c ) QD."

     15. The FtTJ then went on to consider the submission  made  by  Counsel
         that the appellant would fall into the group of  those  who  had  a
         "lower level of individual elements". Two  submissions  were  made,
         the first one was advanced on the  basis  that  the  appellant  was
         "westernised" and that this was a risk factor.

     16. The FtTJ considered  the  issue  of  those  who  are  perceived  as
         "westernised" due to  their  behaviour,  appearance  and  expressed
         opinions which may include those who return to  Afghanistan  having
         spent time in Western countries (as set out at page 65 of the  EASO
         report). For the reasons set out at paragraphs 27 -  28  the  judge
         did not find that there was any evidence before the Tribunal in his
         specific individual case which would lead to any  difficulties  for
         this appellant.

     17. I observe that the grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal  do  not
         seek to challenge the FtTJ's assessment of this issue.

     18. As  to  the  second  issue  which  related  to  his  mental  health
         difficulties, the judge considered those at paragraphs 29 - 33.

     19. The FtTJ therefore dismissed his appeal. Permission to  appeal  was
         issued on two grounds on 6  February  2020  and  on  2  March  2020
         permission was granted by FtTJ Neville.

The hearing before the Upper Tribunal:

     20. Following the grant of permission, the matter was to be listed  for
         an oral hearing. However, this did not take place in the  light  of
         the COVID-19 pandemic and  the Upper  Tribunal  issued  directions,
         inter alia, indicating that it was provisionally of the  view  that
         the error of law issue could be determined without  a  hearing  and
         inviting submissions on that issue and also the  error  of  law  in
         issue.

     21. Mr Holt,  Counsel  on  behalf  the  appellant  responded  to  those
         directions indicating that notwithstanding the current difficulties
         that the appeal should be listed for an oral hearing and that  this
         could take place via Skype.

     22. Consequently, as a result of those submissions the Tribunal  listed
         the hearing to enable oral submissions to be given by each  of  the
         parties.

     23. Mr Holt, Counsel on behalf of the appellant and who had appeared on
         his behalf before the First-tier Tribunal relied upon  the  written
         grounds of appeal. Whilst the directions sent by the Upper Tribunal
         made  provision  for  further  written  submissions,  Mr  Holt  had
         confirmed at paragraph 4 of his reply that he did not seek to  make
         any further written submissions. Ms  Petterson  on  behalf  of  the
         respondent relied upon the Rule 24 response  filed.  I  also  heard
         oral submission from  the  advocates  as  summarised  below.  I  am
         grateful for their assistance and  their  clear  oral  and  written
         submissions.




    Ground 1:

     24. Dealing with ground 1, it is submitted  that  the  FtTJ  failed  to
         consider the risk of stigmatisation (due to the poor mental health)
         as a relevant "individual element" that would increase the risk  of
         Article 15 C harm, and therefore the FtTJ gave insufficient reasons
         for finding against an Article 15( c )  risk.

     25. It is further submitted  that  as  the  appellant  originated  from
         Laghman  province  which  was  one  that   entailed   a   risk   of
         indiscriminate  violence.  The  ESAO   report   entitled   "country
         guidance, Afghanistan" at page 28 stated that the province was  not
         such that "mere presence" would be sufficient to establish  a  risk
         of Article 15 C violence but that indiscriminate violence did reach
         a "high level" and a lower level of "individual elements" would  be
         required to show substantial grounds to establish a  real  risk  of
         serious harm  to  a  civilian.  Thus,  the  appellant  relied  upon
         "individual elements" that placed him at a heightened risk of harm.
         The individual element was the risk of stigmatisation  as  referred
         to at page 67 of the EASO report.

     26. The grounds submit  that  the  risk  of  stigmatisation  which  was
         documented in that report could at  least  arguably  amount  to  an
         individual element that exposed the appellant to a heightened  risk
         of Article 15 C harm.

     27. It is submitted in  the  written  grounds  that  whilst  the  judge
         considered the appellant's mental  health,  the  judge  had  failed
         entirely to consider the  arguments  regarding  stigmatisation.  At
         paragraph 7 of  the  written  grounds  it  is  stated  that  it  is
         important to note the difference: there is  a  specific  risk  that
         arises from the appellant's mental health but an entirely different
         risk that arises from  stigmatisation  as  a  result  of  perceived
         mental health issues. Thus, it is  submitted  that  by  failing  to
         consider the issue  of  stigmatisation  the  judge  had  failed  to
         provide adequate reasons for finding that there was an  absence  of
         "individual elements" that would increase the Article 15 C risk for
         this appellant.

     28. In his oral submissions, Mr Holt identified that the centre of  his
         grounds was whether or not the judge gave sufficient regard to what
         could arguably amount to "an individual  element"  and  to  whether
         this appellant returning to  Laghman province would face a slightly
         higher risk of indiscriminate violence so  that  in  his  case  the
         individual element would mean that he  would  be  at  risk  of  the
         Article 15 C threshold being reached . In the appellant's  case  it
         is submitted that the fact that was not given proper  consideration
         was  not  the  appellant's  mental   health   but   the   fact   of
         stigmatisation that he would face as  a  result  of  mental  health
         problems.

     29. He referred the Tribunal to page 67 of  the  EASO  report  in  this
         regard.

     30. In respect of the rule 24 response at  paragraph  5,  he  submitted
         that the reference to the decision of AK and the argument  set  out
         therein was not the one that was  relied  upon  on  behalf  of  the
         appellant. He submitted that he accepted what had been set  out  in
         the respondent's rule 24 response at paragraph 5 and that there was
         little evidence of the appellant becoming destitute, but that  this
         was not the argument. He submitted that which was relevant was  the
         issue of stigmatisation  due  to  his  mental  health  which  could
         therefore amount to an individual element to  raise  the  issue  of
         risk.

     31. Insofar as the respondent's rule  24  response  referred  to  there
         being no evidence of stigmatisation, this  is  wrong  as  the  ESAO
         report does refer to those with mental health  difficulties  facing
         stigmatisation. He therefore concluded his submissions on ground  1
         by stating that the risk has to  be  considered  and  that  in  the
         absence of this Article 15 C had not been given proper  and  lawful
         consideration.

     32. Mr Holt made it plain that ground one was his "principal ground  of
         appeal".

     33. Ms Petterson on behalf of the respondent relied upon  the  rule  24
         response dated 24th of April 2020.

     34. It was submitted that as the judge had recorded,  there  was  scant
         evidence as to what support the appellant had been receiving in the
         UK at paragraph 31.

     35. The judge had clearly engaged with background evidence and analysed
         the EASO report contained in the bundle at some length. At [27]  he
         noted  that  the  report  stated  that  in  general  the  risk   of
         persecution to  men  perceived  as  "westernised"  is  minimal  and
         observed in the  same  paragraph  that  he  was  provided  with  no
         evidence of any specific individual circumstances in  the  specific
         context of the appellant being westernised  or  even  perceived  as
         such.

     36. Dealing with the assertion that the appellant would be stigmatised,
         the  respondent  relied  upon  the  country  guidance  decision  AK
         (Article 15 (c) Afghanistan CG [2012] UKUT 163 which remains  a  CG
         decision. Paragraph 20 of  AK  refers  to  60%  of  the  population
         suffering from mental health problems. The unemployment rate in the
         same paragraph is given as 35% and that 36% of the population  live
         below the poverty line. Paragraph 2 to 5 of AK refer to there being
         little evidence of significant  numbers  of  people  which  include
         those with mental health problems in Kabul suffering destitution or
         inability to survive at subsistence levels. Paragraph 2 to 4  refer
         to assistance provided to returnees. Consequently,  based  on  that
         decision it was submitted on behalf of the  respondent  that  there
         were no grounds to suggest that the appellant would be  stigmatised
         in view of his mental health problems.

     37. Thus, the written response submits that the determination  was  not
         materially affected by any errors of law.

     38. In her oral submissions Ms Petterson on behalf  of  the  respondent
         submitted that the judge properly assessed the appellant's position
         on return to Afghanistan having noted from the medical report dated
         1/8/19 that the appellant was not in receipt of any support in  the
         UK neither medication or treatment and referred to  the  report  at
         page 5. She submitted that when looking at the documents there  was
         no  evidence  of  any  ongoing  treatment,  therapy  or  assistance
         provided for the appellant for any mental health difficulties which
         was a relevant consideration.  This  was  also  position  from  the
         letter dated 20 December 2009 exhibited at  pages  6  -  7  of  the
         appellant's bundle.

     39. Ms Petterson submitted that the judge properly  considered  Article
         15 ( c) in the context of the previous decision of the FtTJ in 2012
         who did not accept that  the  appellant  faced  any  problems  upon
         return to Laghman province as a result of  any  problems  from  the
         Taliban. The judge rejected his account of  events  in  Afghanistan
         and did not accept that they were truthfully  made.  This  was  the
         starting point of the analysis and FtT Judge Andrews  was  entitled
         to conclude that there would be no individualised risk based on his
         history.

     40. Furthermore, in the light of the  material  before  the  First-tier
         Tribunal (the medical report) it was not clear  how  the  appellant
         would be identified as  someone  with  mental  health  difficulties
         given that he was  not  accessing  medication  or  therapy  at  the
         present time.

     41. Mr Holt by way of reply submitted that the central  point  made  on
         behalf the respondent  was  that  there  was  a  lack  of  evidence
         concerning the appellant's treatment for  mental  health.  However,
         the evidence relating to treatment could go to the quality  of  the
         mental health issue but that the judge in his consideration did not
         say that the appellant's mental health was  not  severe  enough  to
         reach the threshold and that this  reasoning  is  absent  from  the
         decision. Consequently, this argument could not defeat ground 1. As
         the judge made a positive finding that he had mental health issues,
         the judge was then required to assess  whether  it  would  lead  to
         stigmatisation.

Decision on error of law:

     42. I have carefully considered the submissions made  by  each  of  the
         advocates are set out above.

     43. The summary of the appellant's claim before the FtT is set  out  at
         paragraph 9. Mr Holt of Counsel confirmed that  the  issue  in  the
         case was "whether the appellant can return to his home province  of
         Laghman or whether this would breach Article 15 (c). If he can,  it
         was accepted that  the  appeal  failed.  If  not,  is  an  internal
         relocation reasonable? A mental health issue arises in relation  to
         both limbs and the length  of  the  appellant's  residence  in  the
         United Kingdom is also a factor. Paragraph 276 ADE (vi) is  reliant
         on the same factors. There is no separate Article 8 claim."

     44. It was not argued on behalf of the appellant that he  would  be  at
         risk of persecution or serious harm based on  his  earlier  account
         relating to events in Afghanistan. Therefore, the findings of  fact
         made by Judge Baker remained as the basis of the factual assessment
         of the circumstances in relation to the appellant's home  area.  In
         other  words,  notwithstanding  the  opinion   set   out   in   the
         psychologist's report  that  he  had  not  been  manufacturing  his
         account previously (see page 4 of the  report)  the  FtTJ  was  not
         asked to reconsider or make any further  findings  in  relation  to
         those issues. I observe that the psychological report was based  in
         part of the acceptance of his previous factual account, that he had
         been the subject of early trauma,  he  feared  persecution  by  the
         Taleban and had been was forced to leave his family home. It is not
         clear whether the psychologist had seen  the  earlier  decision  of
         Judge Baker, but in any event, it was not argued that the  previous
         judge's findings were undermined by any other  evidence,  including
         the psychological report. I also observe that it is plain from  the
         FtTJ's decision that he was critical of the report for the  reasons
         set out at paragraph 30 - 31 as he  concluded  that  there  was  no
         evidence to support the claim that specialist mental health support
         had been engaged with by the appellant  given  that  there  was  no
         evidence in support and that the appellant himself had said he  had
         no treatment.

     45.  What had been argued before the FtTJ was that there  would  be  an
         Article 15 (c) risk in Laghman Province and it was  submitted  that
         on the facts of the appellant's case, in the light of the risk of "
         perceived westernisation" and his mental health which would led  to
         his stigmatisation that he  would  succeed  by  reason  of  special
         factors particular to his personal circumstances ( see the "sliding
         scale" approach in Diakite v Comissaire general aux refugies et aux
         apatrides (CJEU -C-285/12) at [32] and Elgafaji v  Staatssecretaris
         van Justite [2009] ECR 1-921 at [39]40]).

     46. Mr Holt on behalf the appellant submits that  the  FtTJ  failed  to
         consider the argument relating to risk of stigmatisation  and  that
         it was not the risk which arose from his mental health but the risk
         of stigmatisation as a result of his mental health.

     47. It is plain from reading the decision of  the  judge  at  paragraph
         [25]  that there were two  elements  that  the  judge  went  on  to
         consider at [25 - 33] of the decision,  by  the  use  of  the  word
         "firstly" in relation to the issue  of  perceived  "westernisation"
         and the second in relation to his mental health.

     48. The assessment made by  the  FtTJ  as  to  the  risk  arising  from
         "perceived westernisation" was set out at paragraph 26 - 28 of  the
         decision. The grounds do not challenge that  assessment.  The  FtTJ
         dealt with the second point raised relating his mental  health  and
         concluded at [33] that when weighing the matters together, that  he
         was unable to find that the appellant fell into the category  of  a
         "lower level of individual elements" (see paragraph 33).

     49.  In  my  judgement  it  is  noteworthy  that  when  rejecting   the
         appellant's case on  the  basis  of  risk  of  being  perceived  as
         westernised, the judge's reasoning is based on the lack of evidence
         from the appellant to support such a submission. At [27]  the  FtTJ
         did not consider that there was any evidence as to the  appellant's
         behaviour if returned to Afghanistan; or  what  it  was  about  his
         appearance or opinions which would lead him  to  be  considered  as
         "westernised". Whilst the judge also  noted  that  the  report  had
         stated that in general the risk was minimal,  the  judge  concluded
         that he had "no evidence of any specific  individual  circumstances
         in the context of the appellant being westernised or even perceived
         as such."

     50. At [28] the judge also found that he had  not  been  provided  with
         evidence as to what behaviour had been  adopted  by  the  appellant
         which would lead to difficulties for  him  nor  had  he  heard  any
         evidence that the appellant would be able  unable  to  readjust  to
         Afghanistan's social restrictions( see [28]).

     51. Counsel submits that the  judge  did  not  consider  the  issue  of
         stigmatisation, however in my judgement whilst the  judge  did  not
         expressly  use  the  term  "stigmatisation"  at  paragraph  28  the
         reference made to the lack of evidence concerning  the  appellant's
         behaviour which would lead him to difficulties for him or  that  he
         would be unable to readjust to the social restrictions, can also be
         viewed as part of the holistic assessment undertaken  by  the  FtTJ
         which included his mental health which he went on  to  consider  at
         paragraph 29 - 31.

     52. Whilst Mr Holt  relies  upon  the  risk  of  stigmatisation  it  is
         important  to  consider  the  evidential  basis  upon  which   that
         submission was made. The FtTJ accepted that the appellant had "some
         mental health difficulties" (at [29]).

     53. The only objective country material  relied  upon  by  Mr  Holt  in
         support of the submission before the FtTJ was  that  which  he  has
         identified in his grounds and in  his  submissions  before  me,  as
         contained at page 67 of the European Asylum Support  Office  report
         "Country Guidance; Afghanistan -Guidance Note and  Common  Analysis
         (June 2018) ("EASO").

     54. Under the heading Section 15 "Persons living with disabilities  and
         persons with severe medical issues" it  makes  reference  to  "this
         profile  refers  to  people  with  disabilities,  including  mental
         disabilities, as well as those  who  have  severe  medical  issues,
         including for example,  people  with  HIV,  mental  health  issues,
         medical issues related to  drug  addiction  et  cetera."  This  was
         followed by information concerning the lack of funds to operate and
         sustain healthcare facilities and went on to state:-

             "In Afghanistan, people with mental and physical  disabilities
             are often stigmatised. Their condition is at times  considered
             to have been caused by an "offence against God".  Mistreatment
             of those people  by  society  and/or  by  their  families  has
             occurred. Women, displaced persons and returned migrants  with
             mental health issues are particularly vulnerable..."

     55. However, there is no further elucidation given as to  the  type  of
         mistreatment,  its  prevalence  nor  any  indication  of  in   what
         circumstances  such  stigmatisation  would  arise  or  provide  any
         consideration of the type of behaviour which would lead to  such  a
         risk.

     56. Mr Holt did not direct the First-tier Tribunal or this Tribunal  to
         any other material in this regard.

     57. In the section entitled "risk analysis" it makes reference to those
         living  with  mental  and  physical  disabilities,  the  individual
         assessment whether or not discrimination in mistreatment by society
         and/or by the family could amount to persecution should  take  into
         account the severity and/or repetitiveness of the acts  or  whether
         they occur as an accumulation of various measures. It also  states,
         "not all individuals under this profile would face a level of  risk
         required to establish well-founded fear of persecution."  It  makes
         reference  to  there  being  an  individualised  assessment   which
         includes the nature  and  visibility  of  the  mental  or  physical
         disability.

     58. In my judgement the difficulty with Mr Holt's  submission  is  that
         there was no evidence advanced before the FtTJ to  demonstrate  how
         the appellant would act on return or how his  mental  health  would
         impact on his behaviour or how he would be perceived by others as a
         result of any mental health difficulties  that  he  had.  What  was
         lacking was evidence in support of the  individualised  risk  which
         the FtTJ had  found  earlier  relating  to  the  risk  relating  to
         perceived westernisation and also that referred to at paragraph 28.

     59. The  FtTJ  recorded  at  paragraph  29  the  summary  made  by  the
         psychologist set out at pages 4 - 5  and  that  whilst  the  report
         referred to trauma suffered by the appellant at an  early  age,  it
         seemed that the first two years that he was in the  United  Kingdom
         the appellant did well and that it was after  the  refusal  of  his
         application for asylum, his detention and  near  deportation  which
         the appellant found "extremely traumatising".  The  effect  on  the
         appellant's behaviour was described in the report as "him living in
         underground existence fearing and avoiding authorities as  well  as
         accessing practical psychological and financial support". This  was
         in relation to his life in United Kingdom. There was no  link  made
         to any mental health difficulties and how he would  behave  outside
         of the UK that would lead to a risk of stigmatisation.

     60. In general terms I would accept that there is little  understanding
         of mental health problems in Afghanistan and as the respondent  set
         out in the rule 24 response (relying on the decision in AK)  it  is
         recorded that 60% of  the  population  suffer  from  mental  health
         problems as  a  result  of  the  prolonged  conflict  and  lack  of
         treatment. However, as demonstrated above, the evidence before  the
         FtTJ was far from demonstrating that the appellant would be  at  an
         individualised risk of stigmatisation as a  result  of  his  mental
         health difficulties.

     61. I am therefore satisfied that there is no material error of law  in
         the decision of the FtTJ relating to this issue and  therefore  his
         conclusion at  paragraph  33  where  he  weighed  all  the  matters
         together and found that the appellant would not be  at  risk  of  a
         breach of  Article 15 ( c ) risk on return to Laghman province  was
         one reasonably open to him on  the  evidence  before  him  and  the
         limited nature of the submission that was made.  I  therefore  find
         that ground 1 is not made out.

     62. Dealing with ground 2, the grounds at paragraphs  9  to  11  submit
         that the same  failure  to  consider  the  risk  of  stigmatisation
         applied to his consideration  of  the  reasonableness  of  internal
         relocation. The  grounds  submit  that  whilst  the  judge  rightly
         considered the appellant's mental health, the judge had  failed  to
         consider at all whether or not the appellant would face a  risk  of
         stigmatisation as a result of how his health would be perceived.

     63. As this was the basis upon which ground  2  was  advanced,  and  no
         reliance was placed on any other aspect of the  issue  of  internal
         relocation, it must follow that in light of my assessment of ground
         1, ground 2 cannot succeed when relying on the same basis.  In  any
         event, as there is no error in the judge's assessment that he could
         return to his home area and that it  would  not  be  in  breach  of
         Article 15 (c), the issue of internal relocation does not arise.

     64. For those reasons, I am not satisfied that it has been demonstrated
         that the decision of the FtTJ did involve the making of an error on
         a point of law. I therefore dismiss the appeal. The decision of the
         FtTJ shall stand.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of  an
error on a point of law and therefore the decision shall stand.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him.  This direction applies both to the  Appellant  and
to the Respondent.  Failure to comply with  this  direction  could  lead  to
contempt of court proceedings.


Signed Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds
     Dated 23 July 2020





                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS


1.   A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must make
a written application to the Upper Tribunal. Any such application must be
received by the Upper Tribunal within the appropriate period after this
decision was sent to the person making the application. The appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the individual and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:


2.   Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is in the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration Acts, the appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the notice of decision is
sent electronically).


3.   Where the person making the application is in detention under the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working days
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


4.   Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is outside
the United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to
appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days (10 working days, if the
notice of decision is sent electronically).


5.   A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or a Sunday, Christmas
Day, Good Friday, or a bank holiday.


6.   The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on the covering
letter or covering email.

