
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:  PA/10350/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House, London         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11 January 2019                   |On 5 February 2019                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                                     L M
                         [Anonymity direction made]
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms J Fisher, Counsel instructed by Duncan Lewis
solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Deller, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
An anonymity order was made by  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  As  this  is  an
appeal on protection grounds, it is  appropriate  to  continue  that  order.
Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify  him  or  any  member  of  his  family.  This  direction
applies, amongst others, to  both  parties.  Failure  to  comply  with  this
direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

1.           The  Appellant  appeals  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
      Tribunal  Judge  Housego  promulgated  on  20  September  2018   ("the
      Decision").  By the Decision,  the  Judge  dismissed  the  Appellant's
      appeal against the Respondent's decision dated 9 August 2018  refusing
      his protection claim.

2.          The Appellant is a national of Bangladesh.  He came  to  the  UK
      on 18 September 2006 with a work permit valid to 6 September 2007.  It
      is part of the Appellant's protection claim that, during that  period,
      he returned to Bangladesh and came back to the UK.  It is  during  the
      visit to Bangladesh that he says that events on which  he  now  relies
      occurred.  After 6 September 2007, he overstayed in the  UK.   He  was
      encountered by immigration officers in January 2011  and  served  with
      notice as  an  overstayer.   Thereafter  he  absconded  until  he  was
      discovered during a further enforcement visit in August 2012, released
      on reporting restrictions and a travel document  was  agreed  for  his
      removal. He again absconded.  The Appellant then came to the attention
      of the immigration authorities when he was arrested by the  police  in
      May 2018.  He claimed asylum on 7 June 2018.

3.          The basis of the Appellant's protection claim  is  that  he  has
      borrowed money from [AA] who has threatened him and his children if he
      cannot re-pay the loan.  The Appellant's wife and children  remain  in
      Bangladesh.  He says that his family has continued to receive threats.
       The Appellant originally said that he  could  not  remember  when  he
      borrowed the money but says it was before he came to the UK.  However,
      in a later statement, he said for the first time that he had  returned
      to Bangladesh in 2007 and had made one payment to try to  resolve  the
      situation but, far from achieving that aim, he says  he  was  attacked
      and hospitalised.  He relies  on  scarring  caused  he  says  by  that
      incident.  He also claims to be suffering from  post-traumatic  stress
      disorder ("PTSD") as a result of his experiences.

4.          The Respondent  disputes  the  credibility  of  the  Appellant's
      claim.  The Judge did  not  accept  the  claim  as  true,  relying  on
      inconsistencies in the Appellant's account and the delay in the making
      of the protection claim.  He accepted that the Appellant has debts and
      creditors.  However, he did not accept that  the  Appellant  had  been
      threatened or  attacked  by  money  lenders.   He  accepted  that  the
      Appellant bears scars but did not accept that  those  were  caused  as
      claimed.  He concluded that the Appellant is an economic migrant.   He
      also made the point that, as the threat is said to come from non-State
      agents, there is a complete answer to the  claim  (even  if  true)  as
      there is a sufficiency of protection in Bangladesh and  the  Appellant
      can internally relocate.

5.          The grounds of appeal  focus  on  a  refusal  by  the  Judge  to
      adjourn the  hearing.   The  basis  of  the  adjournment  request  and
      consideration of it is set out at [34] to [45] of  the  Decision.   In
      brief summary, the adjournment was sought to adduce further  evidence.
      We deal with the substance of the Judge's consideration  below.    The
      Appellant's two grounds focus on that refusal and assert, first,  that
      the refusal to adjourn deprived the Appellant of a fair  hearing  and,
      second, that the refusal was otherwise irrational.

6.          Permission to appeal was initially  refused  by  the  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Bird.  The Appellant renewed the  application  to  this
      Tribunal.  He also made an application pursuant to rule 15(2A) of  the
      Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 to adduce the  evidence
      which formed the basis of his application to adjourn.

7.          Permission  to  appeal  was  granted  by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
      Canavan in the following terms so far as relevant:

         "... 2.  Given that the appellant's representatives  were  able  to
         identify a number of pieces  of  evidence  that  they  intended  to
         obtain, and confirmed that they had funding in place for a  medico-
         legal report, it is at least  arguable  that  the  judge  may  have
         failed to provide the  appellant  a  fair  opportunity  to  produce
         evidence that might have been relevant to a proper determination of
         the appeal.  I have some doubts as to whether the further  evidence
         the appellant has produced since the hearing would  have  made  any
         material difference to the outcome of  the  appeal.   Even  if  his
         account of the assault is taken at  its  highest,  the  judge  made
         clear findings relating to the availability of state protection and
         internal relocation.  However, it is at  least  arguable  that  the
         further evidence that the  appellant's  representatives  wanted  to
         obtain  might  have  been  relevant  to  his  overall  credibility,
         including his claim that the money-lender  was  a  person  of  some
         influence.  It may have been relevant  to  the  assessment  of  the
         appellant's vulnerability and the  issue  of  internal  relocation.
         The  grounds  have  sufficient  merit  to  justify  more   detailed
         consideration at a hearing."


8.    The matter comes  before  us  to  assess  whether  the  Decision  does
      disclose an error of law and to re-make the Decision or remit  to  the
      First-tier Tribunal for re-hearing.

The Basis of the Adjournment Request and Further Evidence

9      The  basis  of  the  application  to  adjourn  is  made  in   written
      submissions dated 17 September 2018. By that time, an adjournment  had
      already been refused on the papers  twice.   The  adjournment  was  to
      permit  the  solicitors  to  obtain  corroborative  evidence  of   the
      Appellant's account from  Bangladesh  and  to  obtain  a  medico-legal
      report in respect of the  Appellant's  reported  scarring  and  mental
      health.  There was at that time a rule  35  report  dealing  with  the
      scarring but nothing further.

10.   The submissions point to the following relevant  matters.  First,  the
      solicitors had been unable to obtain the Appellant's  medical  records
      and corroborative evidence due to the restricted time  available.   As
      Ms Fisher pointed out and is made clear in a subsequent statement from
      the Appellant's solicitor dated 5 October 2018 which  accompanied  the
      application for permission to appeal, Duncan Lewis was instructed only
      on 4 September 2018 (although the Respondent's refusal is dated nearly
      one month earlier).  Second, there were significant credibility issues
      raised by the Respondent in his decision and  it  was  said  that  the
      further evidence may assist the Appellant, particularly  the  evidence
      in the form of a medico-legal report.  The adjournment  sought  was  a
      period of four weeks from the date of  the  submissions  and  hearing,
      therefore by mid-October.

11.   The corroborative evidence on which reliance is placed is as follows:

         (a)      An affidavit from the Appellant's  wife  dated  4  October
         2018 which attests to the taking of the loan, the Appellant's visit
         to Bangladesh when he tried to repay one instalment of the loan and
         the attack on the Appellant and his hospitalisation;


         (b)       A  certified  letter  from  an  unidentified  person   on
         notepaper headed "Bangladesh Awami League"  dated  4  October  2018
         which states that [AA] is known to the person and  organisation  as
         the Joint Secretary of the Sylhet branch of the  Awami  League  and
         that he is a local influential leader who also provides credit with
         interest;


         (c)      The Appellant's expired passport bearing stamps  appearing
         to show that he left  Bangladesh  and  arrived  in  the  UK  on  18
         September 2006 but also that he went to Bangladesh on 27  May  2007
         and left on 26 July 2007;


         (d)      A declaration from the Appellant's brother in law that  he
         sent the documents to the UK at  the  request  of  the  Appellant's
         wife;


         (e)      A hospital certificate setting out an  examination  on  12
         June 2007 and appearing to provide details  of  scarring  found  as
         well as a discharge letter dated 19 June 2007 appearing to  confirm
         that the Appellant was hospitalised from 12 to 19 June 2007 as  the
         result of a physical assault.

12.   The Appellant also seeks  to  rely  on  the  report  of  a  Consultant
      Forensic Psychiatrist, Dr S Sahota dated 18 October  2018.   In  brief
      summary, Dr Sahota makes the following comment:

         (a)      The Appellant suffers from  PTSD  and  has  suffered  from
         symptoms of PTSD for over ten years (4.1.4]).  He says that  "[h]is
         symptoms  are  characteristic  of  this  condition   although   his
         presentation is atypical as he has not received professional  input
         to date.  My impression is that the severity of  symptoms  are  not
         subclinical since onset of trauma and the reason he has not  sought
         treatment is largely due to cultural reasons, poor insight and  low
         health seeking behaviour." He refers to the cause of PTSD as  being
         a violent attack based on the Appellant's reporting and  says  that
         he is "concerned about the impact of returning  to  an  environment
         where  trauma  has  taken  place  in  a  person   with   PTSD   and
         vulnerability to stress.   I  foresee  a  deterioration  in  [LM]'s
         mental health in these circumstances".


         (b)       The  Appellant  has  received  medication   for   anxiety
         disorder.  He stopped taking that medication after a few days.   Dr
         Sahota wished to investigate for physical  causes  of  the  anxiety
         "given the chronic  nature  of  these  symptoms".  Dr  Sahota  also
         recommends specialist PTSD treatment and a change in medication.


         (c)      In terms of the impact of the Appellant's mental health on
         his fitness for interview, Dr Sahota says  that  "[h]is  attention,
         concentration and memory  are  within  the  normal  range  and  not
         substantially impacted by his traumatic symptoms."


         (d)      Dr Sahota  concludes  that  the  Appellant's  scarring  is
         "consistent" with the Appellant's account and  "highly  consistent"
         with traumatic attack.





The Decision in Relation to the Adjournment Request

13.   As we have  already  noted,  the  Judge  deals  with  the  adjournment
      request in some detail at [34] to [45] of the Decision.  He does so in
      the following manner.  First, he notes the basis  of  the  request  as
      being the desire to obtain further documents and a medico-legal report
      (following the rule 35 report which identified the possible  need  for
      that report), that those have not been obtained  earlier  due  to  the
      timeframe between the Respondent's decision, the  instructing  of  the
      current solicitors and the hearing date, the  timescale  within  which
      those documents could be obtained (a period of four weeks) and funding
      being available for the purpose of instructing an  expert.  The  Judge
      then directs himself as to the relevant test and  potential  prejudice
      to the Appellant if the adjournment request is refused.

14.   The Judge then goes on to consider those  matters.   He  accepts  that
      there is a credibility concern in this case and identifies  a  central
      inconsistency being the Appellant's failure to mention  the  visit  to
      Bangladesh in 2007 at the asylum interview.

15.   The Respondent objected to the adjournment request.  He pointed to  it
      being unlikely that the hospital would have records  dating  back  ten
      years and that it was also unlikely that the  Appellant's  wife  would
      have the passport which expired in 2009,  particularly since there  is
      no reason why the Appellant's wife would be holding that  document  in
      Bangladesh if,  as  appears  to  be  the  Appellant's  case,  he  left
      Bangladesh in 2007 and has not been back since.  He would have  needed
      that passport to return to the UK.  It was noted  that  the  Appellant
      had not mentioned any mental health issues nor the  attack  until  the
      rule 35 report  in  August  2018.    The  Judge  queried  whether  the
      Appellant had received any treatment for mental health during his time
      in the UK and it was confirmed that he had not.  It was also confirmed
      that he has direct telephone contact with his wife.

16.   The Judge went on to refuse the adjournment request for the  following
      reasons:

         "39.     I declined to adjourn the hearing.   The  Rule  35  report
             identified some scarring.  A medico-legal  report  was  highly
             likely to say  that  the  scarring  was  consistent  with  the
             account of being attacked, and  undoubtedly  the  Home  Office
             would say could that it could have been caused  [sic]  in  any
             number of ways.  I did not consider that such  a  medico-legal
             report would assist in coming to a conclusion for that reason.
              It was somewhat unlikely that the hospital still have records
             10 years  later,  and  there  is  no  reason  why  e  mail  or
             telephonic enquiry could not have been made even in the  short
             time since the current solicitors  were  instructed.   It  was
             said only that the wife "may have" a copy of the passport, and
             although she could be telephoned no enquiry had been  made  of
             her.  This was speculation.


         40.      It followed that I would not be applying  TK  (Burundi)  v
             SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ 40 as damaging to credibility.


         41.      Without deciding  that  he  was  a  vulnerable  witness  I
             decided that the appellant would be treated  as  a  vulnerable
             adult  in  the  way  recommended  by  the  Joint  Presidential
             Guidance Note Number 2 of 2010.  The  Home  Office  Presenting
             Officer did not  object.   I  followed  the  Guidance  in  the
             hearing, and Counsel for the appellant so  confirmed  upon  my
             enquiry of her.  The issue in the case was credibility of  the
             account, and if the account was found reasonably likely to  be
             true whether there was sufficiency of  protection  or  whether
             internal relocation was  viable.   The  latter  2  points  are
             heavily dependent on objective evidence and submission  rather
             than the evidence of the appellant.


         42.      I have found that the appellant has debts in Bangladesh so
             that  the  reports  from  elders  would  not  be  of   further
             assistance to him."

17.   Having observed that the guidance in relation to vulnerable  witnesses
      was followed by the Respondent and that Counsel was content that  this
      had been done,  the  Judge  indicated  that  he  was  considering  the
      Appellant's evidence as if he were vulnerable  which  would  alleviate
      any  disadvantage  to  him.   Finally,  he  said  that,  "if,  in  the
      consideration  of  the  evidence  subsequent  to  the  hearing,   [he]
      considered that it was not possible fairly to come  to  a  conclusion,
      [he] would relist the case as part heard." He indicated also  that  it
      would be expected that the Appellant's solicitors would take steps  to
      obtain the further evidence immediately and if a permission to  appeal
      application were made  that  should  be  accompanied  by  any  further
      evidence.  He concluded that he  could  fairly  determine  the  appeal
      based on the hearing he conducted.

The Appellant's Grounds and Submissions of the Parties

18.   The grounds draw attention to the need to enquire whether the  hearing
      was fair and not simply whether the Judge's  refusal  to  adjourn  was
      unreasonable.  Our attention is  drawn  to  the  decision  in  Nwaigwe
      (adjournment: fairness) [2014] UKUT 00418.  We do  not  need  to  cite
      from that  case.   We  have  taken  into  account  when  reaching  our
      decision, the test as set out in the headnote.

19.   The unfairness of the hearing is summarised  in  the  grounds  in  the
      following way:

         (a)      The evidence sought and since obtained addresses  many  of
         the credibility findings reached by the Judge;


         (b)      The Appellant's credibility was the subject of significant
         adverse comment in the Respondent's refusal and  was  therefore  "a
         pivotal issue";


         (c)      The Judge did not take account of the fact that the medico-
         legal report was to deal  with  both  scarring  and  mental  health
         issues (he refers only to the likely weight of any  conclusions  as
         to scarring);


         (d)      Although the Judge said that he had treated the  Appellant
         as if he were a vulnerable witness, what that entails is beyond the
         expertise of the Tribunal.

      In conclusion, the grounds assert that the Appellant was significantly
      prejudiced by the refusal of the adjournment and  was  deprived  of  a
      fair hearing as a result.

20.   By reference to the further evidence, the Appellant also  argues  that
      the Decision is irrational.  He points to the evidence  based  on  the
      Appellant's wife's affidavit, the hospital letters and the passport as
      corroborating the Appellant's case that he travelled to Bangladesh  in
      2007 and was attacked there.  It is further argued  that  the  medico-
      legal report would provide more detail than the rule 35 report.   That
      goes to the Judge's finding that the Appellant  was  not  attacked  in
      2007 as he claimed.

21.   The second  point  made  is  that  the  Appellant's  wife's  affidavit
      supports his case that his family have moved home to avoid the threats
      made by [AA] and the continued risk to  him  from  that  source.   The
      Judge rejected that account based on inconsistencies about  where  the
      Appellant's family were living (although we are  not  clear  how  this
      further evidence assists the Appellant's case since  the  letter  from
      the Awami League suggests that [AA] is the  branch  secretary  of  the
      Awami League in Sylhet which is where the Appellant's wife says she is
      living).

22.   Finally, the initial grounds (which pre-date the medico-legal  report)
      suggest that the  medico-legal  evidence  may  undermine  the  Judge's
      finding that his mental illness has not impaired his recall  and  that
      this evidence will deal with whether the  Appellant  is  feigning  his
      illness.  Whilst we accept that Dr  Sahota's  report  does  provide  a
      diagnosis of PTSD based on  the  Appellant's  reported  symptoms,  the
      doctor does not suggest that the illness has affected his  ability  to
      recall; indeed, quite the opposite as we observe at [12] above.

23.   The grounds go on to deal with what is said at [88]  of  the  Decision
      that the appeal would fail even if the Appellant's account  were  true
      based on the  availability  and  sufficiency  of  protection  and  the
      possibility of internal relocation.  The Appellant argues that, if  he
      were found to be generally credible, this may affect the weight to  be
      given to other evidence and his adverse immigration  history,  that  a
      Judge might accept the Appellant's account that [AA]  is  powerful  in
      the local  area  (even  though  he  failed  to  mention  that  in  his
      statement) and that the  Appellant's  mental  health  is  relevant  to
      whether he could internally relocate.

24.   Ms Fisher adopted those grounds in her submissions and emphasised  the
      following points:

         (a)      The  Appellant's  case  was  within  the  Detained  Asylum
         Casework and therefore neither he nor his solicitors  had  time  to
         obtain a medico-legal report by the time of the hearing.


         (b)      The corroborative evidence goes directly to  the  findings
         made by the Judge in relation to the claimed  threat  made  by  the
         money lender. That evidence tended to show that the  Appellant  was
         in Bangladesh in 2007 and was attacked there and  that  [AA]  is  a
         powerful man in the local area.


         (c)      Although, as we pointed out, the report of Dr Sahota  does
         not say that the Appellant's power of recall  is  affected  by  his
         mental  health  and  says  little  about  scarring  (as  the  Judge
         concluded was likely to be the case), Ms Fisher  pointed  out  that
         the medical report supports the Appellant's  case  to  suffer  from
         PTSD due to a traumatic event  which,  considered  with  the  other
         evidence, might lead a Judge to a different conclusion.   Moreover,
         the report deals with the impact on the Appellant's  mental  health
         of return to Bangladesh (if his account is accepted  as  true)  and
         that, in any event, he would face  isolation  and  exclusion  which
         would impact on the possibility of internal relocation.

25.   In response, Mr Deller accepted that the issue is whether the  refusal
      to adjourn is unfair and not whether it  is  reasonable.   He  pointed
      out, though, that the Judge was very careful to  explain  the  reasons
      for the refusal in the context of the case as  a  whole  in  terms  of
      credibility.  He also pointed out that the Judge found that the appeal
      fails whether the Appellant's claim is credible or not because of  the
      sufficiency of protection and possibility of internal relocation.  The
      evidence which goes only to the credibility  of  the  claim  does  not
      impact on the Judge's findings in relation to those aspects.  The only
      slight caveat, as Mr Deller accepted, is in relation to the power  and
      reach of [AA].  However, the evidence before the Judge  and  since  is
      only that [AA] is a member of the party in power.   There  is  nothing
      further in relation to his reach.

26.   Mr Deller argued that this is not a case where it  can  be  said  that
      the further evidence establishes any matter as a fact (as to which see
      the case of E v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2004] EWCA
      Civ 49).  The most which can be said is that the evidence  "may"  have
      made a difference.   The  further  evidence  does  not  undermine  the
      Judge's findings that, even if the claim were true, the  appeal  fails
      due to the sufficiency of protection and internal relocation.  Further
      and in any event, the claim is based on facts said to have occurred in
      2007.  The passage of time since coupled with the Appellant's  failure
      to claim asylum at an earlier stage means that credibility is  already
      damaged.

27.   Although Mr Deller accepted that the solicitors may only  have  had  a
      short period in which to prepare the appeal, the Appellant's  case  is
      that he has known of his claim for over ten years.

28.   In conclusion, Mr Deller submitted that the further evidence does  not
      make much  difference.   The  rule  35  report  was  considered.   The
      Appellant's vulnerability was taken into account  in  accordance  with
      the Practice Statement.  Overall, the Judge was well aware of the need
      for fairness particularly where  the  timescales  were  short  but  in
      circumstances in which the further evidence was unlikely to  make  any
      practical difference, he submitted that there is no error of law.

29.   In reply, Ms Fisher pointed out that justice must  not  only  be  done
      but be seen to be done.  She submitted that the application to adjourn
      was a cogent one based on evidence which the  solicitors  intended  to
      adduce which they have subsequently obtained.  It was unreasonable not
      to adjourn and also  unfair.   The  Judge  could  have  adjourned  the
      hearing part-heard as he indicated he might do.  The further  evidence
      undermined  some  aspects  of  the  Judge's  reasoning   as   to   the
      adjournment.  For example, the Judge surmised  that  hospital  records
      might not be available after ten years, but the Appellant was able  to
      obtain those.  The evidence is capable of supporting  the  Appellant's
      claim to have returned to Bangladesh and being assaulted  there  which
      in turn may displace  the  findings  in  relation  to  sufficiency  of
      protection and internal relocation.  Whilst the Appellant's  delay  in
      claiming asylum may be  a  relevant  factor,  a  Judge  still  has  to
      consider risk on return based on an assessment of the evidence  looked
      at holistically.

30.   Although Ms Fisher accepted that the medical report might  not  itself
      undermine the Judge's credibility findings based  on  the  Appellant's
      powers of recall, the doctor's conclusions were  nonetheless  relevant
      to the possibility of internal relocation. She did  not  suggest  that
      there are no credibility issues and accepted that the Appellant has  a
      poor immigration history but submitted that he does now have  evidence
      capable of supporting the core of his claim (even though she  accepted
      that the core of his claim now asserted in relation to  what  occurred
      in Bangladesh in 2007 was not mentioned in his asylum interview).

31.   We reserved our decision.  Both parties agreed  that  if  we  were  to
      find an error of law, as this is a  challenge  on  procedural  grounds
      based on asserted unfairness  of  the  previous  hearing,  the  appeal
      should be remitted for hearing de  novo.   We  turn  to  consider  our
      decision whether the Judge's refusal  to  adjourn  was  unfair  and/or
      unreasonable.

Discussion and Conclusions

32.   We have reached the conclusion that the Judge did err  by  failing  to
      grant an adjournment in this case for essentially two reasons.

33.   First, although the Judge notes at  [34]  of  the  Decision  that  the
      reason behind the need for an adjournment  is  the  limited  timeframe
      available to the Appellant's solicitor (as a Detained Asylum  Casework
      case), the Judge has not factored that into account  when  considering
      whether fairness demanded that he adjourn.

34.   Second, and allied to that  reason,  the  Judge  has  not  taken  into
      account that the adjournment sought was a short one of only  a  matter
      of weeks, an expert had already been identified to provide that report
      and funding was available for that report.  That is a relevant  factor
      when  considering  whether  the  interests  of  justice  required   an
      adjournment, but the Judge did not consider it.

35.   The focus of the Judge's reasoning is that the further  documents  and
      report which the Appellant wished to adduce could make no  difference.
      We have some sympathy with that view so far as the additional evidence
      from  Bangladesh  is  concerned.   Whilst  that  may  be  capable   of
      supporting a claim that the Appellant was attacked  in  Bangladesh  in
      2007 and the passport was capable of supporting his case that  he  had
      returned there in 2007, those documents do not add to the reasons  for
      any attack nor explain the inconsistency in his evidence.    There  is
      also no explanation why the Appellant's wife was holding his  passport
      when he would have required it  to  return  to  the  UK  nor  why  the
      Appellant himself could  not  have  obtained  the  documents  earlier,
      particularly since, on his case, he had known  of  the  basis  of  his
      claim for over ten years by the time he made it.
36.   The affidavit of the Appellant's wife is  capable  of  supporting  the
      Appellant's case that he was attacked because he  was  in  debt  to  a
      money-lender and was indeed attacked when in Bangladesh  in  2007  but
      raises further questions about how it is that the Appellant's wife has
      managed to remain in Bangladesh  for  the  past  eleven  years  or  so
      without an attack on the family.  In any event,  that  is  a  document
      which the Appellant could have obtained for himself. There is also  no
      reason why that document at least could not have been obtained by  the
      solicitors in the time since instruction.

37.   We accept though that the medical report which  the  Appellant  wished
      to adduce falls into a different category.  The Appellant is  unlikely
      to have realised that an  expert  report  might  avail  him  and  even
      though, for the  reasons  we  give  above,  it  may  not  assist  him,
      certainly in relation to the reasons  for  any  inconsistency  in  his
      claim, nonetheless, the importance of such a report may well have  not
      become evident until after the rule 35 report was written and once the
      solicitors were instructed.

38.   We have considered carefully whether the  error  can  be  said  to  be
      immaterial, particularly in light of the  comments  of  Judge  Canavan
      when she granted permission.  We have reached the view that the  error
      is material for four reasons.

39.   First, as Ms Fisher pointed out, the basis of the finding at  [88]  of
      the Decision as to sufficiency of protection is not expanded  upon  by
      reference to the evidence other than a  broad  assertion  that  "[t]he
      copious objective evidence in the refusal letter is sufficient to show
      that  there  is   sufficiency   of   protection."   The   finding   is
      insufficiently reasoned.

40.   Second, as Ms Fisher also pointed out,  the  finding  in  relation  to
      internal relocation takes no account of the Appellant's case that [AA]
      is powerful in Bangladesh and would find the Appellant if he returned.
       That is not a particularly strong  reason  given  that,  as  we  note
      above, there is very limited evidence in support of that assertion, an
      inconsistency in the Appellant's evidence in this regard and potential
      question marks raised by the further evidence.

41.   Third, however, also in relation to  internal  relocation,  the  issue
      whether it would be unduly harsh for the Appellant to relocate  within
      Bangladesh would need to take into account the medical evidence  about
      his mental health condition.  We note that Ms Fisher's point about the
      isolating effect of relocation within Bangladesh does  not  apparently
      factor in  the  consideration  that  the  Appellant's  wife  lives  in
      Bangladesh and the Appellant has apparently managed  to  live  in  and
      adapt to a strange country when he came to the UK with limited if  any
      family support  here.   Nonetheless,  the  Appellant's  mental  health
      condition would be a relevant factor to assess.

42.   Finally, the error which we have found to exist is based on a lack  of
      procedural fairness.  It would be inappropriate in those circumstances
      to compound the unfairness by refusing to set aside the  Decision  and
      permit a re-hearing of the appeal.

43.    For  that  reason  also,  we  agree  with  the  submissions  of   the
      representatives that, if we were to find an error of law  and  to  set
      aside the Decision as we have done, then the appropriate course is  to
      remit the appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  bearing  in  mind  in
      particular the need for fresh credibility findings to be made  on  the
      evidence as is now available.

DECISION
We are satisfied that the Decision involves the making of a  material  error
on a point of  law.  The  Decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Housego
promulgated on 20 September 2018 is set aside.  The appeal  is  remitted  to
the First-tier Tribunal for re-hearing before a different Judge.
Signed           [pic] Dated: 30 January 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Smith
