


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
PA/10982/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      | Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 20 April 2018                          | On 03 May 2018                   |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN

                                   Between

                                     Q A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Briddock, Counsel instructed by Milestone
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Senior Presenting Officer


                      ERROR OF LAW DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a national of Pakistan born on 26 February  1987.   He
    made an application for asylum on 18 April 2017 on  the  basis  of  his
    sexual orientation.  This application was refused in a  decision  dated
    15 October 2017.  The Appellant appealed against that decision and  his
    appeal came before Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  Bartlett  at  the
    hearing on 27 November  2017.   In  a  decision  and  reasons  dated  6
    December 2017 the judge dismissed the appeal essentially on  the  basis
    that she did not accept that the Appellant is a gay man.

 2. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was sought on the basis that
    the judge had erred materially in  law  in  the  manner  in  which  she
    assessed the Appellant's evidence of his relationship with  his  former
    school friend, A; in respect of the definition of the  relationship  of
    "relationship" and that  the  judge  had  erred  in  finding  that  the
    Appellant was evasive.  It was submitted that the judge erred  in  that
    there are a number of findings that were  based  on  purely  subjective
    speculation i.e. at [23] in finding that it was not credible  that  the
    Appellant would not have been attracted to anyone other  than  A  as  a
    teenager, nor that he did not  discuss  with  his  housemates  what  he
    wanted A to know about his sexual orientation  and  that  this  was  an
    error not least in light of the fact that by the time A visited the  UK
    the Appellant was openly living as a gay man.

 3. Thirdly, it was submitted that the judge erred in  her  assessments  of
    photographs submitted by the Appellant at [25] which she  found  "gives
    little support to his claim he is homosexual." This failed to take into
    account the fact that the photographs depict  the  Appellant  in  close
    physical contact with  A  and  in  one  photograph  they  are  kissing.
    Fourthly, at [26] the judge  erred  in  finding  that  the  Appellant's
    attendance at LGBT groups "does little to support his claim" when it is
    obvious that attendance at such groups do  support  a  claim  based  on
    sexual orientation.

 4. Fifthly, the judge erred at [26] in her assessment of the  evidence  of
    Mr H. who attended the hearing before the First tier Tribunal and  gave
    oral evidence that he believed the Appellant to be a gay  man  and  the
    judge dismissed this evidence erroneously  on  the  basis  that  Mr  H.
    believed the Appellant to be gay due to mere attendance at groups which
    was not the extent of his evidence.

 5. Sixthly, the judge at [26] inappropriately stated "as a  judge  sitting
    in this Tribunal I am aware of the length people will go to to  support
    their claim" which was not only inappropriate but implicitly  suggested
    that  Mr  H.'s  evidence  was  a  fabrication,  absent  any  evidential
    foundation for this.

 6. Seventhly, at [27] in considering the letters from MindOut when, rather
    than consider that evidence in  the  round,  the  judge  took  a  point
    against the Appellant on the basis it was not  credible  given  he  had
    been attending MindOut since 2014 that he did not know he  could  claim
    asylum based  on  his  sexual  orientation  until  January  2017.   The
    evidence from MindOut was clear and supported the Appellant's claim  to
    be a gay man.

 7. Eighthly, the judge erred in failing at [29] when assessing  the  issue
    of messages on the Appellant's phone to distinguish between messages of
    a practical nature and those of a romantic nature and it was  perfectly
    reasonable for the Appellant not to use his phone for intimate messages
    but rather just for practical purposes.

 8. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge  Storey  in  a
    decision dated 19 February 2018 on the following basis:

         "It is arguable that the judge's assessment of whether or  not  the
         Appellant  had  shown  he  was  gay  relied  unduly  on  subjective
         assumptions and was  unduly  dismissive  of  photographic  evidence
         relating to close physical contact with A. and attendance  at  LGBT
         events.  Despite noting at paragraph 21 that sexuality is primarily
         about identity, it is unclear whether at various  points  later  on
         the judge treated it as essentially about physical/sexual contact".

 9. A Rule 24 response was lodged by the Respondent on 7 March 2018 on  the
    basis that the Respondent opposed the appeal and the grounds of  appeal
    amounted simply to a disagreement with  the  judge's  findings  and  an
    attempt to reargue the case portraying the evidence  from  a  different
    perspective.  It was submitted the judge identified numerous points  on
    which she found the Appellant to lack credibility or to be inconsistent
    which combined led her to the reasonable conclusion that the  Appellant
    had not discharged the burden of proof.   The  judge  was  entitled  to
    decide as she did and provided a clear  explanation  for  each  of  her
    findings.  The evidence including  the  photographs  and  that  of  the
    witness was not sufficient such as to compel the judge to find  in  the
    Appellant's favour."

Hearing

10. At the hearing before me, I heard detailed submissions by  Mr  Briddock
    on behalf of the Appellant, who took me through the judge's conclusions
    and also the evidence in support of the  Appellant's  claim,  including
    the photographs and the two letters dated 4 August 2017 and 16 November
    2017 at AB86 and 87  from  the  LGBT  mental  health  charity,  MindOut
    confirming that the Appellant had been attending their organisation. Mr
    Briddock submitted the judge had made a number of erroneous findings in
    respect of the evidence of Mr H., at [26] where she  held:  "Mr  Hart's
    complete failure to root the Appellant's homosexuality in anything more
    than mere attendance at groups does little to support  the  Appellant's
    claim" Mr Briddock submits that this was  erroneous  in  that  Mr  H.'s
    evidence  was  much  wider  than  simply  confirming  the   Appellant's
    attendance at groups and that he also refers to the fact that they have
    socialised together.  Mr Briddock produced a  copy  of  his  Record  of
    Proceedings which have been extracted and appended to  the  grounds  of
    appeal  in  relation  to  the  confusion   over   the   definition   of
    "relationship" by the Appellant who sought  to  distinguish  between  a
    sexual relationship of a short duration e.g. with somebody known as  C.
    and a longer term romantic and sexual relationship e.g. with A.

11. In  respect  of  the  photographs  Mr  Briddock  accepted  that  whilst
    photographs do  not  prove  sexual  orientation  they  do  support  the
    Appellant's claim to be a gay man and the judge had erred  at  [25]  in
    failing to consider  the  photographs  in  the  round  with  the  other
    evidence.

12. In his submissions Mr Kotas submitted that he properly  understood  the
    grounds were simply a disagreement with an adequately reasoned decision
    and that  in  essence,  the  complaint  was  more  of  a  quibble  over
    interpretation of  the  evidence  rather  than  identification  of  any
    material errors of law.  However, he accepted at [22] that there was an
    element of  subjectivity  on  the  judge's  part  in  relation  to  her
    assessment  and  her  finding  of  implausibility  in  respect  of  the
    Appellant's lack of attraction to anyone else.  He  accepted  that  the
    photographs appeared organic or natural and that at  [26]  the  judge's
    expression as to her awareness of the lengths people go to has no place
    in the determination, albeit he did not consider that this was fatal.

13. In reply, Mr Briddock accepted that  taken  individually  the  separate
    pieces of evidence were not conclusive but when considered as  a  whole
    it was clear that the low standard of proof in respect of the Appellant
    establishing his sexual orientation had been reached and the judge  had
    erred in concluding to the contrary.

Findings and Decision

14. I find material errors of law in the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Bartlett essentially for the reasons set out in  the  grounds  of
    appeal.  I have considered these errors in a cumulative sense, in  that
    as Mr Briddock acknowledged each individual piece of evidence  may  not
    be sufficient, but when taken as  a  whole  the  evidence  appeared  to
    indicate that the Appellant was, as he asserted, a gay man.  The  judge
    however, appears to have treated each piece of evidence separately  and
    has made errors in  the  assessment  of  some  of  that  evidence.   In
    addition to the oral evidence of the Appellant, three further witnesses
    were called in support of his claim, each of whom  produced  a  witness
    statement and was subjected to cross-examination on behalf of the  Home
    Office. In addition to the live oral evidence there were letters from a
    Mr  Phil  Brook,  an  LGBTQ  Mental  Health  Advocate  at  MindOut  and
    photographs of the Appellant with friends including with A.

15. It is clear from the Appellant's evidence that he distinguished between
    what in his mind was a relationship e.g. with his former partner A. and
    what he also described as "one night stands with random men."  He  also
    stated that he went on dates but did not use  gay  apps  and  he  would
    attend gay clubs.  It is unclear why the judge reached  the  conclusion
    she did in light of the totality of the evidence before her.  The judge
    records at [8] that the Appellant had dated other men  and  had  had  a
    sexually intimate  relationship  with  somebody  called  C.   Yet  this
    evidence is not properly or clearly addressed by the judge  in  finding
    that the Appellant could not discharge the burden of proof  in  respect
    of his sexual orientation. The judge held at [22] as follows.

         "22. I found the Appellant's answers in the asylum interview on the
             subject (of A) to be evasive.  At the oral hearing whenever he
             was asked about relationships he wished to focus  entirely  on
             A; it was only after a considerable number of  questions  that
             he  identified  having  any  form  of  relationship  beyond  a
             friendship with anybody else.  Whilst on the one hand  such  a
             focus on one individual could be viewed as slightly  obsessive
             and focussed behaviour I find that he  was  evasive.   Further
             the lack of ability of the Appellant to identify an attraction
             to anybody except one individual and  until  he  came  to  the
             United Kingdom in 2009 when he was 20  years  old  not  to  be
             credible."

16.  The difficulty with this is even if the Appellant was evasive, it does
    not  mean  that  his  evidence  e.g.  that  he  had  had  an   intimate
    relationship with someone other than A is not  true  and  that  is  not
    clearly or properly addressed by the judge.

17. In relation to the fact that the Appellant did not tell A. he  was  gay
    prior to A.'s visit to the UK, the judge rejected this evidence at [23]
    on the following basis:

         "I do not accept that the Appellant would not have given  extremely
careful thought as         to what was communicated about his sexuality  and
how it was communicated to  A.        prior  to  A.  coming  to  the  United
Kingdom and that he was not to discuss  this            carefully  with  his
friends  and  housemates.   On  the   Appellant's   own   account   A.   was
extremely important to his life as was his sexuality.  It  is  not  credible
that he would          have left the communication about it as a  matter  of
chance particularly when he claims      to have been living  an  openly  gay
lifestyle."

18. I find that the judge erred in this respect in that the  Appellant  had
    in 2009 when  he  came  to  the  United  Kingdom  accepted  his  sexual
    orientation  and  had  since  that  time  been  living  an  openly  gay
    lifestyle.  In that circumstance and given that he  had  been  in  love
    with A. since prior to that time and prior  to  coming  to  the  United
    Kingdom it seemed once A. decided to visit him in the United Kingdom it
    was inevitable that he would disclose his sexual  orientation  and  his
    feelings for A. to him.  I do not find that  in  itself  is  inherently
    implausible or lacks credibility.

19. The judge's analysis of the evidence of Mr H. is at [26]:  "however  Mr
    Hart's complete  failure  to  root  the  Appellant's  homosexuality  in
    anything more than mere attendance at groups does little to support the
    Appellant's claim."  The difficulty with that finding is that there are
    photographs of the Appellant with Mr H. who gave evidence that they are
    friends in that they socialise together and  they  have  also  attended
    support groups.  The evidence of Mr H. is in the Appellant's bundle  at
    pages 19 to 20 where he describes himself as a retired businessman  and
    a gay man.  He stated he met the Appellant in Compton's, a gay  bar  in
    Soho and that he is a volunteer with Opening Doors London, which  is  a
    large gay charity offering counselling and social support and he  meets
    the Appellant regularly as a friend.  They visit gay bars together,  go
    to gay organisations like London Friend and ELOP and they also attended
    Brighton Pride together on 5 August 2017.  He makes  reference  to  the
    Appellant having an honest and sincere  character.   I  find  that  the
    judge's assessment of his evidence that it completely  failed  to  root
    the  Appellant's  sexual  orientation  in  anything  more   than   mere
    attendance at groups does not do justice to his evidence, considered as
    a whole.

20. I find that the judge further erred at [29]  in  finding:  "I  consider
    that there is a great difference  between  a  perfectly  understandable
    desire not to use dating apps and a purported  total  denial  of  using
    basic messaging to arrange meetings and the aftermath of such  if  they
    were romantic in nature".  This finding is not in accordance  with  the
    oral evidence that was before the judge, which was that  the  Appellant
    used messaging  to  arrange  dates  but  not  to  communicate  intimate
    thoughts or feelings. It is also clear from the Record  of  Proceedings
    that the Appellant stated that  he  was  concerned  about  dating  apps
    because he felt there were "dodgy false profiles and  sometimes  people
    say nice over the internet but when meet they are  very  different  and
    that he liked meeting people on a one to one basis and not over the gay
    apps".



Decision

21. For the reasons set out above I find material  errors  of  law  in  the
    decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Bartlett.  I  set  that  decision
    aside and remit the appeal for a hearing de  novo  before  a  different
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Rebecca Chapman                         Date 29 April 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman


