
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/10947/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|on 12th July 2019                  |on 2nd August 2019                 |
|                                   |                                   |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DEANS


                                   Between

                                     H G
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Ms J McCallum, Latta & Co, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This appeal is brought against a decision by Judge of the First-tier
      Tribunal Lucas dismissing an appeal on protection grounds.

   2. The appellant was aged 18 at the date of the hearing before the First-
      tier Tribunal in January 2019.  She is a national of Ethiopia.  She
      has been recognised as a victim of trafficking.  She was brought to
      the UK from Calais in November 2016 under section 67 of the
      Immigration Act 2016.  She has leave to remain until August 2023.

   3. Permission to appeal was granted principally on the ground that the
      Judge of the First-tier Tribunal arguably erred in several ways in
      finding the appellant's account implausible and, in particular, in
      making his credibility findings failed to consider evidence in the
      form of country information.

   4. To understand the basis on which permission to appeal was granted, it
      is necessary to look at the appellant's account and the judge's
      findings in respect of it.  According to the appellant, she and her
      older sister lived with their parents in Addis Ababa.  The appellant
      had a close relationship with her maternal uncle.  Some time before
      the appellant left Ethiopia her parents arranged a marriage between
      her sister and an older man.  When the appellant was aged 13, her
      uncle told her that her parents had arranged a marriage for her but he
      disapproved of it.  He arranged for the appellant to leave Ethiopia
      and travel to Sudan in order to avoid this forced marriage.  Once in
      Sudan the appellant lived with a family in a state of domestic
      servitude.  She was forced to move to Beirut, where she was enslaved
      for 3 years to a family who mistreated her.  This family had a home in
      France, to which they took the appellant and from which she escaped
      and made her way to Calais.  The appellant did not believe that her
      uncle knew he was sending her into a harmful situation in Sudan.  She
      trusted him and believed that he knew the family he was sending her to
      in Sudan.  She last had contact with her uncle when she was in Beirut.
       He was worried about her but told her everything would be all right
      "tomorrow".  The appellant has not had contact with her parents or
      sister since she left Ethiopia.

   5. At paragraph 26 of his decision the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal
      stated that he did not regard the appellant's account "as in any way
      credible."  She stated that she never had any discussions with her
      parents about her arranged marriage although she also said she had a
      good relationship with them.  Implausibly it was her uncle who told
      her about the proposed marriage and arranged for her to travel to a
      family in Sudan, supposedly for her welfare.  According to the judge,
      at paragraph 28, it made no sense for the appellant's uncle to arrange
      for her to leave her parents, country and education at the age of 13
      for an unknown fate in Sudan and then Beirut.  At paragraph 29 the
      judge found that the appellant's uncle had acquiesced in her domestic
      servitude and this was not the action of someone who had the best
      interests of the appellant at heart.  At paragraph 30 the judge
      indicated that he did not believe that at the age of 13 the appellant
      would have left Ethiopia without speaking to her parents.

   6. The application for permission to appeal contends, first, that because
      the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal did not find the appellant's
      account "inherently implausible" it could not be found implausible.
      Something seemingly implausible might be seen as plausible "in another
      light".  It was not implausible that the appellant did not have a
      discussion with her parents where a proposed marriage was an arranged
      one.  The appellant's uncle might have seen escape as preferable to a
      forced marriage.  It was contended, secondly, that the judge looked at
      the evidence "in a one dimensional way" and, thirdly, that the judge
      characterised the risk to the appellant according to his own
      perception of reasonableness.  Fourthly, although the judge recognised
      that the appellant was a vulnerable witness this was not taken into
      account when assessing the evidence.  Fifthly the judge paid only lip
      service to the finding that the appellant was a victim of trafficking
      and did not assess how this affected the appeal.  Finally the judge
      failed to assess adequately any of the country information.  Reliance
      was placed in particular on the authority of KB & AH (credibility-
      structured approach) [2017] UKUT 00491.

Submissions
   7. At the hearing before me Ms McCallum referred to a consolidated bundle
      she had provided of the evidence which was before the First-tier
      Tribunal.  This was of considerable assistance to me and I would like
      to record my appreciation of this.

   8. Ms McCallum submitted that the appellant was entitled to refugee
      status not only because she was a victim of human trafficking but also
      because she had fled from a forced marriage.  There was considerable
      evidence before the First-tier Tribunal of forced marriage in
      Ethiopia.  The First-tier Tribunal failed to take a structured
      approach to credibility, in accordance with KB & AH.  The Judge of the
      First-tier Tribunal did not believe that the appellant did not discuss
      the proposed marriage with her parents.  The judge assessed this
      through a western standard but should have asked if parents in
      Ethiopia would have discussed a proposed marriage with their child.
      It was known that even children living in Scotland were taken abroad
      in the school holidays to marry without their prior knowledge.

   9. It was suggested to Ms McCallum that the judge's finding was to the
      effect that the appellant's uncle had lied to her.  Ms McCallum
      responded that the appellant's evidence was that her uncle did not
      know he was sending her somewhere worse.  Ms McCallum submitted either
      that there would be no support for the appellant from her family on
      return to Ethiopia or that her family would have harmful intentions
      towards her.  There was also an issue of illegal exit from Ethiopia.
      The appellant would be forced back into the same situation from which
      she had fled - facing either forced marriage or servitude.

  10. For the respondent, Mr Diwnycz relied upon a rule 24 response dated
      24th May 2019.  This states that the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal
      found the appellant's evidence implausible and lacking in credibility
      having considered the evidence holistically.  The judge's findings
      were open to him and, in particular, the judge was entitled to find it
      was unlikely that the appellant's uncle who acted in the interests of
      her welfare would effectively place her in an unknown and arguably
      worse position in Sudan.  The judge identified that the trafficking
      aspect had little impact on the appeal since it related to events
      after the appellant left Ethiopia and did not relate to the core of
      the appellant's claim.

Discussion
  11. It is not entirely clear what is meant at paragraph 26 of the decision
      where the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal stated: "The Tribunal does
      not regard her account as in any way credible".  Both the application
      for permission to appeal and the rule 24 response seem to have assumed
      that what the judge meant was that the appellant had fabricated a
      story in order to claim protection.  There is, however, more to the
      judge's findings than this.  The judge recognised at paragraph 32 that
      the appellant had been accepted as a victim of trafficking.  At
      paragraph 29 the judge posited that the appellant's uncle acquiesced
      in her domestic servitude.  The inference may be drawn from the
      judge's findings that it was not the appellant who fabricated a story
      in order to claim protection but her uncle, whom she trusted, who
      fabricated a story in order to deliver the appellant into domestic
      servitude.  The appellant's account is implausible not in the sense
      that she would not have been forced into marriage by her parents but
      in the sense that her uncle had her best interests at heart in seeking
      to save her from a forced marriage.  The inference to be drawn from
      the judge's findings is that the appellant's uncle used the fear of a
      forced marriage to induce the appellant to flee into domestic
      servitude with a family in Sudan.  This family then transferred the
      appellant, without her consent, to serve a family in Beirut.  This
      accords with the decision that the appellant was a victim of human
      trafficking but accepts as implausible that her uncle arranged her
      departure from Ethiopia without knowing what awaited her in Sudan.

  12. There are certain issues on which the judge's findings might be open
      to challenge.  At paragraph 30 the judge found that the appellant
      would not have left Ethiopia at the age of 13 without speaking to her
      parents, with whom she had a good relationship.  In fact the judge
      recorded contradictory evidence from the appellant about her
      relationship with her parents.  In her witness statement the appellant
      recorded that she had a good relationship with her parents.  At
      paragraph 16 the judge records that initially in cross-examination the
      appellant said her relationship with her parents was good. The judge
      then records at paragraph 17 that the appellant said she did not have
      a good relationship with her parents.

  13. This is perhaps an issue where the judge should have specifically had
      regard to the fact that the appellant was a vulnerable witness, who
      gave contradictory answers in cross-examination.  When this is taken
      into account it is difficult to see how the judge could have made a
      finding that the appellant would have spoken to her parents before
      leaving Ethiopia because she had a good relationship with them,
      particularly where there is an element of speculation about how a 13-
      year-old Ethiopian girl might behave.  For reasons which I will
      develop, however, I do not think the judge's findings at paragraph 30
      are fatal to his decision.

  14. Generally, the judges' findings on the lack of plausibility of the
      appellant's account were open to him, provided it is recognised that
      it was the appellant's interpretation of her uncle's behaviour which
      was implausible and it was not necessarily the case that the appellant
      was giving evidence in which she herself did not believe.  When this
      is recognised most of what is contended in the application for
      permission to appeal about the structuring of the decision, or about
      the judge's perspective, falls away. What remains is that the
      appellant was rightly recognised to be a vulnerable witness, even if
      the judge did not fully take this into account when making findings,
      and that she was a victim of trafficking.  The one further aspect of
      the application for permission to appeal is whether the judge took
      proper account of the country information.

  15. During the course of the hearing I was referred to country information
      which was before the First-tier Tribunal about forced marriage of
      child brides in Ethiopia.  A BBC report from 2006 (Appellant's
      bundles, p180) referred to the prevalence of this.  There was a more
      recent report from 2015 stating that Ethiopia has one of the highest
      rates of child marriage in the world (Appellant's bundle, p 172).  AN
      HJT report from 2007 (Appellant's bundle, p 175) indicates that it is
      in rural regions where child marriages are prevalent.  A Home Office
      report of October 2017 states that early marriage and marriage by
      abduction are prevalent across Ethiopia, although the incidence has
      reportedly declined in recent years (Appellant's bundle, p 208).  The
      legal age for marriage is 18 for both genders but the law was not
      enforced uniformly and families in rural areas were sometimes unaware
      of it.

  16. As already noted, it was part of the appellant's submission that the
      judge failed to have regard to this country information.  I accept
      that this country information might have been highly relevant if there
      was any question of returning the appellant to Ethiopia as a minor but
      there is none.  Any risk to the appellant of forced marriage as a
      child, if it ever existed, has gone.

  17. I understood it to have been suggested that if the appellant were to
      return to Ethiopia she feared reprisals from her parents for running
      away, or from the authorities if she had left the country illegally.
      These fears appear to have been somewhat speculative in the context of
      this appeal.  The appellant does not know whether she left Ethiopia
      illegally.  The Home Office report of October 2017 (Appellant's
      bundle, p 203) does not suggest that returnees who have left illegally
      face any particular sanction from the authorities.

  18. So far as the appellant's family is concerned, as the appellant has
      leave until 2023, she would be returning as a woman in her twenties.
      I was not referred to any country information regarding forced
      marriage of women over the age of 18, nor to any evidence of a
      widespread problem of, for example, honour killings.  The evidence
      does not show that the appellant would face a real risk of being
      trafficked from Ethiopia as an adult.  She was tricked into leaving
      when she was a child.

  19. After the appellant left Ethiopia around 2013 she endured almost
      unimaginable abuse as a domestic slave until she was brought to the UK
      in November 2016.  The abuse she suffered was not in her home country
      but in Sudan and Lebanon and, finally, in France.  The issue in her
      appeal, however, was whether she is currently at risk of persecution
      or serious harm in Ethiopia.  Even taken at its highest, the evidence
      does not establish a real risk of persecution or serious harm in
      Ethiopia.  Even if I had found that the findings of the First-tier
      Tribunal were fatally flawed, I do not perceive how the appellant
      could succeed in her appeal.

Conclusions
  20. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve
      the making of an error on a point of law.

  21. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal dismissing the appeal shall
      stand.


Anonymity
The First-tier Tribunal did not make a direction for anonymity (contrary to
what is stated on the front sheet of the decision).  In view of the fact
that the appellant was trafficked as a child and is a vulnerable person I
make such a direction in the following terms. Unless or until a court or
tribunal directs otherwise no report of these proceedings shall either
directly or indirectly identify the appellant or any member of her family.
This direction applies to the appellant and the respondent.  Failure to
comply with this direction may give rise to contempt of court proceedings.





M E Deans
                                        25th July 2019
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge


