
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10106/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5th March 2018                             |On 21st March 2018            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN


                                   Between

                                     msm
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms G Lee (instructed by Duncan Lewis & Co,
Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood (Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal to the Upper Tribunal by the Appellant in relation to
    a judgment of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Telford  promulgated  on  8th
    December 2017 after a hearing at Harmondsworth on  9th  November  2017.
    Judge Telford, having heard the appeal,  dismissed  it  principally  on
    credibility grounds.  The challenge to that judgment is that the  Judge
    fundamentally misunderstood what it was that the Appellant was actually
    claiming. That can be set out quite briefly in that the  Judge  at  the
    beginning of his findings on credibility, which start at paragraph  34,
    said:- "On all aspects of his claim I find  his  evidence  incredible".
    There is nothing inherently wrong in putting the overall finding at the
    beginning and then giving reasons afterwards.  However, if the  reasons
    are not based on the evidence then there is a problem. The first reason
    the Judge gave  for  his  adverse  credibility  finding  was  that  the
    Appellant acted inconsistently with his claims which included his claim
    to be in fear whenever he  was  in  Bangladesh.   The  lack  of  action
    against him  by  the  authorities  in  Bangladesh  when  he  was  there
    undermined that claim.  It was doubly so, the Judge found, because  his
    claim was not only  that  he  was  involved  in  student  politics  and
    therefore in the sights of the Awami League, but that  his  father  too
    was active and targeted politically.

 2. The Appellant had  never  claimed  to  always  have  been  in  fear  in
    Bangladesh.  His claim was that there was no problem until  his  father
    disappeared.  He never claimed to have been in fear  while  he  was  in
    Bangladesh and that, being the basis of a finding of inconsistency,  is
    wrong and means that the credibility findings as a whole  start  on  an
    unfair and unjustified basis.

 3. The next  paragraph  in  the  Decision  and  Reasons  referred  to  the
    Appellant being able to obtain a visa, travel openly with it using  his
    own passport and to have been able  to  travel  around  with  impunity.
    However, at the time he was doing so he had not claimed to have been in
    fear and therefore no reason why he could not travel around openly  and
    freely.

 4. The next issue with the Judge's consideration is  his  misunderstanding
    about the position of the Appellant's father.  It has always  been  the
    Appellant's case, and it is quite clear  from  his  statement  and  the
    asylum interview, that his father  was  the  General-Secretary  of  the
    local  branch  of  the  BNP,  whereas  the  Judge  clearly  gained  the
    impression that his father was the national  General-Secretary  of  the
    BNP in Bangladesh, which  of  course  would  be  a  very  high  profile
    position.  That is not what the Appellant  had  ever  claimed  and  the
    grounds refer to the parts of the asylum interview where the  Appellant
    made that clear.

 5. Those two matters of themselves are enough for  me  to  find  that  the
    adverse credibility findings are unsafe and Miss Isherwood did not seek
    strenuously to defend the Decision and Reasons. On the basis  that  the
    credibility findings,  which  go  to  the  heart  of  the  matter,  are
    unsustainable I set the Decision and Reasons aside.  It is  right  that
    it should be  remitted  for  a  fresh  hearing  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, the appropriate hearing centre being Taylor House.   To  that
    extent the appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed.

Decision

 6. The appeal is allowed to the extent that it is remitted to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal at Taylor House for a rehearing on all issues.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 19th March 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Martin



