
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: PA/10502/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice Centre      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 18 January 2019                            |On 12 February 2019           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

                                     TD
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Sarwar, D & A Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


          DECISION AND REASONS (given extempore on 18 January 2019)

      1. The respondent is a citizen of the  Democratic  Republic  of  Congo
         ('DRC').  He applied for asylum on  6  September  2016.   That  was
         refused by the Secretary of State for the Home Department  ('SSHD')
         in a letter dated 15 August 2018.  As I am anonymising the  case  I
         shall refer to the appellant before the First-tier Tribunal ('FtT')
         as TD.  The appellant before me and the respondent before  the  FtT
         is the SSHD.



Background

      2. The FtT allowed TD's appeal, finding against the SSHD that  he  was
         and is a citizen of the DRC and that he was  subjected  to  serious
         harm for a political opinion imputed to him as claimed.   The  SSHD
         has appealed against that decision to  the  Upper  Tribunal  ('Ut')
         with permission having been granted by FtT Judge Kelly.

Summary of Asylum Claim

      3. TD claimed to have been born in the DRC and to have had his own car
         repair business.  He had contracts  with  the  Kabila  regime.   He
         claims that there was a motorbike accident in 2011 and his business
         came under suspicion for having tampered with the motorbike used as
         part of the President's supporting vehicles.  He claims that he was
         arrested in September 2011, taken to a military base and  held  for
         eight months during which time he was tortured but that he  managed
         to escape to Angola in April 2012  where  he  resided  with  family
         friends.  They assisted him to get fake identification documents in
         Angola and he lived there for some time.   He claims  that  he  was
         identified when in Angola and he was detained there,  before  being
         flown back to the DRC.  He again managed to escape  at  around  the
         end of August 2016 with the help of a Catholic priest and fled from
         the DRC to the UK using an Angolan passport.

      4. The SSHD did not accept that TD is  a  DRC  national  and  provided
         comprehensive reasons for that position at  [28]  to  [34]  of  his
         decision letter.  The SSHD did not  accept  that  he  was  able  to
         obtain the Angolan documents that he did without them being genuine
         and also noted that the account that he provided  was  implausible.
         The SSHD also addressed the claim that he was viewed  adversely  by
         the DRC regime.   The  SSHD  specifically  rejected  the  documents
         supporting TD's claim.  These included letters from lawyers in  the
         DRC, birth certificate related documents,  and  a  letter  from  an
         organisation named the Angels of the Sky.  The SSHD did not  accept
         that these documents, which were said not to be original documents,
         should have weight attached to them.  The SSHD also  regarded  TD's
         account to be implausible and provided reasons for that.

      5. That decision was appealed by TD to the  FtT.   TD  relied  upon  a
         number of supporting documents before the FtT.   These  included  a
         witness statement from  him,  photographs,  a  statement  from  the
         Movement of Liberation of the Congo.  That last document  described
         there being searches for TD, who was said to be born  in  Kinshasa,
         because he had disappeared in 2011; that document is to be found at
         page 10 of the bundle before the FtT.   There  are  also  documents
         confirming TD's birth in the DRC.  At page 15 of the  bundle  there
         is a document titled  Application  for  Supplementary  Judgment  of
         Birth Certificate.  This  describes  TD  as  having  been  born  in
         Kinshasa, gives his date of birth and gives details of his parents.
          Page 22 is a copy of a birth certificate, described as an integral
         copy of a birth certificate; that also refers  to  TD  having  been
         born in Kinshasa.  TD obviously also relied upon the evidence  that
         had already been considered by the SSHD including the Angels of the
         Sky letter dated 22 April 2015.  This described TD as  having  been
         detained,  summarised  the  circumstances  of  that  detention   in
         September 2011, and described the family as fearing that they could
         not find him and wished to  visit  him.   In  the  lawyer's  letter
         written by a Mr Kabangela Ilunga is dated 4 May 2015, the following
         is stated:

             "I am consultancy lawyer  appointed  by  the  members  of  the
             family of Mr TD concerning his physical  integrity.   In  fact
             since the course of the year  2011  and  as  a  result  of  an
             accident caused by  an  engine  failure  of  the  presidential
             cortege where he previously repaired accident  interpreted  by
             the security service as an attack directed toward the head  of
             state Mr TD is being searched for this reason.   In  order  to
             avoid the extrajudicial sanctions Mr TD  has  fled  to  Angola
             from where he was expelled to his country the  DRC.   In  fact
             being searched by the Congolese Intelligence Service so as  to
             be arrested TD left the country clandestinely and returned  to
             Luanda, the Angolan capital where  he  thought  he  was  safe.
             According to the information known by his  family  Mr  TD  has
             been arrested by the police in Angola who in turn  handed  him
             over to the Intelligence Services of the  Democratic  Republic
             of Congo or he would be kept in secret  in  an  unknown  place
             here in Kinshasa and this since after April 2015 and according
             to them his family has not heard any news from him this  being
             the reason why they have contacted me at my  lawyer's  office.
             This is the reason why I look for  your  competent  advice  so
             that light is shed upon the health condition and the state  of
             the detainee.  Hoping that nothing  worse  happens  to  him  I
             would be grateful if you would accept Mr General Attorney  the
             expression of my highest consideration".

         The letter was addressed to the General Attorney at  the  Court  of
         Appeal of Kinshasa.

      6. The FtT heard evidence from TD with the  assistance  of  a  Lingala
         interpreter.  The FtT found that TD was a DRC national and  not  as
         the SSHD claimed an Angolan national.  In so finding the FtT  noted
         that the SSHD had not undertaken any verification  of  the  various
         nationality documents.  The FtT also  regarded  it  as  significant
         that TD's children were accepted by the SSHD to be nationals of the
         DRC.  The FtT noted the letter from the lawyer that I  have  quoted
         in full and was satisfied that weight could be placed on the letter
         having considered the profile of the author, as  contained  in  the
         bundle before it.  The FtT noted  that  TD's  late  wife  was  also
         accepted to be a national of the DRC.  The FtT then said this:

             "27. When I take all these matters together and also take into
                  account the documents at  pages  10,  15  and  22  of  the
                  appellant's bundle and at page  113  of  the  respondent's
                  bundle I am satisfied that despite  the  appellant  having
                  had an Angolan passport he has shown to the lower standard
                  that he is a national of DRC.

             28.  I am also satisfied that the claims of the appellant  are
                  credible.  Once again I take note of the  letter  from  Mr
                  Ilunga which confirms the  claims  that  have  been  made.
                  However  I  have  also  noted  the  various  documentation
                  contained in both the  appellant's  and  the  respondent's
                  respective bundles and in particular the letter  from  the
                  Angels of the Sky.  I  am  satisfied  that  it  cannot  be
                  simply dismissed as reproductions as  the  refusal  letter
                  does.  Further, the refusal letter appears to  concentrate
                  on the plausibility of the appellant's claim  rather  than
                  the appellant's credibility.

             29.  The appellant has also been  largely  consistent  in  his
                  claims.

             30.  When I consider all these matters I am satisfied  to  the
                  lower standard the appellant's claim is a credible one and
                  he would be at real risk on his return to DRC  because  of
                  his imputed political opinion.   I  am  further  satisfied
                  that he has been able to escape from detention in  DRC  on
                  two occasions and that because of this he would  be  known
                  to the authorities on return ..."

Grounds of appeal to the UT

      7. The SSHD drafted three grounds of appeal.

             Ground  1  submits  that  the  findings  regarding  TD's   DRC
             citizenship and Angolan citizenship were not open to the  FtT.



             Ground 2 submits that the FtT made a material mistake of  fact
             regarding  the  letter  from  the  Angels  of  the   Sky   and
             misunderstood the SSHD's arguments.

             Ground 3 contends that the  FtT  failed  to  engage  with  the
             reasons outlined in the SSHD's decision letter and  failed  to
             provide adequate reasons for its conclusion that  TD  provided
             credible evidence.

      8. In a decision  dated  25  October  2018  FtT  Judge  Kelly  granted
         permission to appeal.  He however observed that it was not arguable
         that the FtT gave inadequate reasons for its finding that TD was  a
         citizen of DRC given the extensive reasoning contained at  [20]  to
         [27] of the decision and  refused  permission  to  appeal  on  this
         ground.  He however observed that  it  is  arguable  that  the  FtT
         fundamentally misunderstood the SSHD's case concerning  the  Angels
         of the Sky document and gave inadequate reasons as to why it  found
         that TD had substantiated the remainder of  his  narrative  to  the
         appropriate  standard.   The  FtT  therefore  purported   to   give
         permission on grounds 2 and 3 but not ground 1.

Hearing Before UT

      9. At the hearing before me Mr Bates argued that although the grant of
         permission purported to be limited, the FtT did not comply with the
         guidance contained in Safi & Ors (permission to  appeal  decisions)
         [2018] UKUT 00388 (IAC).  This states that it is  essential  for  a
         judge who is granting permission to appeal only on limited  grounds
         to say so in the standard form of the document  that  contains  the
         decision as opposed to the reasons for the decision.  Mr Bates made
         it clear that because the FtT failed to make the decision clear  in
         the correct part of the decision the SSHD was not given any  proper
         procedural opportunity to make an application to renew that ground.
          Mr Bates therefore indicated his intention, relying upon Safi,  to
         rely on all three grounds of appeal.

     10. Mr Sarwar was given an opportunity to deal  with  that  application
         and indicated that he was content to respond to all three  grounds.



     11. Mr Bates submitted that the FtT erred in law  in  its  approach  to
         TD's nationality for the reasons set out within ground 1.  Mr Bates
         argued that the FtT failed to take into account that the children's
         nationality could not be determinative because they could have  got
         that nationality through their mother who was  a  DRC  national  or
         their father, TD, might have been a dual national.  As to ground 2,
         Mr Bates submitted that the FtT failed  to  deal  with  the  reason
         explained within the decision letter why  the  Angels  of  the  Sky
         letter should have little weight attached to it.   In  relation  to
         ground 3, Mr Bates took  me  to  the  decision  letter  itself  and
         invited me to find that the FtT  provided  inadequate  reasons  for
         rejecting the matters contained therein.

     12. In response Mr Sarwar invited me to find that the grounds were  not
         made out and that although the  FtT's  reasoning  is  brief  it  is
         adequate.  He referred me to the  decision  in  MK  (duty  to  give
         reasons) Pakistan  [2013]  UKUT  00641  (IAC)  in  which  the  then
         president Mr Justice McCloskey said this at [11]:

             "The depth and  extent  of  the  duty  to  give  reasons  will
             inevitably vary  from  one  case  to  another.   The  duty  is
             contextually sensitive.  Thus, as the Upper Tribunal  observed
             in Shizad [2013] UKUT 35 (IAC), a Tribunal's reasons need  not
             be extensive if its decision makes sense.  See also R (Iran) v
             SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 982".

     13. Mr Sarwar submitted that the context in this  particular  case  was
         such that three points were worthy of emphasis.  The first is  that
         the meat of the SSHD's decision was to the effect that he  did  not
         accept TD's claimed nationality, that is he did not accept that  he
         was a citizen of the DRC or live  there  and  as  such  his  entire
         account, which was predicated on his employment and activities  and
         detention in the DRC, could not be  accepted.   Secondly,  the  FtT
         accepted the lawyer's letter which I have quoted in full  and  that
         this confirmed the core of TD's case.  That letter  supported  TD's
         claim to a very great extent.  Thirdly, the FtT was well  aware  of
         the SSHD's concerns in the decision letter being focused  upon  the
         plausibility of the claim and was entitled to give short shrift  to
         this, bearing in mind the acceptance  of  the  supporting  evidence
         adduced by TD and the lower standard of proof.

     14. In reply Mr Bates submitted that it  was  still  unclear  from  the
         decision why the FtT was prepared to find TD credible.  That  meant
         that the reasoning was simply inadequate and there was therefore an
         error of law.



Error of Law Discussion

Ground 1

     15. The FtT clearly addressed TD's claim to be a DRC citizen  and  made
         comprehensive findings in that regard.  The  FtT  was  entitled  to
         observe at [22] and [23] that  the  SSHD  had  not  undertaken  any
         verification checks of TD's Angolan or  DRC  passport.   In  making
         that observation the  FtT  was  factually  correct.   The  FtT  was
         entitled to note this.   When the decision is read as a whole,  the
         FtT did not necessarily place great weight on this failure,  rather
         the failure is simply noted.  I do not accept the  submission  that
         the FtT  required  the  SSHD  to  establish  TD's  nationality  and
         therefore inverted the burden of proof on nationality.  The FtT was
         simply passing comment on the absence of any  verification  on  the
         part of the SSHD.

     16. Turning to the FtT's findings regarding TD's children, the FtT  was
         entitled to note that it was significant  that  the  children  were
         named in his passport and that it was conceded that those  children
         were nationals of  the  DRC.   The  FtT  was  well-aware  that  the
         children had a DRC citizen mother.  The FtT went on at [25] to  say
         that it placed weight on the lawyer's letter.  The lawyer's  letter
         does not state that TD is a citizen of the DRC but the way in which
         the letter is written certainly gives the impression that that  was
         the case.  The FtT also referred to documentation at pages  10,  15
         and 22 of the bundle before it.  I have  summarised  that  evidence
         above.  It all supported TD's claim that he was a  citizen  of  the
         DRC, in particular the evidence relevant to his birth in  the  DRC.
         The FtT in these circumstances was entitled to  take  all  of  that
         evidence  into  account,  consider  it  together  in  order  to  be
         satisfied that TD had displaced the burden upon  him  to  establish
         that he is a national of the DRC.  It follows that I  do  not  find
         ground 1 to be made out.

Ground 2

     17. Ground 2 submits that the FtT made a material mistake  of  fact  in
         relation to the Angels of the Sky document.  Ground 2 includes  the
         following:

             "The SSHD did not accept the letter submitted by the appellant
             which was purported to be from Angels of the Sky.  This was on
             the basis that the address in the document did not  match  the
             documented address of the organisation on their website".

         The decision letter says  something  slightly  different  at  [36].
         This says that the Angels of the Sky letter has a different contact
         address from what is held on the organisation's website and then  a
         footnote is provided.  That gives a website address.  It cannot  be
         said that the FtT did not engage with the point that was being made
         within the  decision  letter  concerning  the  Angels  of  the  Sky
         document because at [19] the FtT Judge  records  having  asked  the
         SSHD's representative on what basis the submission at [36]  of  the
         decision letter had been made.  The FtT says this at [19]:

             "She referred me to the footnote.  I indicated I had seen this
             but was unable to understand from  where  the  author  of  the
             refusal letter had made the  finding  at  paragraph  36.   The
             appellant's representative referred  me  to  page  26  of  the
             appellant's bundle which was a  copy  of  the  website.   This
             appears to give  an  address  for  www.societecivile.cd  which
             would appear to be a hosting website for Angels  of  the  Sky.
             The respondent's representative said she was unable to help me
             further as she had no other evidence in this regard".

         What is clear is that the FtT sought  clarification  regarding  the
         point  that  was  made  in  the  decision   letter.    The   SSHD's
         representative was unable  to  provide  that  clarification  beyond
         repeating what was in the decision letter.  Given  the  absence  of
         any clarification, and in the light of the point that  TD  made  in
         his witness statement that the letter did  not  provide  a  website
         address  but  rather  provided   contact   addresses   which   were
         consistent, the FtT was entitled to accept the  evidence  from  the
         Angels of the Sky.

     18. Ground 2 is put on the basis that there has been a mistake of  fact
         but as Mr Sarwar pointed out, that submission comes  nowhere  close
         to establishing the necessary ingredients for the mistake  of  fact
         to constitute an error of law.  The SSHD has been unable to set out
         what the mistake as to the existing fact was.  The  SSHD  has  also
         been unable to categorise the fact or the evidence as  established.
         It follows that ground 2 is not made out.

Ground 3

     19. I turn to ground 3 which is perhaps the strongest  of  the  grounds
         given  the  very  brief  way  in  which  the  FtT  deals  with  the
         credibility of TD's claim as to what happened when he  was  in  the
         DRC.  The FtT was satisfied that TD's claims were credible and that
         he  had  been  largely  consistent.   The  FtT  was  aware  of  the
         plausibility concerns held by the SSHD because the FtT referred  to
         these  at  [28].   The  FtT  was  entitled  to  regard  the  SSHD's
         credibility concerns  as  mainly  being  predicated  upon  apparent
         implausibility.  That this is so is clear from a reading of [35] to
         [43]  of  the  decision  letter,  which  focus  upon  the  apparent
         plausibility of the account.  Standing back from the accounts as  I
         have summarised them to  be,  aspects  are  undoubtedly  apparently
         implausible.  It was apparently implausible that  TD  was  able  to
         escape twice and that he would be viewed so  adversely  for  having
         been a mechanic  or  involved  in  the  repair  of  the  motorbike.
         However, the FtT made it clear that it was applying quite  properly
         the lower standard of proof where apparently implausible events can
         nonetheless be reasonably likely.

     20. In my judgment what is key in this case is  that  the  FtT  clearly
         accepted the supporting independent evidence adduced by  TD.   That
         included the letter from the lawyer which confirmed  the  basis  of
         the claim, the  letter  from  the  Angels  of  the  Sky  which  was
         consistent with  what  the  lawyer  had  said,  and  the  documents
         referred to pages 10, 15 and 22 of the bundle, the document at page
         10 also being consistent with what the lawyer and the Angels of the
         Sky   had   said.    Therefore,   although   there   was   apparent
         implausibility, the FtT was entitled to find that the  account  was
         nonetheless credible given TD's credibility and the wide  array  of
         independent evidence in support  of  his  account,  which  the  FtT
         regarded to be credible and cogent.  It may well be that the  FtT's
         approach  to  TD's  credibility  and  the  supporting   documentary
         evidence might be described as generous, but it cannot be described
         as perverse, indeed the SSHD has not sought to do so.

     21. Whilst I entirely accept that the FtT's  reasoning  and  engagement
         with the SSHD's position could have been more comprehensive, in  my
         judgment it was adequate.  The SSHD should be able to  discern  why
         he was unsuccessful  before  the  FtT.    Contrary  to  the  SSHD's
         submissions, the FtT accepted the supporting evidence from  various
         sources to corroborate TD's nationality and his account  of  having
         been detained and ill-treated  in  the  DRC.   Notwithstanding  the
         apparent implausibilities in TD's account, the FtT was prepared  to
         accept it as credible when all the evidence was considered  in  the
         round.  For these reasons ground 3 is not made out.

Notice of decision

22. The FtT decision does not contain an error of law and is not set aside.



Direction regarding anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date

UTJ Plimmer
Upper Tribunal Judge Plimmer                     31 January 2019

