
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10103/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham CJC              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 7th June 2019                     |On 24th July 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     DBA
                         (ANONYMITY direction made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Mills (Senior HOPO)
For the Respondent:    Mr Mohzam (Solicitor)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Phull, promulgated on 17th October 2018, following a  hearing  at
    Birmingham on 17th September 2018.  In  the  determination,  the  judge
    allowed the appeal of the Appellant, whereupon the Respondent Secretary
    of State, subsequently applied for,  and  was  granted,  permission  to
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a  citizen  if  Iraq,  and  was  born  on  1st
    September 1992.  He appealed against the  decision  of  the  Respondent
    dated 27th July 2018, refusing  his  application  for  asylum  and  for
    humanitarian protection, pursuant to paragraph 339C of HC 395.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The essence of the Appellant's claim is that he was born in Kirkuk  but
    lived in Sala Al-Din.  His father was a First Lieutenant in  the  Iraqi
    Army.  He was killed opposing Kurdish forces.  The  family  then  moved
    away.  They moved to a distance of  100  kms  away  from  Kirkuk.   The
    Appellant worked for his uncle on a farm.  ISIS attacked the village in
    June 2014 and took control of the area.  ISIS then took his sister  and
    several girls from the village in June 2015.  Her dead body was  dumped
    outside their home on 25th June 2015.  His  mother  subsequently  died.
    His brothers' whereabouts were unknown.  He has tried  to  contact  his
    uncle since arriving in the UK  but  without  success.   He  now  fears
    return to Iraq where he states that  his  life  would  be  unsafe.   He
    cannot return to his home area because he has not got a  CSID  document
    for relocating to another part of the country.

The Judge's Findings

 4. A feature of this appeal before Judge Phull was  that  the  matter  had
    previously been heard by Judge Colyer in February 2017.   Judge  Colyer
    had found the Appellant to be broadly credible but had taken  the  view
    that the Appellant ought to make greater  efforts,  through  the  Iraqi
    Embassy, to secure CSID documentation, so as to enable  him  to  return
    back to that country.  A year later, the  Appellant  had  then  applied
    again, only to be refused, and it was in those circumstances  that  the
    appeal came before Judge Phull.

 5. Judge Phull began the consideration of the matter at the outset stating
    that, "My starting point is the decision of Judge  Colyer,  promulgated
    on 23rd February 2017" who had found the Appellant  to  be  a  credible
    witness and who had accepted the Appellant's fear of ISIS and  that  he
    and his family suffered persecution  from  them.   There  was  also  an
    independent country expert report from Alison Pargeter which was in the
    Appellant's favour (see paragraph 19).  However, Judge Colyer had found
    that the Appellant could relocate internally within Iraq  and  that  it
    would not be unduly harsh for him to do so, given that he  "had  failed
    to approach the Iraqi Embassy in the United Kingdom to  assist  him  in
    obtaining the identity documents" (paragraph 20).

 6. Judge Phull went on to state that given the findings  of  Judge  Colyer
    that the Appellant "had suffered persecution in his home area,  I  turn
    to consider whether the  Appellant  continues  to  be  at  risk  there"
    (paragraph 21).  The judge held that he would be at risk upon return to
    Iraq,  particularly  in  circumstances  where  he  did  not  have   any
    documentation to enable him to acquire a CSID card, and  had  not  been
    able to make contact with any relatives in his country.

 7. Judge Phull allowed the appeal.

Grounds of Application

 8. The Grounds of Application state that the judge had erred  in  law  for
    three essential reasons.  First, she had failed to consider  fully  the
    Appellant's ability to obtain a civil status ID card (CSID) given  that
    the Appellant did not attend the Iraqi Embassy to  try  to  obtain  the
    necessary documents.  Second, that the judge failed  to  consider  that
    obtaining a CSID is possible and that internal relocation  is  possible
    to other parts of Iraq.  Third, that the judge failed to give  adequate
    reasons for departing from the previous decision of the Tribunal, given
    the principles in Devaseelan [2002] UKIAT 00702.   In  any  event,  the
    judge had failed to explain why the Appellant's case met the  threshold
    in respect of  humanitarian  protection  given  the  improved  security
    situation in Kirkuk.

 9. On 12th November 2018 permission to appeal was granted by the Tribunal.



Submissions

10. At the hearing before me on 7th  June  2019,  Mr  Mills  explained  how
    following the rejection of the Appellant's previous  protection  claim,
    there had now been a fresh claim application by the Appellant which set
    out to gainsay the decision of Judge Colyer made on February 2017.   He
    accepted that the Appellant had found to be broadly credible.  However,
    Judge Colyer was clear that there was no reason why the Appellant could
    not go back to the IKR because he had relatives there.  Judge Phull had
    failed to follow the principles in Devaseelan because by the time  that
    the appeal arose before Judge Phull, there was still no  evidence  that
    the Appellant had gone to the Iraqi Embassy to try and  secure  further
    documentation to enable him to get the requisite CSID documentation  so
    that he could return back to his country.  The plain fact was that  the
    Appellant had not been able to show that he was undocumented and  could
    not proceed to document himself by  taking  the  necessary  steps  that
    Judge Colyer had advocated.  Finally, it was incorrect to suggest that,
    following the departure of ISIS from Kirkuk, that the level of violence
    there had not subsided, so as not to engage  Article  15(1)(c)  of  the
    Qualification Directive.

11. For his part, Mr Mohzam submitted that he did rely  upon  his  skeleton
    argument.  He  stated  that  the  decisions  by  the  courts  following
    February 2017 had materially  changed  the  situation,  and  the  judge
    expressly drew attention to these before concluding that the Appellant,
    who had attempted to contact his uncle and had failed to do  so,  would
    be able to secure the necessary documentation.

12. In reply, Mr Mills submitted that  the  judge  also  misread  the  CIPU
    Report from the Home Office, only the first two pages of  which  are  a
    summary, but the remaining 50 odd pages  are  a  collation  of  various
    objective materials ranging from the US State Department Report to  the
    BBC,  which  confirm  that  the  situation  in  the  IKR  had  in  fact
    substantially improved, so that the Appellant could now return back  to
    his country.

No Error of Law

13. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA 2007) such that I should set aside the  decision  and  remake  the
    decision.  I come to this conclusion, notwithstanding Mr Mills' valiant
    efforts to persuade me otherwise.  My reasons are as follows.

14. First, the judge does begin correctly at the outset by stating that "My
    starting point is the decision of Judge Colyer" (paragraph  19).   That
    decision, however, was decided on 23rd  February  2017.   Against  that
    background, the judge observed that the finding  of  Judge  Colyer  was
    clear that the "Appellant had suffered persecution in  his  home  area"
    (paragraph 21).

15. However, there was now the decision in AA (Iraq) [2017], to  which  the
    judge  had  regard.  She  observed  that  this   effectively   replaced
    paragraphs 204 of AA (Iraq) [2015].  She observed  how  that  when  the
    Court of Appeal decided AA (Iraq) [2017], it gave guidance that:-

         "There is at present a state of internal armed conflict in  certain
         parts of Iraq, involving government security  forces,  militias  of
         various kinds, and the Islamist group known as ISIL.  The intensity
         of  this  armed  conflict  in  the  so-called  'contested   areas',
         comprising the governorates of Anbar, Diyala, Kirkuk,  Ninewah  and
         Salah Al-Din,  is  such  that,  as  a  general  matter,  there  are
         substantial grounds for believing that any civilian returned there,
         solely on account of his or her presence there, faces a  real  risk
         of being subjected to indiscriminate violence ..."  (see  paragraph
         22 of Judge Phull's determination).

16. It remains the case that there has been no subsequent country  guidance
    case that alters this position.   Given that the  judge  was  bound  to
    refer to the country guidance case, there is no evidence that  she  did
    not do  so,  but  on  the  contrary,  she  supplemented  this,  with  a
    consideration of the latest case law.

17. Second, there was a question of the Appellant being able to get a  CSID
    document.  It is true that the view on 23rd February 2017 was that  the
    Appellant, being a credible witness, ought to try and  attempt  to  get
    documentation from the  Iraqi  Embassy.   However,  as  Mr  Mohzam  has
    pointed out in his skeleton argument, the decision in AAH (Iraq) [2018]
    makes it clear that:-

         "it is possible for an Iraqi national living in the UK to obtain  a
         CSID through the consular section of the Iraqi Embassy  in  London,
         if such a person is able to produce a current or  expired  passport
         and/or the book  at  page  number  for  their  family  registration
         details".

18. However, this was a case where the  Appellant  had  not  been  able  to
    contact any family relatives, and  in  particular  his  uncle  "despite
    making several attempts to do so" (paragraph 28), so as to be  able  to
    get a modicum of information in order to be able to provide  the  Iraqi
    Embassy with a  book  and  page  number  for  his  family  registration
    details.

19. In AAH (Iraq) [2018], the Court of Appeal had gone on to say  that,  "a
    CSID from Iraq is likely to be severely hampered if the person  wishing
    to obtain the CSID is from an area where Article 15(c) serious harm  is
    occurring" (see paragraph 177 of AAH (Iraq) [2018]).  Furthermore,  the
    Tribunal had gone on to  say  that  "a  laissez-passer  should  not  be
    counted for these purposes: these can be issued without any other  form
    of ID being available" (see the head note).

20. It has to be remembered that this is a case where, as Judge Phull makes
    clear:-

         "he does not have a CSID document or a nationality certificate  and
         no way of obtaining copies because  the  originals  were  destroyed
         when his home was destroyed in 2003; at the time  he  was  still  a
         child" (paragraph 29).

21. This is important given what the head note states in AAH, namely,  that
    "it must also be borne in mind that a significant  number  of  IDPs  in
    Iraq are themselves undocumented; if that is the case  it  is  unlikely
    that  they  could  be  of  assistance".   This  is  important   because
    ultimately, as the head note in AAH makes clear, the question is,  "are
    there male family members who will be able and willing  to  attend  the
    civil registry with P?".  The judge's conclusion was  that,  given  the
    lower standard of proof that applies to protection  cases,  that  there
    was no such evidence.

22. In short, the judge's conclusion, particularly at paragraphs 28 to  29,
    was one which was open to her.   She  makes  it  clear  that,  "I  find
    without practical support the  Appellant  cannot  obtain  any  relevant
    documentation from Iraq" (paragraph 28).  That was a  finding  open  to
    the judge on the evidence that was put to the judge at the time of  the
    hearing.  Similarly, the judge was entitled to conclude on the evidence
    before her that, "This evidence confirms that he has no family  support
    available to him in Iraq.  I  find  he  was  candid  that  he  had  not
    attended the Iraqi Embassy in London and did not have knowledge of  the
    Red Cross" (paragraph 29).  The question here is what, given  what  had
    transpired since the decision of Judge Colyer on  23rd  February  2017,
    would be the purpose of the Appellant attending the Iraqi  Embassy,  if
    he has not been able to make contact with male relatives in his family,
    so as to obtain even the slightest form of documentary evidence,  which
    would be of assistance to him were he to go to the Iraqi Embassy.   The
    judge took a realistic view and concluded that according to  the  Iraqi
    Embassy by himself would not alter the position given what  the  latest
    country guidance cases that established from Iraq.

Notice of Decision

23. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    an error of law.  The decision shall stand.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 12th July 2019







