
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
PA/10229/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 6th October 2017                      |  On 17th October 2017              |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON

                                   Between

                                   Md S M
                         (aNONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Karim, Counsel, instructed by Liberty Legal
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a national of Bangladesh born in 1977 and  he  entered
    the UK on 18th May 2010 on a student visa.  His leave was  extended  to
    30th April 2015 following which further applications were rejected.  He
    was encountered working during an enforcement visit on 3rd  April  2016
    and served with removal directions whereupon he claimed asylum  on  the
    basis that if he were returned to Bangladesh he would  be  at  risk  of
    persecution on the basis of his political opinion as  he  is  and  was,
    during his time in Bangladesh, a  member  of  the  Bangladesh  National
    Party.  He asserted that he was a Publicity Secretary  in  the  student
    wing of the BNP Chatro Dal (student wing) of the BNP.   He claimed that
    he was threatened by members of the Awami League in 2003 and  2008  and
    was attacked in 2009 suffering injuries. He asserts  that  he  remained
    involved with the BNP after coming to the UK.

 2. In a determination promulgated on 10th November 2016, a  Judge  of  the
    First Tier Tribunal dismissed the appellant's appeal on all grounds.

 3. The appellant made an  application  for  permission  was  made  on  the
    following grounds

    (i)    the judge accepted that the appellant had been attacked  on  one
    occasion in 2009 but did not accept the extent of his  injuries.   What
    was important however was not the level of injury  as  was  argued  but
    whether he was a victim of politically motivated attack.   The  earlier
    attack was of significance.   At  the  hearing  the  judge  refused  an
    application for an adjournment for medical evidence. She later  in  her
    decision rejected the claimed extent of  his  injuries  [82]  asserting
    that the account in his asylum interview and the FIR were at  variance.
    The judge, then however, appeared to criticise the lack of  information
    [83] and [84] in relation to the attack.

    (ii)   the judge accepted that the appellant was able to provide  basic
    information regarding the BNP and he was a low level member.  Objective
    evidence  showed  that  the  Bangladesh  authorities  were   kidnapping
    opposition members and other activists and leaders of the BNP had  been
    targeted and arrested. The judge accepted at [76]  that  the  appellant
    did not try to embellish his evidence but found that the claim  in  the
    letter from the Bangladesh Jatioabadi Chatra Dal  was  that  he  was  a
    leader was inflated.  He had in fact consistently described himself  as
    a 'student leader'.  She accepted that he had been threatened  and  was
    still involved in the BNP in the UK and if he returned  would  continue
    to be involved [96] of the decision.  In the light  of  the  background
    evidence the judge erred in her conclusions that the appellant was  not
    at real risk on return.

 4. At the error of law  hearing  before  me  Mr  Karim  pointed  out,  the
    significance of the previous attack in 2009, which, even though finding
    some inconsistencies in his account, was an important factor but  given
    insufficient attention.  The First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  did  identify
    that the appellant did not leave Bangladesh for some months  after  the
    said attack, and did  not  relate  the  difficulties  his  friends  had
    experienced, but did not adequately  address  the  issue  of  the  2009
    attack.  It  was  important  to  assess  how  the  appellant  would  be
    perceived on return,  bearing  in  mind  the  necessity  to  factor  in
    Paragraph 339K, and in view of his individual profile  as  an  activist
    even if not a leader, bearing in  mind  the  background  material.  The
    judge failed to address whether the appellant would be perceived as  an
    activist on return and the risk emanating therefrom.  That was found to
    be a material error of law and in the event the decision was set aside.






Conclusions

 5. On finding an error of law I specifically preserved paragraphs 75,  76,
    77, 81 and the first two sentences of paragraph 82 and paragraph 96  of
    the First-tier Tribunal decision. Those are  referred  to  below.   The
    First-tier Tribunal made a series of findings indicating that it  found
    the appellant to be a 'low level member' of the BNP.  The appellant was
    found to be able to give correct answers in relation to  the  BNP.   It
    was accepted that he did not try to embellish his evidence  as  to  his
    involvement in the Party  [76].   The  judge  also  accepted  that  the
    appellant was threatened on two occasions and it was  accepted  he  had
    been attacked as claimed in 2009 and accepted the FIR.  The judge  then
    appeared to become diverted, having accepted that he provided an FIR in
    relation to the attack in 2009, to considering the injuries rather than
    the political motivation and thus effective consideration of  paragraph
    339K of the Rules (previous serious harm as an indicator of real risk).



 6. The First-tier Tribunal Judge's findings read as follows:-

         "75.     I also accept that the appellant was a low level member of
             the BNP.  The appellant was questioned about his knowledge  of
             the BNP at his asylum interview and was able to  give  correct
             answers relating to when the party was  founded,  the  leader,
             the logo of the party and its motto.

         76.      I note the appellant has never stated that he was a leader
             of the party either at a local or national  level.   I  accept
             that he has not  tried  to  embellish  his  evidence  in  this
             regard.

         77.       The  appellant  has  stated  that  after  some  years  of
             involvement, he was given the role of Publicity  Secretary  in
             the sub-district of Upzilla, Jogonnathopur and I  accept  that
             he undertook this role.

         81.      Turning now to the key substance of the appellant's claim,
             the appellant  has  stated  that  he  was  threatened  on  two
             occasions and  attacked  on  one  occasions  whilst  still  in
             Bangladesh.  I accept the appellant's evidence in this regard.

         96.      I accept that the appellant, if he returns to  Bangladesh,
             would continue to be involved with the BNP.  I note  that  the
             appellant was not simply involved  with  the  BNP  during  his
             student days, but continued to be involved with them, at a low
             level, until he left Bangladesh."

 7.  I  consider  the  points  taken  against  him  previously.   From  the
    appellant's asylum interview it is clear  that  he  maintained  he  was
    threatened in 2003 and in 2008 but that he was able to evade an attack.
    He was clear that he did not claim asylum on entry because he wished to
    return to Bangladesh and  explained  that  had  BNP  been  returned  to
    government after the election in 2014 he would have returned.

 8. The appellant submitted that he could not return to Bangladesh  because
    numerous friends had been killed or were in hiding and the local  party
    office had been broken into.  Although the appellant had not  mentioned
    this previously it was his explanation that he had not been  so  asked.
    Although he was criticised in his oral evidence before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge for not relating that his friends had been  the  victims
    of attacks because of their political beliefs until his  oral  evidence
    it is correct that he was asked in his asylum interview about  his  own
    individual difficulties and not  questioned  specifically  about  other
    attacks.

 9. He did state at [AIR 113] with reference to the  Awami  party  'in  the
    current situation without any case they beat people up  and  they  kill
    them'.  He was not pressed on further questioning.  He did not  have  a
    legal representative  at  the  substantive  interview.   I  accept  the
    appellant's evidence on this point.

10. I do, however, accept from the findings of the previous judge that  the
    appellant was an activist in  the  BNP  and  although  there  were  two
    letters signed by the same organisation as to his activities in the UK,
    both letters being dated 23rd August 2016, that does not, on the  lower
    standard of proof, necessarily undermine the  proposition  that  he  is
    active in the BNP in the UK.  The  fact  is  that  this  appellant  was
    attacked for his activities  in  2009  and  that  he  provided  an  FIR
    confirming the same.  That too was accepted by the First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge and indeed the appellant provided a  medical  report.   The  real
    issue is the motivation and as indicated above, and in the  context  of
    the evidence overall, I accept that the appellant was  indeed  attacked
    on the basis of his membership of the BNP.  Memories in respect of  the
    account do not necessarily  always  synchronise  entirely  but  it  was
    accepted that the appellant left  Bangladesh  after  this  incident  in
    April 2009 albeit he waited to apply for a visa in January 2010.  I  do
    not consider this to be an extensive time to  wait  to  remove  oneself
    from persecution.

11. When referring to the profile of the appellant it was accepted  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge that he was not a leader, but bearing in mind
    his previous activity, knowledge of the BNP and threats and  attack  on
    him, which were accepted, I am not persuaded that he was  a  completely
    'low level' -he was a Publicity Secretary for five to  six  years  [AIR
    34]. The appellant was clear at his asylum interview that he  was  'not
    an MP or a President - but I was an activist the duties that were given
    to me I did them'.  The FIR filed after the attack was accepted by  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge and there is no reason to conclude  that  the
    injuries sustained and recorded in the medical report  were  not  as  a
    result of the  attack.   The  appellant  has  been  credible  in  other
    respects.  The factor of the previous politically motivated  attack  is
    also relevant to his profile.

12. At [64] the First-tier Tribunal Judge recorded that the  appellant  was
    cross examined to the effect that he had always maintained  he  was  an
    'activist' not a 'leader' and the judge also recorded the human  rights
    violations in Bangladesh over the  recent  years  as  set  out  in  the
    country background material. The First-tier Tribunal  accepted that the
    appellant would continue to be involved  in  the  BNP  on  his  return.
    Indeed in his asylum interview he confirmed that he joined the  BNP  on
    entry to the UK.

13. Albeit that he may not have reported two out of three incidents that he
    received in Bangladesh, bearing in mind the attitude of the  police  it
    may open  to  him  to  consider  that  there  was  not  sufficiency  of
    protection and therefore he did not wish to report such incidents.

14. This  appeal  before  the  Upper  Tribunal  has  been  subject  to  two
    adjournments and on both occasions there was  an  indication  from  the
    Home Office that they wished to verify the documents  relating  to  the
    criminal cases against the appellant and the translations.  The  matter
    was first heard before me on 20th March 2017 adjourned on 2nd June 2017
    and again on 28th July 2017 in order that the Secretary  of  State  may
    verify the documentation and the translations which  had  been  served.
    In response a further decision letter was filed dated 10th August  2017
    and this specifically identified the documentation that  was  filed  by
    the appellant.

         "a.      Affidavit from your father dated 078-03-2017  (pages  2  -
             3);

         b. Discharge letter from Jaganath Upazila Health Complex dated  24-
             04-2009 (pages 5 - 8);

         c. Daily Shyamal Sylhet newspaper article dated 29-09-2014 relating
             to the first case, an alleged  attack  on  Bangladeshi  police
             officials (translations, pages 9 - 12);

         d. District & Session Court, Sylhet Court  Order  dated  13-02-2017
             relating  to  a  second  case,  a   killing   of   a   student
             (translations pages 30 - 31);

         e. Police Complaint report dated 27-11-2016, relating to  a  second
             case, a killing of a student (translations pages 32 - 34);

         f. First Information report (FIR) dated 27-11-2016, relating  to  a
             second case, a killing of a student (translations pages  35  -
             37);

         g. Charge Sheet dated 25-01-2017, relating  to  a  second  case,  a
             killing of a student (translations pages 38 - 42);

         h. Undated Arrest Warrant, relating to a second case, a killing  of
             a student (translations page 42);

         i. District & Session Court,  Sylhet  Judgement  dated  08-11-2016,
             relating the first case, an alleged attack on police officials
             (translation pages 70 - 79);

         j. Police Complaint report dated 28-09-2014, relating to the  first
             case, an alleged attack on police officials (translation pages
             80 - 82);

         k. FIR dated 28-09-2014, relating to the  first  case,  an  alleged
             attack on police officials (translation pages 83 - 84);

         l. Charge Sheet dated 27-01-2015, relating to the  first  case,  an
             alleged attack on police officials  (translation  pages  85  -
             90)."

These documents assert that the appellant  had  participated  in  a  violent
    attack  against  police  officials  on  28th  September  2014  and  was
    convicted for this on 8th November 2016,  resulting  in  ten  years  of
    prison and a 50,000 taka fine and also  that  he  participated  in  the
    murder of a student on 27th November 2016.

15. It should be noted that on these dates the appellant was in fact in the
    United Kingdom but the cases  were  said  to  be  'trumped  up'.    The
    father's  affidavit  explained  the  documentation  that  'because   of
    political hostility the ruling party has  implicated  my  son  in  many
    cases and for that reason the law enforcement agents are  searching  in
    our house to arrest my son'.  This affidavit did not seek to  elaborate
    on the political activities of the appellant and  was  conservative  in
    its assertions and thus demands some weight to be attached to it.

16. The Secretary of State had specifically  asked  and  been  given  ample
    opportunity to verify this court documentation and did not do so.  This
    is not a question of the Secretary of State being  expected  to  verify
    documentation but having requested and being given the  opportunity  to
    do so.   The Secretary of State  argued  that  Tanveer  Ahmed(Documents
    unreliable and forged)/Pakistan [2002] UKIAT 00439  should  apply  but,
    despite the credibility issues taken against the appellant  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal, the judge accepted that he was a low level  member
    of the BNP, had a good knowledge of the BNP and  gave  correct  answers
    thereto.  Indeed, he had not tried to embellish his  evidence  in  this
    regard.  It  was  also  found  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  that  the
    appellant was given the role of Publicity Secretary in the sub-district
    of Upzilla and that he was 'not simply involved with [the  BNP]  during
    his student days'.  It was specifically accepted that the appellant was
    a party member in Bangladesh from 1997 until he left in  2010  although
    it was not accepted that he was a leader.  As such I place some  weight
    on the documentation presented and listed above and which included  FIR
    and charge sheets accusing the appellant of assault and  offences  with
    weapons.

17. I considered the claim against the  background  country  material.  The
    appellant had provided an FIR in relation to an attack in 2009 which, I
    accept, was the  result  of  politically  motivated  attacks  and  thus
    consideration of paragraph 339K of the Rules, that is previous harm, is
    indeed an indicator of real risk of future harm.

18.  The First-tier Tribunal noted at paragraph 94

       'the  objective  information  form  organisations  such  as   Amnesty
           International , Human Rights Watch and Odkhikar  indicates  that
           there have been numerous human rights violations  in  Bangladesh
           in  recent  years.   This  includes  violence  not  just  around
           election time but also in clashes between rival political  party
           supporters.  However nobody has been brought to justice for  any
           unlawful killings'

       Odhikar's Annual Report indicates numerous categories of  victims  of
           torture including  religious  minorities,  individuals  who  are
           vocal about human rights issues included journalists and lawyers
           and opposition political party activists/.

19. The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  accepted  that  the  appellant  would
    continue to be involved with the BNP if he returned to  Bangladesh  and
    albeit that he was involved in a low level I  still  consider  that  he
    would be an activist.

20. I am not persuaded on the balance of proof that this is a "weak  asylum
    claim" when considering the standard of proof, the particular  evidence
    and the background material.  The appellant has provided  documentation
    which has not been challenged by the Secretary of State other  than  to
    state that it was undermined by Tanveer Ahmed,  which  I  do  not  find
    persuasive.

21. Mr Karim provided me with  the  Country  Information  and  Guidance  on
    Bangladesh: Opposition to the Government, dated February 2015, and also
    referred me to the background  country  information  in  the  objective
    evidence.  This clearly  identifies  that  activists  of  the  BNP  are
    targeted.

         "1.3.5   Ongoing high levels of politically motivated violence  are
                perpetrated by the security forces and both  opposition  and
                government activists and student wings.  In the  run  up  to
                the January 2014 parliamentary elections, there were reports
                of over 500 deaths and  more  than  24,000  people  injured,
                while   arbitrary    arrests,    enforced    disappearances,
                intimidation, the unlawful destruction of  private  property
                and economic disruption, were widespread.  In January  2015,
                in the run up  to,  and  on  the  anniversary  of  the  2014
                elections, protests were banned.  As of the end  of  January
                2015, it was reported that  7,000  BNP  activists  had  been
                arrested, and at least 27 people had been killed in  clashes
                between the supporters of the ruling party, the Awami League
                and  opposition  supporters.   Houses  and  shops  of  those
                identified as opposition supporters in  northern  Bangladesh
                have been demolished and hundreds of people, including women
                and children, have been internally displaced as a result  of
                the crackdown. Internal conflicts within  political  parties
                also  occurred,  resulting  in  deaths  and  injuries   (see
                'Political situation since 2014 parliamentary elections' and
                'Treatment of government critics and Political violence'  in
                the country information section).

         1.3.7    Prosecution and  punishment  for  criminal  acts  such  as
                perpetrating violence can however amount to  persecution  if
                it involves victimisation by the  authorities,  for  example
                because  of  the  persons   political   opinion,   and   the
                consequences   are   sufficiently   severe   (see   relevant
                section(s)  of   the   Asylum   Instruction   on   Assessing
                credibility and refugee status)."

22. It is evident that the core charges seem  to  involve  prosecution  and
    punishment for criminal acts when the appellant was not in  Bangladesh.
    Indeed, at paragraph 2.4.1 it states:

         "2.4.1   Harassment of  the  opposition  was  widespread  in  2013,
                ranging from charges filed against  senior  BNP  members  to
                limitations placed  on  political  activities,  particularly
                rallies and processions.  In March  2013,  following  a  BNP
                rally that turned violent, nearly 200  opposition  activists
                were arrested, including BNP acting secretary general  Mirza
                Fakhrul  Islam  Alamgir.   Of  those  detained,  154   faced
                charges, including several top leaders.

         2.4.5    Odhikar reported 'According  to  information  gathered  by
                Odhikar, in 2013, 506 persons were killed and 24,176 injured
                in political violence.  263 incidents of  internal  violence
                in the Awami League and 140 in the BNP  were  also  recorded
                during this period.  In addition to this,  28  persons  were
                killed and 2980 were injured in internal  conflicts  of  the
                Awami League while six were killed and 1592 were injured  in
                BNP's internal  conflicts.'   Between  January  and  October
                2014, Ain o Salish Kendra (ASK) recorded  558  incidents  of
                political  violence  in  Bangladesh,  resulting   in   7,204
                injuries and 137 deaths.  According to information  gathered
                by Odhikar, 'from January to June  2014,  132  persons  were
                killed  and  5,224  injured  in  political  violence.    163
                incidents of internal violence in the Awami League and 13 in
                the BNP were recorded during this period.   In  addition  to
                this, 18 persons were  killed  and  1,621  were  injured  in
                internal conflicts of the Awami  League  while  two  persons
                were killed and 129 persons were  injured  in  BNP  internal
                conflicts.'"

23. In addition I note that at paragraph 2.5.7 an April  2014  report  from
    Human Rights Watch noted that:

    "Many of the victims in  the  cases  documented  in  this  report  were
         leaders and activists belonging to BNP, Jamaat,  or  their  student
         wings.  They were all male, ranging in age from 15 to 62.  In  some
         cases the authorities appeared to target  the  victims  because  of
         suspected involvement in specific crimes.  In other cases, however,
         security  forces  appeared  to  seek  out  influential   opposition
         district and sub-district level leaders who might have been able to
         mobilise people to protest against the government and  the  holding
         of the elections.   Human  Rights  Watch  described  a  pattern  of
         supposed 'crossfire' killings of opposition members in Bangladesh."

24. The background  information  supplied,  for  example,  from  the  Dhaka
    Tribune identifies that:

    "The government is immensely repressing BNP leaders  and  activists  as
         there is no rule of law and accountability  in  the  country.   The
         current regime, which usurped state power by force,  has  continued
         killing and oppression by its party cadres  and  law  enforcers  to
         eliminate the opposition and perpetuate its power."

This identifies that the government and security forces are involved in  the
    repression and furthermore that not just leaders but also activists are
    the targets.  As set out in the article "Political Conflict,  Extremism
    and Criminal  Justice  in  Bangladesh",  dated  11th  April  2016,  the
    Executive Summary stated:

    "As the Awami League  (AL)  government's  political  rivalry  with  the
         Bangladesh National Party (BNP) reaches new  heights,  so  has  its
         repression.  At the same time, a deeply politicised,  dysfunctional
         criminal justice system is undermining rather than buttressing  the
         rule of law."

This article identified that:

    "Police  tasked  with  targeting  the  Government's   rivals   and   an
         overstretched justice  system  compelled  to  prosecute  opposition
         leaders and activists now also face a renewed threat  from  violent
         extremists.  ...  The government's reaction  to  rising  extremism,
         including arrest and prosecution of several  suspects  without  due
         process and transparency, is fuelling alienation that these  groups
         can further exploit."

25. There is further reference to the  fact  that  effort  to  'reform  the
    dysfunctional  criminal  justice  system'  including  by  investing  in
    training, equipping and otherwise modernising the  police,  prosecution
    and judiciary, would be insufficient unless it was also  taken  out  of
    politics  and  that  years  of  partisan  recruitment,  promotions  and
    postings had polarised these institutions to the point  that  officials
    no longer concealed their allegiance.

26. The CIG confirmed that internal political fighting in the Awami  League
    and BNP including in its student and  youth  wings  and  such  violence
    often resulted in death or injury.

27. As such I accept that the appellant had on the lower standard of  proof
    shown that he would be at real risk on return to Bangladesh and I allow
    the appeal on asylum and Article 3 grounds.

28. For the reasons I set out above in relation  to  asylum  and  below  in
    relation to Article 3 of  the  Human  rights  Convention,  I  find  the
    Appellant a valid claim to such protection.  There  is  no  substantive
    difference in this case between the Appellant's claim under the Refugee
    Convention, the Human Rights Convention and under paragraph 339C of the
    Immigration Rules (which deals with claims for Humanitarian Protection)
    but as I find the Appellant has a  valid  claim  for  protection  as  a
    refugee it I do not consider any claim for Humanitarian protection.

29. The appellant cannot succeed under the Immigration  Rules  Appendix  FM
    but further to Paragraph 276 ADE, although he has not lived in  the  UK
    for 20 years,  there would be significant obstacles in him returning to
    Bangladesh.

30. Further to Huang v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  [2007]
    UKHL 11, taking full account of relevant considerations, I did consider
    that any private life of the claimant would be  prejudiced  by  removal
    in a  manner  sufficiently  serious  to  amount  to  a  breach  of  the
    fundamental right protected by Article 8.

DECISION

I allow the appeal on Asylum grounds
I dismiss the appeal on humanitarian protection grounds
I allow the appeal on human rights grounds (Articles 2, 3 and 8).
I allow the appeal under the immigration rules.


Notice of Decision

I remake the decision, preserving the sections of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
decision as indicted and I allow the appeal.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed           Helen Rimington                   Signed 16th October 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed      Helen Rimington                        Signed 16th October 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington


