
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                     Appeal
Number PA/10423/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                     |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 23rd February 2018                |On 6th March 2018                    |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PARKES


                                   Between

                               MURAT OZKULLUK
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss E Fitzsimmons (Counsel, instructed by Hoole &
co, Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Turkey. He arrived in the UK in 2005 on a
    visit visa and after  an  application  for  an  extension  was  refused
    remained without leave making further  unsuccessful  applications.  The
    application for asylum was made on the 12th of August 2015 and  refused
    with no right of appeal but further  submissions  were  considered  and
    refused leading to these proceedings.

 2. The appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Boyes at  Newport  on
    the 28th of March 2017 and dismissed in a decision promulgated  on  the
    30th of March 2017. The Judge rejected the Appellant's claim  to  be  a
    pacifist by conviction and found that  the  Appellant's  objections  to
    performing military service in Turkey  were  not  such  that  he  could
    refuse to do so. The Judge had regard to  the  Appellant's  immigration
    history, his delay  in  claiming  and  his  previous  use  of  a  false
    identity. The Appellant was not assisted by article 8 of the ECHR.

 3. The Appellant's application for  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal made to the  First-tier  Tribunal  was  refused.  The  renewed
    application was made to the Upper  Tribunal  and  considered  by  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Gleeson who granted permission on the 15th of  September
    2017.

 4. In the grant of permission Judge Gleeson found  that  it  was  arguable
    that the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's  findings  on  credibility  were
    arguably flawed. This was having regard to the Appellant's  claim  that
    he had raised the issue of military service in his 2009 application and
    that  appropriate  weight  had  not  been  given  the  uncle's  witness
    statement. The Upper Tribunal Judge was  hampered  by  the  absence  of
    Record of Proceedings.

 5. The submissions made at the hearing  are  set  out  in  the  Record  of
    Proceedings and referred to where relevant below. It was accepted  that
    the central issue was the Appellant's credibility.  The  core  findings
    were in paragraphs 26 to 28 of the decision. It was submitted that  the
    Judge had not considered all the evidence, the  Appellant  could  be  a
    conscientious objector without being  political.  With  regard  to  the
    Appellant's private life he had been here since he was 15 and the Judge
    had not considered the very significant  obstacles  to  his  return  to
    Turkey.

 6. The Home Office not surprisingly submitted that the decision  was  open
    to the Judge for the reasons given. All matters had been considered and
    reasons had been given for rejecting the Appellant's claims.

 7. In assessing this decision I have had regard to the guidance of Burnett
    LJ in EA v SSHD [2017]  EWCA  Civ  10  at  paragraph  27  he  made  the
    following observations:  "Decisions  of  tribunals  should  not  become
    formulaic and  rarely  benefit  from  copious  citation  of  authority.
    Arguments that reduce to the proposition that the F-tT  has  failed  to
    mention dicta from a  series  of  cases  in  the  Court  of  Appeal  or
    elsewhere will rarely prosper. Similarly,  as  Lord  Hoffmann  said  in
    Piglowska v Piglowski [1999] 1 WLR 1360, 1372, "reasons should be  read
    on the assumption that, unless he has demonstrated  the  contrary,  the
    judge knew how he should perform his functions  and  which  matters  he
    should take into account". He added that  an  "appellate  court  should
    resist the temptation to subvert the principle  that  they  should  not
    substitute their own discretion for that  of  the  judge  by  a  narrow
    textual analysis which  enables  them  to  claim  that  he  misdirected
    himself". Moreover, some principles are so firmly embedded in  judicial
    thinking that they do not need to be recited. For example, it would  be
    surprising to see in every civil judgment a paragraph dealing with  the
    burden and standard of  proof;  or  in  every  running  down  action  a
    treatise, however short, on the  law  of  negligence.  That  said,  the
    reader of any judicial decision must be reassured from its content that
    the court or tribunal  has  applied  the  correct  legal  test  to  any
    question it is deciding."

 8. The Judge accepted that the Appellant faced military service in  Turkey
    and properly focussed on the Appellant's stated  objections  to  having
    undertake it. In considering the Appellant's case the Judge had  regard
    to the case of Sepet and  another  [2003]  and  addressed  whether  the
    Appellant would be required to take action against  Kurds  as  part  of
    military service. Whilst it is right to observe that political activism
    is not a requirement to show  conscientious  objection  the  Judge  was
    clearly looking for evidence that supported the claim in a wider sense.
    Paragraph 28 is not contradictory and the Judge himself noted that  the
    Appellant's political activities or lack of them were  not  central  to
    the issue he was deciding.

 9. There was no evidence to show that the Appellant had mentioned  to  the
    Home Office in 2009 that he was facing call up in Turkey.  Even  if  he
    had known then that he was facing call up that did not explain  why  it
    was not raised by him as a basis for claiming asylum outright either at
    that time or at any time between 2009 and the further submissions being
    made. The Judge was obliged to consider the delay and it cannot be said
    that the Judge placed  undue  weight  on  the  issue.  The  Appellant's
    preference to obtain and use false identity documentation also  counted
    against him and there  can  be  no  complaint  that  his  actions  were
    considered in that light.

10. On the evidence that was presented to the First-tier Tribunal the Judge
    was entitled to find that the Appellant had not shown  that  he  was  a
    conscientious objector to military service and the case law meant  that
    the Appellant had not established that he  could  not  be  expected  to
    return to Turkey or that he was entitled to international protection on
    any basis.

11. With regard to the Appellant's human rights claim the Judge  considered
    the Appellant's immigration history. Having entered in 2005 at the  age
    of 15 he turned 18 in 2008 and so had spent a  considerable  amount  of
    time in the UK illegally as an adult. The Judge's consideration of this
    aspect in paragraphs 41 and 42 was brief  but  the  Appellant  has  not
    pointed to factors that  would  impede  his  reintegration  to  Turkey,
    family support is not an essential matter for integration  although  it
    may make matters easier, the Appellant could move to a  welsh  speaking
    part of Wales if he chose, he would face  linguistic  issues  and  need
    accommodation and employment but those are the  ordinary  incidents  of
    relocation.

12. The decision being brief is not an error. The important point  is  that
    the decision explained why the Appellant's claim was rejected and  that
    the reasons given were sufficient and open to the Judge on the evidence
    available. It is not necessary for a Judge to consider each  and  every
    point raised or every piece of evidence presented, the decision  should
    be read as a whole and from the starting point that the Judge knew what
    he was doing and whilst  the  Judge  might  have  put  more  into  this
    decision and in doing so avoided the challenge being considered in this
    decision it cannot be said  that  he  erred  in  the  approach  or  the
    findings made.

CONCLUSIONS

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside the decision.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule  45(4)(i)  of
the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005  and  I  make  no
order.

Fee Award

In dismissing this appeal I make no fee award.

Signed:

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal (IAC)

Dated: 2nd March 2018
