
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: PA/10375/2018
                                                               PA/10362/2018
                                                               PA/11219/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice Centre      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 8 February 2019                            |On 25 February 2019           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

                                   Mrs G I
                                   Mr A R
                                  MISS A I
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Miss E Mottershaw, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr A Tan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellants, mother, son and daughter, are  nationals  of  Pakistan.
    They have permission to challenge the decision of Judge  Foudy  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (FtT) dismissing their appeal against the decisions
    made by the respondent on 10  August  2018  refusing  their  protection
    claims.  The judge did not find credible their account of being at risk
    on return to Pakistan from family  members  of  the  first  appellant's
    husband as a result of  a  long  history  of  domestic  abuse  directed
    against the first appellant.

2.   Permission was granted limited to the Article 8 issue.

3.   I am grateful to both representatives for their submissions.  I can  be
    brief in  setting  out  my  decision  because  both  Mr  Tan  and  Miss
    Mottershaw were in agreement with me  that  the  judge's  decision  was
    erroneous.  The simple point is that the judge wholly failed to address
    the appellants' Article 8 grounds of appeal, confining  herself  solely
    to their protection grounds.  It appears she did not address Article  8
    because "[n]o Article 8  appeal  was  pursued".   Whilst  the  evidence
    relating to this matter is incomplete, what  there  is  indicates  that
    Article 8 was pursued. There is no Record of Proceedings on  the  file,
    but Article 8 was addressed in detail in the respondent's three reasons
    for refusal decisions and was clearly raised in the grounds of  appeal.
    The appellants were unrepresented at the hearing and there was no  Home
    Office Presenting Officer in attendance.  The judge heard evidence from
    the appellants, which,  although  principally  directed  at  explaining
    their fears about return to Pakistan, clearly alluded to their  private
    and family life circumstances.  The first appellant had stated that she
    suffers from diabetes, arthritis, depression and high  cholesterol  and
    has received counselling for suicidal thoughts.

4.   I  also  have  concerns  about  the  judge's  treatment  of  the  first
    appellant's claim to have been the victim  of  domestic  violence.   At
    paragraph 20 the judge said that "I find it  incredible  that  it  took
    until October 2017 for the Appellants to seek protection from  domestic
    abuse if the claim  was  indeed  true".   At  paragraph  25  the  judge
    rejected the reference made  by  Dr  Anwar  to  the  first  appellant's
    history of domestic violence, because in the judge's view  this  doctor
    had simply accepted without question the factual history given  to  him
    by the first appellant. Further  in  the  judge's  view  this  doctor's
    statement that she had suffered domestic violence  since  2013  was  at
    odds with her own evidence that her husband had  been  violent  to  her
    earlier than that.  However, the judge also had  before  her  a  letter
    dated 20 February 2018 from an NHS mental health team based  in  Oldham
    which stated that she had attended six  sessions  for  counselling  and
    "has experienced a great deal of verbal, domestic  and  physical  abuse
    ...".  I am not satisfied that the judge's assessment of  the  domestic
    violence history took into account all relevant evidence.

5.   Whilst it does not appear that the appellants have a strong  Article  8
    case, I cannot exclude that the judge may have approached their appeals
    differently had she recognised that Article  8  was  in  play  and  had
    properly  weighed  the  medical  evidence  relating  to  past  domestic
    violence.

 6.  For the above reasons I conclude that the decision  of  the  FtT  judge
    requires setting aside for material error of law.

7.   I see no  alternative  to  remitting  the  case  to  the  FtT.   In  my
    judgment, it is a case in which every effort should be made  to  obtain
    legal representation.  On Judge Foudy's findings (see last sentence  of
    paragraph 25), the first appellant is a vulnerable witness.  Getting to
    the bottom of whether the first  appellant's  account  of  experiencing
    domestic abuse at the hands of the  husband/father  is  credible,  will
    require  a  careful  handling  of  oral  testimony.   From  the  bundle
    submitted for the hearing  before  me  -  entitled  "Domestic  Violence
    Evidence" - there is now more documentation on this issue (even  though
    there is still no police report).

8.   I would emphasise, however, that the ambit of the next hearing must  be
    confined to Article 8.  Whether or not the husband/father  has  engaged
    in domestic abuse, the claim that the appellants would be at risk  from
    his family members in Pakistan was simply  not  substantiated  and  was
    properly not pursued by Miss Mottershaw.

9.   To conclude:

    The decision of the FtT judge is set aside for material error of law.


    The case is remitted to the Ft (not before Judge Foudy).


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


[pic]
Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal       22 February 2019

