
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10277/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 20 October 2017                            |On 11 December 2017           |


                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    [A A]
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Richards, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer.
For the Respondent:    Mr Dieu, instructed by Duncan Lewis & Co. Solicitors
                    (Harrow Office).


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The respondent, whom we shall call "the claimant",  is  a  national  of
    Iran.  He came to the United Kingdom on  24  March  2016,  and  claimed
    asylum immediately, on the basis of  his  conversion  to  Christianity,
    which is said to have taken place before the claimant left  Iran.   The
    Secretary of State refused the claimant's claim, because the  decision-
    maker, having considered the claimant's evidence about his own  history
    and beliefs did not accept that he was Christian or that he was telling
    the truth about the  circumstances  of  his  claimed  conversion.   The
    claimant appealed, and the matter came before First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Suffield-Thompson in Newport on 18 January 2017.

 2. The judge did not hear oral evidence: the claimant was not called.  She
    accepted the claimant's account as found in the documents on file,  and
    allowed the appeal.

 3. The Secretary of  State  now  has  permission  to  appeal  against  her
    decision.  The grounds of appeal are as follows:-

          "1. Procedural unfairness.

          As is evidenced by extracts from  the  PO's  hearing  minute  (see
          below), the FTJ had clearly decided the appeal  would  proceed  by
          submissions only, even before having arrived  at  court.   Despite
          the PO's objections that she quite properly wanted an  opportunity
          to cross-examine, the FTJ declined to allow this.  The SSHD  could
          have no real complaint if the decision not to call  the  appellant
          was  made  by  the  appellant's  representative,   without   prior
          knowledge of the FTJ's view, but this clearly did  not  happen  in
          the extant appeal.  It is quite apparent that  the  FTJ  had  pre-
          empted the conduct  of  the  hearing  in  this  way.   Indeed  the
          recording of the way the hearing was conducted at [10] in  no  way
          reflects the reality of how this came to be.

          Further and in the alternative - the FTJ indicating  she  was  not
          minded to entertain cross-examination,  even  before  arriving  at
          court, clearly shows the FTJ  had  made  up  her  mind  about  the
          outcome of the appeal  even  before  hearing  submissions  on  the
          merits of the claim, or entertaining the possibility  that  cross-
          examination  might  undermine  the  appellant's  claim.   Such  an
          approach shows a distinct lack of impartiality.  It cannot be said
          that the outcome of the appeal was inevitable.

          "Before the hearing started, the clerk approached me and  the  Rep
          to say that the IJ wanted to proceed  with  submissions  only  and
          asked for our comments.  The Rep confirmed that he  was  happy  to
          proceed on that basis.  I objected  to  this  and  asked  for  the
          opportunity to cross-examine the Appellant.  The clerk  came  back
          to inform me that the IJ acknowledged my request but said that the
          hearing would proceed by submissions only.

          As the IJ did this and ignored my request, it was clear  that  she
          had already made up her mind and was going to allow the appeal.

          Mr Dieu also provided me with certificates and  pictures  to  show
          that the Appellant had been baptised on 8th January 2017.

          When we were called into Court, the IJ said to the  Rep  that  she
          understood that there was a particular way in which he wanted  the
          hearing to be conducted.  The Rep said that he would not call  the
          Appellant or the Pastor to give evidence  and  relied  upon  their
          witness statements and evidence.  The IJ granted this request  and
          asked for my submissions.  I believe that the way in  which the IJ
          went about this case by canvassing with  us  first  for  the  best
          course of action and then prompting the Rep to indicate that  this
          case would be dealt with  in  a  particular  way  is  procedurally
          unfair."



 4. At the beginning of the hearing before us we observed  to  the  parties
    that the judge's note  of  proceedings  does  not  record  the  matters
    asserted in the grounds of appeal; the note begins:

         "Mr Dieu intends to deal with the case by way of submissions."

 5. Mr Dieu, however,  confirmed  that  the  grounds  of  appeal  correctly
    recorded what had happened before the hearing began.  He also  accepted
    that the crucial question in this  case  was  the  credibility  of  the
    claimant.  He submitted to us that  despite  any  irregularity  in  the
    proceedings before the First-tier Tribunal Judge, her decision ought to
    stand: she had reached a view she was entitled to reach on the evidence
    before her, and had concluded that the claimant's story was indeed  the
    truth.

 6. The events that took place before the hearing in  this  case  cause  us
    grave concern.  In the first place we have difficulty in detecting  any
    justification for conducting a  dialogue  between  the  judge  and  the
    parties  through  a  clerk,  nor  can  we  see  any  justification  for
    conducting  it  outside  the  hearing  room.   Those  difficulties  are
    compounded by the judge's decision not to record her dealings,  through
    the clerk, with the parties before the hearing began.

 7. Secondly, it is clearly apparent to us, it was apparent to the parties,
    and it must surely have been apparent to the judge, that the  issue  to
    be determined was the credibility of the claimant.   By  indicating  to
    the parties that she was intending to deal with the matter without oral
    evidence, she gave the clearest  imaginable  indication  that  she  had
    already decided that issue  in  favour  of  the  claimant,  before  the
    hearing even began.  This feature of the case also  was  compounded  by
    the judge's invitation to Mr Dieu to state the way in which "he  wanted
    the hearing to be conducted".  There is no doubt in our mind  that,  in
    the circumstances of this case, where the  normal  procedure,  and  the
    expected procedure, was that the claimant's credibility would be tested
    in cross-examination, to indicate that no oral evidence  was  necessary
    and then hint to the claimant's representative that  no  oral  evidence
    need be called, was a demonstration of prejudgment.

 8. In any event, there is also no doubt, applying the well-known  test  in
    Re Medicaments and Related Classes of Goods (No.2) [2001] 1 WLR 700  at
    [85], as endorsed by the House of Lords in Porter v Magill [2002] 2  AC
    537, that the circumstances we have set out would  lead  a  fair-minded
    and informed observer to conclude that there  was  a  real  possibility
    that the Tribunal was biased.

 9. It follows that the judge erred in law by continuing to hear  the  case
    after conducting herself in this way.

10. There is a further problem, because having brought about the  situation
    in which there was no oral evidence from the  claimant,  and  therefore
    also no cross-examination  of  the  claimant,  and  similarly  no  oral
    evidence from  or  cross-  examination  of  the  claimant's  supporting
    witness, the judge herself seems to have made a factual contribution in
    the claimant's favour.  At [35], having set out what the  Secretary  of
    State submitted was a difficulty in the claimant's evidence, the  judge
    wrote this:

         "This is not odd at all, I find, as in this  Tribunal's  experience
         all of the Evangelical churches insist that their members take pre-
         baptism classes so that they demonstrate the commitment and insight
         needed to becoming [sic] full members of the  church  and  this  is
         confirmed by the pastor's statement."

11. It does not appear to us that the judge's assertion about "all  of  the
    Evangelical churches" can be a matter properly the subject of  judicial
    notice: the reference to "this Tribunal" must, we think, be a reference
    to her own personal knowledge.   If  she  was  going  to  use  her  own
    personal knowledge she ought to have made it  perfectly  clear  to  the
    parties that she proposed to do so,  in  order  that  they  might  make
    submissions on the propriety of that course of action, or, indeed, call
    evidence to show that she was wrong.  Her failure to  do  so  can  only
    confirm the impression that she was biased in favour of the claimant.

12. In these circumstances we do not think it would be right to attempt  to
    save the determination.  Even if the eventual outcome is  to  the  same
    effect, it cannot  be  regarded  as  a  judicial  decision  unless  the
    proceedings have the characteristics of judicial proceedings, including
    particularly that of fairness.

13. We set aside the decision of Judge Suffield-Thompson for error of  law.
    We direct that the claimant's  appeal  be  reheard  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal before a different judge.






                                                           C. M. G. OCKELTON
                                        VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                      Date: 28 November 2017







