
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10529/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Cardiff CJC                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 1 August 2019                     |On 21 August 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB
                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE L J MURRAY


                                   Between

                                     R K
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Dieu, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Howells, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. The decision under challenge in  this  case  is  that  of  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge Page.  The Appellant asserts that he is a national  of
       Afghanistan.  His nationality is disputed by the  Respondent.   Judge
       Page dismissed the Appellant's  claim  for  asylum  and  humanitarian
       protection in a decision promulgated on 11 March 2019. Permission  to
       appeal was granted on 18 April 2019 on all grounds.




       The Appellant's Grounds of Appeal

    2. The Appellant argues that the decision was  marred  by  a  number  of
       material errors in relation  to  the  Judge's  understanding  of  the
       evidence amounting to a mistake of fact. It is also asserted that the
       Judge failed to take account of material evidence leading  to  flawed
       adverse credibility findings. We heard submissions from both Mr  Dieu
       and Mr Howells in respect of each allegation which  are  recorded  on
       record of proceedings on the court file.

    3. The Respondent accepted in the reasons for refusal letter 'RFRL' that
       the Appellant was a Sikh but not that he was from Afghanistan due, in
       part, to his alleged failure to name any of the roads that  led  into
       and out of Kandahar and his evidence in relation to the existence  of
       'highways' and 'big roads' in Kandahar.

    4. The Judge found at paragraph 14  that  given  the  Appellant  was  in
       business in Kandahar he would  have  known  if  there  were  highways
       there. He states that the Appellant had asked him to accept  that  he
       was involved in the clothing business with his father in Kandahar and
       that goods were transported from one shop to another with others that
       he traded with and yet he did not know when he was interviewed by the
       Respondent that there were any highways in Kandahar.

    5. The grounds assert  that  the  judge  misunderstood  the  Appellant's
       evidence in relation to the nature  of  his  business,  assuming  the
       setup of his shop to be something like a wholesale operation  whereas
       in fact it was more akin to a retail shop. It is said that this was a
       significant material mistake of fact as the Judge used it  to  inform
       his adverse credibility findings about  the  knowledge  of  highways.
       Furthermore, even if there had been some  trade  between  shops,  the
       Judge had assumed that those deliveries would have required  the  use
       of a highway and it was not  established  that  the  shops  were  not
       nearby or used other routes.

    6. Having heard Dr Dieu's submissions and read the relevant questions in
       the asylum interview (q177 to 181) we accept that the nature  of  the
       questions in relation to the roads in  Kandahar  was  confusing.  The
       Appellant was asked variously if he could name the 'big' and  'major'
       roads in Kandahar and name any 'highways'. He named a number of roads
       in response and  did  not  specifically  state  that  there  were  no
       'highways'.  We accept having read the interview, having  heard  from
       Mr Dieu as to his notes from the  First-tier  Tribunal  hearing,  and
       having perused  the  record  of  proceedings  that  it  was  not  the
       Appellant's  evidence  that  the  goods  from   his   business   were
       transported from one shop to another with others he traded  with.  Mr
       Howells also conceded that it was unclear where  this  evidence  came
       from.  However,  he  argued  that  the  adverse  credibility  finding
       remained sustainable because the Appellant claimed that there were no
       'big roads' in Kandahar.

    7. We find that the Judge's conclusion that the  Appellant  should  have
       known more about the roads in Kandahar  due  to  the  nature  of  his
       business was flawed because the  finding  was  not  grounded  in  the
       evidence. The Appellant did in fact state in answer to  question  178
       that there were 'big roads' in Kandahar. His evidence in relation  to
       the question of the size of roads was not as unambiguous as  set  out
       in paragraph 14 of the decision.

    8. The Appellant also argues  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  erred  in
       finding that the Appellant appeared to have  difficulties  describing
       the materials that were used in the business, notwithstanding that he
       claimed to have spent his whole life in it. It is argued that he gave
       sufficient information about the fabrics used and it is unclear  what
       more he could have said.

    9. At paragraph 30 of the decision the Judge  finds  that  there  was  a
       paucity of information contained  in  the  Appellant's  interview  in
       relation to the materials sold in his  business.  The  Appellant  was
       asked a number of questions about the materials he sold in interview.
       He gave a number of names of materials  in  Punjabi  which  were  not
       translated and have not been said to be  wrong.  Notwithstanding  the
       fact that he had already explained that he sold mixed  materials  and
       given a number of fabric names it was put to him at  question  29  of
       the interview that he was unable to say what materials  he  sold.  He
       gave further names for a plain and printed material  in  Punjabi  and
       the interpreter explained as recorded in the interview transcript  in
       the answer to question 29 that there may  have  been  an  issue.  The
       Appellant then provided further information about the nature  of  the
       fabric in answer to the interview questions.

   10. We conclude that it  cannot  fairly  be  concluded  that  there  were
       shortcomings in  the  evidence  in  relation  to  the  materials  the
       Appellant sold particularly in view of  the  explanation  during  the
       interview by the interpreter that there could be difficulties and the
       fact that the Appellant's representative wrote on 16 May 2018 to  the
       Respondent in the following terms:

           "Upon review of the transcript and audio recording  of  the  SEF
           interview with the  client,  there  appears  to  be  significant
           confusion caused  by  misinterpretation  of  what  the  question
           entailed, and the interpreter's lack  of  vocabulary  concerning
           the materials.'

   11. These were matters  that  the  Judge  did  not  take  account  of  in
       concluding that there was a  paucity  of  information  regarding  the
       materials sold. We conclude that this adverse credibility finding  is
       also flawed.

   12. The grounds  also  impugn  the  Judge's  reasons  for  rejecting  the
       evidence of four witnesses who  gave  evidence  that  they  knew  the
       Appellant from Kandahar and recognised  him  again  in  the  Southall
       Gurdwara over 20 years later. The Judge notes at  paragraph  31  that
       their evidence was essentially  the  same.  It  was  the  Appellant's
       evidence that it was pure coincidence that he had met them all again.



   13. The Judge found at paragraph 31:

           "I do not accept, although coincidences do occur, that this many
           coincidences could occur, that the appellant would come  to  the
           United Kingdom and go to the Southall Gurdwara at a time when he
           had no contacts at all in the United  Kingdom  and  suddenly  be
           reunited with many people who remembered him from  the  Gurdwara
           in Afghanistan over twenty years before. The only  conclusion  I
           can reach after considering all the other evidence before me and
           in the round together with their evidence is that they  are  all
           well  intentioned  friends  made  here  who  want  to  help  the
           appellant, and his wife  and  children,  remain  in  the  United
           Kingdom and have been prepared to  come  along  and  give  false
           evidence on his behalf.'

   14. Mr Howells submitted that the Judge was entitled to doubt  that  such
       coincidences  occur.  However,  there  is  no  suggestion  that   the
       Appellant or  his  witnesses  gave  inconsistent  evidence.  Mr  Dieu
       confirmed they were all cross-examined. We find that it is  not  safe
       to conclude, in these circumstances, that  such  coincidences  cannot
       occur without further information such as to the number of Sikhs from
       Afghanistan in the UK and the number and likelihood of  Afghan  Sikhs
       visiting the Gurdwara in Southall. Such likelihoods must be  assessed
       in context.

   15. The Appellant also impugns the Judge's finding at paragraph  35  that
       the Appellant's wife cannot have been in Kandahar with him because it
       was her evidence that she did not know  any  of  his  witnesses.  The
       Judge concludes that she would have  met  them  in  the  Gurdwara  in
       Afghanistan. The grounds assert that this finding is unsound  because
       men and women are separated in the Gurdwara. We find that  the  Judge
       did not take this into account as a potentially plausible explanation
       as to why she did not know them.

   16. The Appellant also alleges further errors in relation to the approach
       to the evidence  in  relation  to  the  Appellant  and  his  family's
       Tazkiras; the details of his journey and the payment of the agent. We
       do not need to deal with these allegations because the errors of  law
       that we have found to be made out  render  the  credibility  findings
       unsafe.

   17. With the agreement of the parties we remit the appeal to  the  First-
       tier Tribunal to be heard by a Judge other than Judge  Page  with  no
       findings preserved.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained a material  error  of  law
and we set it aside with no findings preserved.  The appeal is  remitted  to
the First-tier Tribunal.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date 2 August 2019

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge L J Murray

