
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10526/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Civil Justice    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Centre                               |                                     |
|On 18 June 2019                      |On 16 September 2019                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                     TVN
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADe)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Vokes
For the Respondent:    Mr Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant was born in 1984 and is a male citizen of Vietnam. He has
    lived in the United Kingdom since 2000. He has a  considerable  history
    of criminal offending. Most recently, in March 2015, he  was  sentenced
    to 4 months imprisonment for assault occasioning actual bodily harm.  A
    deportation order was made on 9 February 2016. On  5  October  2017,  a
    decision was taken refuse the appellant's application for international
    protection and his human rights claim. The appellant  appealed  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal which dismissed his  appeal.  He  appealed  to  the
    Upper Tribunal which, by a decision promulgated on 11 April  2019,  set
    aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  and  directed  that  the
    decision be remade in the Upper Tribunal  at  or  following  a  resumed
    hearing. Following the making of a  transfer  order,  the  appeal  came
    before me at Birmingham on 18 June 2019.

 2. Both parties agree that the appellant may properly be  described  as  a
    persistent offender for the purposes of paragraph 398(c) of HC 395  (as
    amended):

         (c) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive  to  the
         public good and in the public interest because, in the view of  the
         Secretary of State, their offending has caused serious harm or they
         are a persistent offender who shows a particular disregard for  the
         law, the Secretary of State in assessing that claim  will  consider
         whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and,  if  it  does  not,  the
         public interest in deportation will only  be  outweighed  by  other
         factors where there are  very  compelling  circumstances  over  and
         above those described in paragraphs 399 and 399A.

 3. Paragraphs 399 and 399A provide:

         399. This paragraph applies where paragraph 398 (b) or (c)  applies
         if -

         (a)  the person has a genuine and subsisting parental  relationship
         with a child under the age of 18 years who is in the UK, and

             (i)  the child is a British Citizen; or

             (ii) the child has lived in the UK continuously for  at  least
             the 7 years immediately preceding the date of the  immigration
             decision; and in either case

                  (a)  it would be unduly harsh for the child to live in the
                  country to which the person is to be deported; and

                  (b)  it would be unduly harsh for the child to  remain  in
                  the UK without the person who is to be deported; or

         (b)  the person has a genuine and subsisting  relationship  with  a
         partner who is in the UK and is a British Citizen or settled in the
         UK, and

             (i)  the relationship was formed at a  time  when  the  person
             (deportee) was in the UK lawfully and their immigration status
             was not precarious; and

             (ii) it would be unduly harsh for that partner to live in  the
             country to which the person is  to  be  deported,  because  of
             compelling circumstances over and  above  those  described  in
             paragraph EX.2. of Appendix FM; and

             (iii)    it would be unduly harsh for that partner  to  remain
             in the UK without the person who is to be deported.

         399A. This paragraph applies where paragraph 398(b) or (c)  applies
         if -

         (a)  the person has been lawfully resident in the UK  for  most  of
         his life; and

         (b)  he is socially and culturally integrated in the UK; and

         (c)  there would be very significant obstacles to  his  integration
         into the country to which it is proposed he is deported.

 4. In addition, section 117C of the 2002 Act also applies:

         117C  Article  8:  additional  considerations  in  cases  involving
         foreign criminals

         (1)   The  deportation  of  foreign  criminals  is  in  the  public
         interest.

         (2)  The more serious the offence committed by a foreign  criminal,
         the greater is the public interest in deportation of the criminal.

         (3)  In the case of a foreign  criminal  ("C")  who  has  not  been
         sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years  or  more,  the
         public interest requires C's  deportation  unless  Exception  1  or
         Exception 2 applies.

         (4)  Exception 1 applies where-

             (a)  C has been lawfully resident in the  United  Kingdom  for
             most of C's life,

             (b)  C is socially and culturally  integrated  in  the  United
             Kingdom, and

             (c)   there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles  to   C's
             integration into the country to which  C  is  proposed  to  be
             deported.

         (5)  Exception 2 applies where  C  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
         relationship with a qualifying partner, or a genuine and subsisting
         parental relationship with a qualifying child, and  the  effect  of
         C's deportation on the partner or child would be unduly harsh.

         (6)  In the case of a foreign criminal who has been sentenced to  a
         period of imprisonment of at least four years, the public  interest
         requires   deportation   unless   there   are    very    compelling
         circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions  1  and
         2.

         (7)  The considerations in subsections (1) to (6) are to  be  taken
         into account where a court or tribunal is considering a decision to
         deport a foreign criminal only to the extent that  the  reason  for
         the decision was the offence or offences for which the criminal has
         been convicted.

 5. At the outset of the hearing, Mr Vokes, who appeared for the appellant,
    told me that the asylum claim was no longer pursued.

 6. I heard evidence from the appellant. He was not cross-examined. I heard
    evidence also from the appellant's former partner, LGN. She was  cross-
    examined by Mr Mills, who appeared for the Secretary of State. LGN  and
    the appellant have a daughter, M, who is now aged 11 years.  She  lives
    with LGN. LGN last visited Vietnam (she was born there and came to  the
    United Kingdom is an asylum seeker) in 2018. M was in  school  and  the
    appellant came to her home to look after M. M herself had last been  in
    Vietnam but 5 to 6 years ago. Asked whether it would be possible for  M
    to visit the appellant in Vietnam, LGN said that the flights were  very
    expensive and that visits could not take place more often than every 5-
    6 years.  She said that M was 'not very keen  to  visit  Vietnam.'  She
    does not like the climate. LGN said that M contacts the appellant every
    day using FaceTime.

 7. I also had written evidence from the appellant's present partner who is
    a student in the United Kingdom.  The  partner  and  appellant  have  a
    child, N, a boy aged 18 months. In her evidence, LGN said that M and  N
    are very close.

 8. I reserved my decision.

 9. I found both witnesses to be truthful and I accept that they  have,  in
    particular, given an accurate account of the relationships between  the
    appellant, M and N.

10. The central issue in this appeal is whether the consequences for  M  of
    being separated from her father by way of his  deportation  to  Vietnam
    are likely to be unduly harsh. M, the natural child  of  the  appellant
    and his former partner LGN, is a qualifying child for the  purposes  of
    the 2002 Act; she is a British citizen. The Secretary of State does not
    argue that it would be acceptable or reasonable M to have  to  live  in
    Vietnam. There is evidence in the form of a social  work  report  which
    indicates that the appellant and M  have  a  close  relationship.  That
    evidence was not challenged by Mr Mills and I accept what  is  said  in
    the report and in the evidence generally regarding the nature and depth
    of the relationship between M and her father.  I  accept  also  that  M
    contacts her father  on  a  daily  basis  using  FaceTime.  M  and  the
    appellant do not live in the same household although I accept that  the
    appellant did assist his former partner in 2018 by caring for M in  her
    home whilst LGN visited Vietnam. I accept also the  evidence  given  by
    LGN regarding the likely frequency of visits to Vietnam by M  to  visit
    the appellant should he be deported there. I find that those visits are
    not likely to take place on an annual basis and that several years will
    elapse between visits. In the light of that finding, I  attach  limited
    weight to Mr Mills' submission that the harshness of  separation  could
    be mitigated by M visiting the appellant in Vietnam; it is likely  that
    M and her father would only meet twice again during M's minority.

11. The factual matrix is further complicated by the relationship which has
    formed between N and M. There is no obvious reason why the  appellant's
    current partner cannot return to  Vietnam  with  N  and  the  appellant
    although I note that she may be able to apply to remain in  the  United
    Kingdom at the end of her studies by which time she will have completed
    10 years continuous residence here. However, the removal of N with  his
    family will have an serious impact upon M. She  would  be  faced  at  a
    significant stage in her development with the  loss  not  only  of  her
    father but also of her stepbrother. Whilst M may  possibly  maintain  a
    relationship by FaceTime Skype with  her  father,  the  infrequency  of
    physical meetings will lead to her  relationship  with  N  being  of  a
    significantly different (and inferior) nature than if N remains in this
    country. I agree with Mr Vokes that it is necessary when assessing  the
    harshness of the impact of deportation of the appellant upon M to  take
    proper account of the damage to other relationships  which  will  occur
    if, as seems likely, the appellant's partner and N  may  only  maintain
    their own family life with the appellant by returning to  Vietnam  with
    him.

12. Mr Mills submitted that the public interest  nonetheless  requires  the
    deportation of the appellant. He did, however, acknowledge that it  was
    'significant' that the appellant had not been convicted of any  offence
    for more than four years. He told  me  that  the  appellant's  apparent
    reformation could have the  effect  of  reducing  the  public  interest
    concerned with his deportation.  Having  regard  to  all  the  relevant
    circumstances, I agree with that observation without  losing  sight  of
    the course of criminal conduct over a number of years which led to this
    appellant becoming a persistent offender within the meaning of the 2002
    Act.

13. Having regard to all that I have said above, I am  satisfied  that  the
    effects upon M of the appellant's deportation are likely to  go  beyond
    the likely consequences for any child being  separated  by  deportation
    from a parent. I accept that M and the appellant do  not  live  in  the
    same household but I do find that their relationship is  nonetheless  a
    very close one. I find also that M has a close  relationship  with  her
    half-brother, N,  and  a  collateral  consequence  of  the  appellant's
    deportation will be the effective termination of that relationship.  In
    the appellant is deported, M will have to experience simultaneously the
    end of her relationship with N (or, at the very  least,  a  significant
    diminution in its quality) together with separation from her father  at
    the time she is on the verge of entering  her  crucial  teenage  years.
    Given the particular facts in this appeal  as  I  have  found  them,  I
    conclude that  the  child  M  will  suffer  as  a  consequence  of  the
    appellant's deportation effects which  may  properly  be  described  as
    unduly harsh. I fully acknowledge the strong public interest  concerned
    with the appellant's deportation although I accept, as  both  advocates
    appeared to do, that the public interest is diminished by the fact that
    the appellant has refrained  from  criminal  offending  for  a  several
    years.

14. In the circumstances, I allow the appeal.



Notice of Decision

I have remade the decision. The  appellant's  appeal  is  allowed  on  human
rights grounds (Article 8 ECHR).


Signed                              Date 22 August 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

