
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal number: PA/10977/2019 (V)



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard Remotely at Manchester CJC   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 9 March 2021                    |On 16 March 2021                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PICKUP



                                   Between

                                    SAKN

                            (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



                            DECISION AND REASONS



For the appellant:     Mr J Greer, instructed by Broudie Jackson Canter

For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Presenting Officer



This  has  been  a  remote  hearing  which  has   been   consented   to by
the parties. The form of remote hearing was video by Skype (V).  A face-to-
face hearing was not held because it was not  practicable,  and  all  issues
could be determined in a remote hearing. At the conclusion of  the  hearing,
I reserved my decisions and reasons,  which  I  now  give.  The  order  made
is described at the end of these reasons.

1. The appellant, who is a national of Senegal with date of birth  given  as
   5.11.78, has appealed with permission to the Upper Tribunal  against  the
   decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated 22.9.20  (Judge  Dainty),
   dismissing on  all  grounds  his  appeal  against  the  decision  of  the
   Secretary of State, dated 29.10.19, to refuse his claim for international
   protection made on 15.10.18.

2. The grounds first argue that the First-tier  Tribunal  failed  to  engage
   with a country expert report confirming that the specific  anti-psychotic
   medication prescribed to the appellant is not available and that there is
   widespread stigma  and  discrimination  towards  those  suffering  mental
   illness. It is argued that the fact that some treatment is available  was
   insufficient reasoning to determine whether the appellant would  be  able
   to receive adequate treatment. Mr Greer couched this ground in  terms  of
   paragraph 276ADE and  very  significant  obstacles  to  integration.  The
   second ground  alleges  inadequate  reasoning  for  concluding  that  the
   Article 3 claim was not made out on the basis of the stress  of  removal,
   when the expert's view was that the stress of proposed removal  triggered
   the last psychotic episode.

3. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted by the  First-tier
   Tribunal on 15.10.20, considering it arguable  that  the  judge  did  not
   address the expert evidence and that whilst the judge considered that the
   appellant's partner's family could provide support in the face of  stigma
   and discrimination, this was not  obvious  and  not  canvassed  with  the
   parties.

4. The judge granting permission considered that the judge was  entitled  to
   conclude that a low risk of relapse in the immediate future, according to
   the expert, failed to meet the high threshold for  an  Article  3  claim.
   However, it was arguable that the judge did not adequately  consider  the
   risk of removal triggering an immediate relapse.

5. I have carefully considered the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  in
   the  light  of  the  submissions  and  the  grounds  of  application  for
   permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  The  Tribunal  has  received
   the respondent's Rule 24 reply, dated 30.10.20, which  asserts  that  the
   judge was entitled  to  consider  that  the  appellant  could  seek  some
   assistance from his partner's family and that  he  could  be  financially
   supported by her on his return to Senegal.  Further,  the  expert's  view
   that mental health care and treatment might not be adequate or  available
   is not sufficient to undermine the judge's conclusion that the  appellant
   could access medical treatment.

6. In relation to very significant obstacles to integration under  paragraph
   276ADE, it is difficult to see how even taking the evidence relied on  in
   the  grounds  into  account  the  circumstances  could  amount  to   very
   significant obstacles. The appellant is  familiar  with  Senegal,  having
   spent most of his life there. Whether or not he will have the support  of
   his partner's family on return and even though there  may  be  widespread
   stigma and discrimination, he will have, the judge found,  his  partner's
   continued financial support and medical treatment is  available  for  his
   mental  health  difficulties.  This  case  falls  far  below   the   very
   significant obstacles test and the matters raised in the  grounds  cannot
   elevate it to meet the private life  requirements  for  leave  to  remain
   under paragraph 276ADE.

7. In relation to Article 3, I am  entirely  in  agreement  with  the  judge
   granting permission that there is no error of  law  in  relation  to  the
   finding of a low risk of relapse in the immediate future.

8. The major difficulty for the appellant in  reaching  the  high  threshold
   required for a viable claim is that his own expert opined  that  "without
   anti-psychotic medication and  psychiatric  input,  for  example  due  to
   financial problems, (the appellant's)  risk  of  relapse  of  his  mental
   health can dramatically increase in the medium to long term. However, the
   risk of relapse occurring in the immediate  future  would  be  considered
   low." The expert's somewhat contradictory opinion at  2.2.1  that  abrupt
   discontinuation of anti-psychotic medical or  if  not  readily  available
   amounted to a moderate to high risk of relapse was in the context of  the
   appellant being unable to pay for his prescription.  However,  the  judge
   found that the appellant was financially supported  by  his  partner  and
   would continue to be so on return to Senegal. There was on  the  evidence
   no  reason  why  the  appellant  would  either   unilaterally   terminate
   medication or medication would not be available. The judge also took into
   account that the appellant was outside a  two-year  period  during  which
   there was said to be a high risk of relapse on stopping  medication.  The
   evidence was that outpatient care for those suffering mental  illness  is
   available  in  Senegal,  including  the  availability  of  anti-psychotic
   medication. The fact that aripiprazole may not be available, according to
   the  country  expert  is  neither  here   nor   there,   as   alternative
   antipsychotic medication is available. The refusal decision at [110] sets
   out that there are  six  psychiatric  facilities  spread  throughout  the
   country. The appellant was relatively symptom-free,  and  more  than  two
   years had elapsed since his last episode. Visits by  the  care  team  had
   become less frequent, to every 2-4 weeks (before the pandemic).  On  that
   evidence the judge was entitled to conclude  at  [32]  that  any  relapse
   would not be immediate or short term, but medium to long term. The  judge
   made a correct self-direction on the AM (Zimbabwe) [2018] EWCA Civ 64  to
   require an imminence of intense  suffering  or  death  in  the  receiving
   state, which may only occur because of the non-availability in that state
   of the treatment which had previously  been  available  in  the  removing
   state.

9. Mr Greer argued that on the basis of AM  (Zimbabwe)  the  appellant  only
   has to show a prima facie case of a risk for the burden to shift  to  the
   respondent. However, as Mr McVeety pointed out, the expert view of a  low
   risk of imminent relapse entitles the judge to conclude that there is  no
   real risk. In the premises, the burden does not shift.

10. The judge did address at [33] of the decision  the  expert  evidence  at
   2.3.2 of the report that the physical act of  return  will  increase  the
   risk of relapse. However, as noted by the judge, that  expert  assessment
   was predicated  on  the  basis  that  the  appellant  was  frightened  of
   returning to his father, which claim the judge rejected as  not  credible
   and which conclusion has not been challenged in the grounds. As the judge
   pointed out, the expert report did not address the likelihood of  relapse
   in relation to the general stress of removal, and, in any event, did  not
   address whether any such relapse would be imminent  or  not.  Those  were
   findings and conclusions open to the judge  on  the  evidence.  In  short
   terms, the evidence was inadequate to satisfy to meet the threshold. I am
   satisfied that the judge did adequately address the issue  of  threat  of
   removal increasing the risk and reached a finding and conclusion open  on
   the evidence.

11. In the premises, it is difficult to see  how  the  article  3  threshold
   could be met on the available evidence, even without the  alleged  errors
   of inadequate reasoning or  irrelevant  considerations  asserted  in  the
   grounds. Even if the threat of removal  may  have  triggered  a  previous
   psychotic episode and even if there is  widespread  societal  stigma  and
   discrimination towards those suffering from mental illness, the judge was
   entitled to conclude that there was no real risk of the appellant rapidly
   experiencing intense suffering on return to Senegal. That was  the  plain
   evidence of the appellant's own psychiatric  expert.  Despite  that,  the
   grounds attempt to construct from other factors an  alternative  scenario
   for immediate relapse triggered by the threat of  removal  or  stigma  or
   discrimination, but,  as  stated,  that  was  not  the  evidence  of  the
   psychiatric expert.

12.  Whilst  the  specific  anti-psychotic  the   appellant   is   presently
   prescribed is not available, there was no evidence  that  alternative  or
   equivalent anti-psychotic medication  would  not  be  available  and,  as
   stated above, with financial support, no reason why the  appellant  would
   not be able to access and afford treatment, even without the  support  of
   his partner's family. In the circumstances, whether or not the  appellant
   will have his partner's family support, the conclusion would be the same.
   Similarly,  it  is  difficult  to   see   how   widespread   stigma   and
   discrimination in Senegal could convert the situation of a person with  a
   low risk of immediate relapse and who has gone two years or more  without
   a psychotic episode into an imminent risk of intense suffering because of
   the non-availabilty of treatment, when the evidence  is  that  outpatient
   treatment and anti-psychotic medication is available in Senegal.

13. It follows that the alleged errors of law asserted in  the  grounds  are
   not made out and even if made out are not material to the outcome of  the
   appeal.  In reality, this was a poor case with inadequate evidence to  be
   able to meet either the very  significant  obstacles  test  or  the  high
   Article  3  threshold.  The  outcome  of  the  appeal  was  inevitably  a
   dismissal. In the premises, and for the reasons set out above, I find  no
   material error of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.





Decision

      The appeal of the appellant to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

      The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands and the appeal  remains
      dismissed on all grounds.

      I make no order for costs.



Signed: DMW Pickup

Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

Date:       9 March 2021





Anonymity Direction

I am satisfied, having had  regard  to  the  guidance  in  the  Presidential
Guidance Note No 1 of 2013: Anonymity Orders, that it would  be  appropriate
to make an order in accordance with  Rules  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 in the following terms:

        "Unless and until  a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
        appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
        shall directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his
        family.  This  direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  both  the
        appellant and the respondent. Failure to comply with this direction
        could lead to contempt of court proceedings."



Signed: DMW Pickup

Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

Date:       9 March 2021





