
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: PA/10127/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 23rd March 2018                           |On 8th May 2018               |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES


                                   Between

                                     R A
                         (anonymity direction  MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr B Hawkins, instructed by Fadiga & Co
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

1.   The Appellant is a citizen of Ghana born in 1983.  He  appeals  against
    the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Lal, dated 15 December  2017,
    dismissing his appeal against the refusal of his  protection  claim  on
    asylum, humanitarian protection and human rights grounds.




2.   After hearing brief submissions by the parties, I find that  the  judge
    erred in law  in  his  assessment  of  credibility  for  the  following
    reasons.  The  judge  failed  to  demonstrate  that  he  had   assessed
    credibility  in  the  round  and  to  give  adequate  reasons  for  his
    conclusions.

3.   The judge dealt adequately with the delay in claiming asylum, but  then
    failed to take into account the medical report of Dr Briggs or to  give
    any reasons for why he attached little weight to it.  The  judge  found
    that the evidence did not support he Appellant's account.  However,  Dr
    Briggs was of the opinion that  the  Appellant's  scarring  was  highly
    consistent with his account. It was incumbent  on  the  judge  to  give
    reasons for why he found the Appellant's account to be  vague  and  not
    credible.

4.   Further, the judge failed to consider the letter from  the  Appellant's
    solicitor which dealt with the notes  confiscated  from  the  Appellant
    during his interview. He found that the  Appellant  had  'cribbed'  his
    account  without  considering  or  giving  reasons  for  rejecting  the
    explanation put forward.

5.   I find that the judge has erred in law in failing to properly  consider
    of the Appellant's account and the supporting evidence and  failing  to
    give reasoned findings in order  to  demonstrate  why  the  Appellant's
    appeal was dismissed. The judge also failed to deal with the section 72
    certificate.

6.   I have decided  in  accordance  with  paragraph  7.2  of  the  Practice
    Statements of 25 September 2012 that the  decision  dated  15  December
    2017 should be set aside and the  appeal  remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal. None of the judge's findings are preserved.


                                 DIRECTIONS

(i)  The Tribunal is directed pursuant to section 12(3)  of  the  Tribunals,
    Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 to reconsider the appeal at  a  hearing
    before a First-tier Tribunal Judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Lal.
(ii) I direct that the Appellant serve on the Respondent  and  the  Tribunal
    any further evidence and submissions, including matters  pertaining  to
    the section 72 certificate, at least 7 days before the hearing.
(iii)    The matter is listed before a First-tier Tribunal judge at Taylor
    House or Hatton Cross, London on the first available date. Please check
    counsel's availability before fixing a date.
(iv) A Twi interpreter is required. List for 3 hours.


           J Frances


Signed                                  Date 23 March 2018
Upper Tribunal Judge Frances
