
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10058/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 23rd February 2018                         |On 9th March 2018             |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                                     MFA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Draycott of Counsel instructed by Brodie
                    Jackson Canter Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs R Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant appeals against a decision of Judge Morris (the judge) of
    the First-tier Tribunal (the FTT) promulgated on 10th April 2017.

 2. The Appellant is an Iranian citizen born in May 1990.  He  entered  the
    UK illegally on 21st March 2016 and claimed asylum.  He claimed that he
    would be at risk because of illegal smuggling activities  that  he  had
    carried out in Iran, he is Kurdish, and had left Iran illegally.

 3. The Respondent refused the application on 8th September  2016  and  the
    Appellant appealed to the FTT.

 4. The judge heard evidence from the Appellant and did not accept that  he
    had given a credible account.  The judge found that the  Appellant  had
    not been engaged in smuggling.  It was not accepted that the  Appellant
    would be at risk if returned to  Iran  simply  because  he  had  exited
    illegally, which the judge accepted, and because he was a failed asylum
    seeker.  The judge did not accept that the Appellant would be  at  risk
    simply because of his Kurdish ethnicity, and did not accept  the  claim
    put at the hearing, that the Appellant would be at risk of imprisonment
    as a draft evader.  The appeal was dismissed on all grounds.

 5. The Appellant applied for permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal.
    Initially permission to appeal was  refused  by  Judge  Pullig,  but  a
    renewed application was subsequently granted by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    McWilliam in the following terms;

         "The core of the Appellant's account, as identified by  the  judge,
         related to events in Iran when he was aged 15 (eleven  years  prior
         to the hearing).

         The Appellant is uneducated.  The judge found that the evidence was
         inconsistent in a number of respects.  The judge at [32] considered
         the submissions made by Counsel in respect of the Appellant's  age,
         but the judge concluded that although a 15 year old may be  excused
         for having forgotten certain events he was not satisfied  that  the
         discrepancies could be explained in this way.  The judge took  into
         account that the evidence (AIR, witness statement and that  at  the
         hearing) was given when the Appellant was aged 26 and  he  expected
         internal consistency from an adult.  It is arguable that the age of
         the Appellant at the time  of  the  events  could  impinge  on  his
         ability to accurately and consistently recall events that  occurred
         when he was a child and that, at least to a  degree,  the  guidance
         given by the Court of Appeal in AM  [2017]  EWCA  Civ  1123  should
         apply when an adult is recounting events that occurred when he  was
         a child."

 6. Following the grant of permission  the  Respondent  lodged  a  response
    pursuant to rule 24 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  rules
    2008.  In summary it was contended that the judge had directed  himself
    appropriately and not erred in law.  It was contended that the  Grounds
    of Appeal merely disagree with the judge's assessment of the  evidence,
    and the judge gave full and cogent reasons for dismissing  the  appeal.
    It was contended that it was a striking feature of  the  evidence  that
    the Appellant had evaded answering a simple direct  question,  and  the
    clear import is that the Appellant had learned a fabricated script from
    which he was unable to deviate.

 7. Directions were issued that there should be a hearing before the  Upper
    Tribunal to ascertain whether the judge had erred in law such that  the
    decision should be set aside.

Submissions

 8. Mr Draycott relied upon the grounds,  A  to  E,  contained  within  the
    application for permission to appeal and expanded  upon  them  in  oral
    submissions.  The submissions are summarised below.

 9. Ground A contends that the judge erred in failing to apply  the  burden
    of proof in a flexible fashion due  to  the  young  age  at  which  the
    Appellant left Iran.  It was  submitted  that  the  judge  should  have
    applied the benefit of the doubt to a vulnerable Appellant and reliance
    was placed upon the Joint Presidential Guidance Note No.2 of 2010 which
    relates to a child, vulnerable adult and sensitive Appellants.  It  was
    submitted that the judge had  failed,  in  making  adverse  credibility
    findings, to take into account the guidance that applied  to  assessing
    evidence given by children.  It was accepted that the Appellant was not
    a child when giving evidence before the judge, but he was 15  years  of
    age when involved in smuggling in Iran and the judge should have  taken
    that into account.

10. Ground B criticises adverse credibility findings made by the  judge  at
    paragraph 31 of the decision.  In particular it is submitted  that  the
    judge acted procedurally unfairly in relying upon answers given by  the
    Appellant in his asylum interview dated  25th  August  2016,  when  the
    following points were not raised with the Appellant in  the  course  of
    his  evidence  before  the  FTT  and  therefore  he  did  not  have  an
    opportunity to comment upon them.

11. Specific reference is made to the finding at paragraph 31(vii)  of  the
    FTT decision in which the judge  notes  an  inconsistency  between  the
    answers given by the Appellant in his asylum interview (questions  101-
    104) and his witness statement.  In his witness statement he claimed to
    have returned to a village in Iraq and stayed with Hama  Saleh  whereas
    in his interview there is no mention of Hama Saleh at all.

12. Also at paragraph 31(viii) the judge noted an inconsistency in that the
    Appellant stated in his witness statement and at the hearing  that  his
    family had sent him a letter telling him not to return home, whereas in
    his interview he stated that it was verbal message.

13. It was further contended that the judge had erred  at  paragraph  31(i)
    and (ii)  by  attaching  adverse  weight  to  the  Appellant's  witness
    statement dated 2nd February 2017 in which the Appellant had  explained
    that he had known his fellow smuggler  for  a  few  months  before  his
    father left the family, when it was contended that the word "before" is
    plainly a typographical error.

14. It was further contended the judge  had  materially  erred  in  law  at
    paragraph 31(vi) by drawing an adverse inference  in  relation  to  the
    Appellant's claim that following an ambush he was able to  turn  around
    and retrace his steps to  Iraq  in  the  dark,  along  tracks  made  by
    animals.  It was contended that this had  failed  to  engage  with  the
    Appellant's description of the relevant road in his asylum interview at
    questions 77-80 as a "hilly mountain area road  and  a  footpath  which
    would have been used for herding animals."

15. Ground C contends that the  judge  materially  erred  by  relying  upon
    section 8 of the Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of Claimants,  etc.)
    Act 2004, as this had not  been  raised  in  the  Respondent's  refusal
    decision, nor was it raised at the hearing.

16. Ground D submits that the judge erred when finding that  the  Appellant
    would not be at  risk  by  reason  of  draft  evasion.   The  objective
    evidence before the judge indicated that an individual who had  been  a
    draft evader for more than one  year,  and  the  Appellant  had  evaded
    conscription  for  approximately  eight  years,   may   face   criminal
    prosecution.   Prison  conditions  in  Iran  breached  Article  3,  and
    therefore the judge had erred in not finding that the  Appellant  would
    be at risk on that basis.

17. Ground E contends that the judge erred in relying upon the  Appellant's
    demeanour and finding him to be an unreliable witness on the grounds of
    his demeanour.  This referred  to  a  finding  by  the  judge  that  on
    numerous occasions the Appellant failed to answer fairly simple  direct
    questions.

18. Mr Draycott submitted that the errors in the FTT  decision  meant  that
    the decision should be  set  aside  with  no  findings  preserved,  and
    remitted to the FTT to be heard again.

19. I then heard oral submissions from Mrs Pettersen.  She relied upon  the
    rule 24 response.

20. With reference to ground A it was submitted that there was no reference
    before the FTT that the Joint  Presidential  Guidance  Note  should  be
    applied.  There was no indication of any unfairness at the hearing.  It
    was submitted that judge had not erred in law.

21. With reference to ground B it was submitted  that  the  judge  had  not
    erred in considering the evidence  and  had  made  findings  upon  that
    evidence which were open to him  to  make  and  had  given  sustainable
    reasons for those findings.

22. With reference to ground C Mrs Pettersen submitted that the  judge  was
    entitled to make a finding on Section 8 of the 2004 Act.

23. With reference to ground D it was submitted  that  the  judge  had  not
    erred in considering draft evasion, and again it was submitted that  he
    had made findings open to him on the  evidence  and  provided  adequate
    reasons.

24. With reference to ground E Mrs Pettersen submitted that the  judge  had
    not made a finding based upon the Appellant's demeanour, but had made a
    finding based upon his refusal to  answer  simple  questions.   It  was
    submitted that the decision of the FTT should stand.

25. In response Mr Draycott pointed out that in his  skeleton  argument  at
    paragraph 23, which was before the FTT, reference had been made to  the
    fact that the events which caused the Appellant to  claim  asylum,  had
    occurred when he was 15 years of age and a child.  In relation to draft
    evasion, it was submitted that the judge had erred by  not  considering
    that the Appellant may be imprisoned which would breach Article 3.

26. At the conclusion of oral submissions I reserve my decision.

My Conclusions and Reasons

27. I consider firstly ground A.  Mrs Pettersen is correct in pointing  out
    that there was no specific reference on behalf of the Appellant to  the
    Joint Presidential Guidance Note No.2 in  the  proceedings  before  the
    FTT, but it is clear from the skeleton argument submitted on behalf  of
    the Appellant, that reliance was placed upon the  fact  that  that  the
    Appellant was a child when he claimed  to  have  been  taking  part  in
    smuggling activities in Iran, and the Appellant's case  was  that  this
    should be taken into account when assessing credibility.  The judge was
    clearly aware of this, and records in paragraph 32 the submission  made
    by the Appellant's representative, that the benefit of the  doubt  must
    be liberally applied to someone who is a minor at the  time  of  events
    giving rise to the claim.  The judge noted  that  reliance  was  placed
    upon paragraph 351 of  the  Immigration  Rules,  and  the  Respondent's
    Asylum Policy Guidance which relates to children.

28. The judge commented at paragraph 32;

         "I accept that to an extent in that a 15 year old might be  excused
         for having forgotten certain events or specifics of  what  occurred
         in events that he does remember.  I am not satisfied, however, that
         certain of the above discrepancies can be explained on that basis:"

29. The judge considered the Appellant's account with considerable care and
    in my view gave adequate reasons for not finding that the discrepancies
    could be explained by the Appellant's age.  The judge was  entitled  to
    note that the inconsistencies were internal, and resulted from accounts
    given by the Appellant at his asylum  interview  in  August  2016,  his
    witness statement in February 2017, and  the  hearing  in  March  2017.
    Those accounts had been given by the Appellant when he  was  an  adult,
    and his witness statement was prepared by legal representatives, and he
    was legally represented at the hearing.  The judge was entitled to find
    that the  separate  accounts  given  by  the  Appellant  as  an  adult,
    contained relevant inconsistencies, which could not be explained by the
    fact that he was recounting events that occurred when he was  a  child.
    That finding was open to the judge to make, and I do not find that  the
    judge materially erred in law on this issue.

30. With reference to ground B the judge found at  paragraph  31(vii)  that
    the Appellant's evidence was inconsistent when his interview record was
    compared with his witness statement  dated  2nd  February  2017.   That
    witness   statement   was   prepared   by   the    Appellant's    legal
    representatives.  The Appellant and his representatives had a  copy  of
    the interview record, and had an opportunity to address  any  parts  of
    the record which were felt to be incorrect and had  an  opportunity  to
    clarify or address any inconsistencies.  The evidence  in  the  witness
    statement as to where the Appellant stayed in a village in Iraq differs
    from the evidence that he provided in  his  asylum  interview.   It  is
    therefore the Appellant and his legal representatives who have provided
    inconsistent  accounts  to  be  considered  by   the   Tribunal.    The
    representatives must have been aware that the accounts were  different,
    and could have provided an explanation but failed to  do  so.   If  the
    judge had had the opportunity of considering all of the papers  in  the
    Appellant's file, and he would not have had as much opportunity as  the
    representatives to prepare, it was open to him to ask why the Appellant
    had given an inconsistent account, but in my view his failure to do  so
    on this point does not amount to a material error of law.  This is  not
    something that the Appellant should have been unaware of, as it was the
    Appellant who had provided the inconsistent accounts.

31. I make the same point with  the  finding  by  the  judge  at  paragraph
    31(viii) which relates to a discrepancy as to whether  the  Appellant's
    family had notified him by letter not to return home,  or  whether  the
    message was sent verbally as contended in his asylum  interview.   This
    inconsistency  has  been  caused  by  the  Appellant  giving  different
    accounts.  The Appellant and his representatives had an opportunity  to
    consider the accounts  provided,  and  provide  clarification  if  they
    though appropriate.  Again  this  is  not  something  about  which  the
    Appellant should have been unaware.

32. With reference to the points made about findings made by the  judge  at
    paragraph  31(i),  (ii)  and  (vi),  I  find  no  substance  in   these
    challenges.  I  find  that  these  challenges  are  disagreements  with
    findings made by the judge.  On these points, the judge  made  findings
    which  were  open  to  him  to  make  on  the  evidence,  and  provided
    sustainable reasons for those findings.

33. With reference to ground C, I find that  the  judge  erred  in  placing
    reliance upon section 8 of the 2004 Act.  This is because section 8 was
    not raised in the reasons for refusal letter, and  not  raised  at  the
    hearing.  Therefore, in my view, it  is  unfair  to  reach  an  adverse
    conclusion, without giving the Appellant an  opportunity  to  offer  an
    explanation.  This point  had  not  been  addressed  by  the  Appellant
    because he had no idea it was being  raised  against  him.   I  do  not
    however find this finding  to  be  a  material  error  in  relation  to
    credibility.  It does not infect the other findings made by the  judge.
    The judge at paragraph 33 accepts that a finding under section  8  that
    the Appellant travelled through safe countries without claiming  asylum
    is not determinative.

34. With reference to ground  D,  the  judge  considers  draft  evasion  at
    paragraphs 48-49 of his decision.  The Appellant relied upon  the  Home
    Office Country Policy and Information Note on military service in Iran,
    and the judge considered this report, which is summarised at  paragraph
    48.  There is reference in the report  to  prison  conditions  in  Iran
    likely to breach the Article 3 threshold.  There is also  reference  at
    2.4.11 that longer draft evasion (more than one year in peace time) may
    result in criminal prosecution.  At paragraph 2.4.12 it is stated  that
    the penalties are provided in law and there is no evidence  to  suggest
    that these penalties are being disproportionately applied.

35. The judge specifically considers whether there  is  reason  to  believe
    that the Appellant would be imprisoned on return to  Iran.   The  judge
    finds at paragraph 49 "the Appellant's representative did not point  to
    any particular country guidance  or  other  case  law  to  support  his
    submission that the Appellant  having  evaded  military  service,  upon
    return, a prison sentence will be highly likely."

36. In my view that judge was entitled to reach the conclusion, based  upon
    the evidence before him, that it had not been proved that the Appellant
    would face a real risk as a result of draft evasion.

37. Lastly I consider ground E and find no error of law  disclosed.   I  do
    not accept that the judge made any finding based upon  demeanour.   The
    judge found at paragraph 30, as  a  general  point,  that  on  numerous
    occasions  the  Appellant  failed  to  answer  fairly   simple   direct
    questions, despite the questions being repeated.   The  judge  recorded
    that the questions were fairly simple and direct and invited an equally
    simple and direct answer, which the Appellant often failed to  provide.
    The  judge   was   satisfied   that   there   was   no   confusion   or
    misunderstanding, and therefore was entitled to  note  the  Appellant's
    failure to answer those questions.

38. In conclusion, I find  that  the  judge  considered  all  the  relevant
    evidence, did not take into account immaterial matters,  made  findings
    open to him, and provided adequate and sustainable  reasons  for  those
    findings, and correctly applied country guidance case law.  The grounds
    demonstrate a strong disagreement with the conclusions reached  by  the
    judge, but in my view do not disclose a material error of law.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the FTT did  not  involve  the  making  of  an
error of law such that the decision must be set aside.  I do not  set  aside
the decision.  The appeal is dismissed.

Anonymity

I have made anonymity direction because the Appellant has made a  claim  for
international protection.  Unless and until  a  Tribunal  or  court  directs
otherwise  the  Appellant  is  granted  anonymity.   No  report   of   these
proceedings shall directly or  indirectly  identify  the  Appellant  or  any
member of his family.  This direction applies both to the Appellant  and  to
the Respondent.  Failure  to  comply  with  this  direction  could  lead  to
contempt of court proceedings.  This direction is made pursuant to  rule  14
of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) rules 2008.


Signed                              Date 3rd March 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal is dismissed.  There is no fee award.


Signed                              Date 3rd March 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall

