
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10757/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 12 February 2019                           |On 5 March 2019               |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HUTCHINSON


                                   Between

                                  Mr a s A
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Radford, Counsel, instructed by J D Spicer Zeb
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant claimed to be a citizen of Syria, born on 5  April  1993.
    The respondent believed him to be a citizen of Egypt.   In  a  decision
    promulgated on 7  December  2018,  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    O'Brien dismissed the appellant's protection appeal on all grounds.

 2. The appellant appeals with permission on grounds that:

      a)  Ground  1  procedural  fairness  -  it  was  argued  that  it  was
         procedurally  unfair  of  the  judge  to   proceed   following   an
         adjournment request,  without  an  assessment  of  the  appellant's
         mental health.

      b) Ground 2 - it was irrational for the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  to
         give any weight to a document verification  report  which  did  not
         specify the author had any expertise.

      c) Ground 3 - the judge gave inadequate reasons  for  concluding  that
         the appellant did not speak "Syrian Arabic" and in the  alternative
         for concluding that it is incredible for a Syrian national to speak
         Arabic in the way the appellant did.



Error of Law Hearing

 3. Mr Jarvis conceded that in light of all the information, including  the
    witness statement from Ms Radford which the respondent had no reason to
    question and which was not  inconsistent  with  the  records  taken  by
    Counsel instructed for the Secretary of State on the day that there was
    an adjournment request, the Secretary of State accepted that the  judge
    ought to have adjourned  to  allow  the  appellant  to  obtain  further
    evidence in relation  to  his  mental  health  difficulties  which  had
    manifested  themselves  at  the  hearing  centre  (Ms  Radford   having
    indicated in  the  grounds  and  in  her  witness  statement  that  the
    appellant had been in extreme distress and hitting his head against the
    walls in the minutes before the hearing commenced).   That  adjournment
    application had been unopposed by the respondent.

 4.  Considering  the  relevant  guidance  and  authorities  including   AM
    (Afghanistan) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2017]  EWCA
    Civ 1123 with reference to the Practice Direction: First-tier and Upper
    Tribunal Child, Vulnerable Adult and Sensitive Witnesses and the  Joint
    Presidential Guidance Note No 2 of 2010 I am of the view that the judge
    erred.

 5. Although the judge purported to treat the  appellant  as  a  vulnerable
    witness on the basis of medical evidence which indicated he had anxiety
    associated with a physical health problem but no specific mental health
    diagnosis, it was difficult to see how the  First-tier  Tribunal  could
    properly  identify  the  appellant's   vulnerability   and   make   the
    appropriate provision for his welfare, or assess his participation  and
    evidence in light of such vulnerability, without  being  aware  of  the
    extent of that vulnerability.  This is particularly the case  in  light
    of what I accept were the indications made by Ms Radford at the hearing
    (which the judge refers to as a concern on the part of Ms Radford about
    the appellant's capacity to participate in proceedings).

 6. Accordingly, with the consent of the parties, I set aside the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal for error  of  law  (Rule  40(3)(a)  of  The
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008).   The  decision  is
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal, to be heard, de novo,  other  than
    by Judge O'Brien.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date:  1 March 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee was paid or payable so no fee award is made.


Signed                                  Date:  1 March 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson
