
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10927/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 19 March 2018                         |On 05 April 2018                   |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

                                    [a a]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Cleghorn of Counsel instructed by Legal Justice
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a national of Iran.  He made a  claim  for  asylum  in
    April 2016 on the basis that the Iranian authorities had  targeted  him
    as a supporter of a KDPI opposition group that  had  been  distributing
    leaflets.   The  appellant  said  he  and  his  cousin  [A]  had   been
    distributing leaflets on behalf of the KDPI, that [A] had been arrested
    and had given the appellant's name to the authorities  and  that  as  a
    result his (the appellant's) house had been raided.  The application he
    made for asylum was refused by the respondent  on  22  September  2016.
    His appeal came before Judge Cope of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (FtT).
    The judge appears to have accepted that the appellant  was  of  Kurdish
    ethnicity and that he has been involved in some activities  in  the  UK
    linked to the KDPI, including attendance at a demonstration  in  London
    in December 216, a seminar in Sheffield  in  January  2017,  and  other
    meetings in Sheffield.  However,  the  judge  did  not  find  that  the
    appellant had given a credible account of suffering adverse experiences
    in Iran or that he had a Facebook account.

2.   The grounds of appeal  first  of  all  challenge  the  judge's  adverse
    credibility findings.  Having  considered  the  competing  arguments  I
    conclude that this ground is made out.  The first reason  is  that  the
    judge accepted that the appellant's account  was  both  internally  and
    externally consistent and  that  the  "extent  of  the  consistency  is
    considerable" (paragraph  27).   Second,  the  reasons  why  the  judge
    nevertheless concluded the appellant was not credible  lack  sufficient
    cogency to explain why they outweighed  the  considerable  consistency.
    In particular, the judge's reliance on an  apparent  implausibility  in
    the appellant's account regarding his  cousin's  involvement  with  the
    KDPI is difficult to follow.  At paragraph 30 the judge states that  he
    finds it surprising that the appellant seemed not to have been aware of
    [A]'s support for the KDPI until mid-2015 when he and his  cousin  were
    about or over 21 years  old.   At  paragraph  31  the  judge  finds  it
    implausible that the appellant would "suddenly" be asked by [A] to help
    him.  Yet there was no specific evidence  suggesting  [A]  had  been  a
    supporter of KDPI for any length of time.  Other reasons given  by  the
    judge at paragraphs 33-39 may be considered to have some force but  not
    sufficient to outweigh the accepted considerable consistencies  in  the
    appellant's account.

3.   I am not entitled to interfere with a judge's findings of  fact  unless
    vitiated by errors of  law,  but  here  the  judge's  findings  do  not
    satisfactorily explain why perceived difficulties as to  implausibility
    outweighed considerable consistency.  Of course,  consistency  is  only
    one of the indicators decision-makers need to look at  (see  KH  [2017]
    UKUT 491 (IAC)), but in the same decision the point is made that  undue
    reliance on plausibility is problematic.

4.   In light of the  unsafe  nature  of  the  judge's  adverse  credibility
    findings in relation to the appellant's claimed experiences in Iran,  I
    also have concerns about the judge's treatment of the  appellant's  sur
    place claim in that the judge was not even prepared to accept  that  he
    had a Facebook account, even though there was print-out  evidence  that
    appeared to go a considerable way to establishing at least that he  had
    such an account.   Further,  the  judge's  treatment  of  the  evidence
    submitted by the appellant regarding the KDPI  website  photographs  is
    curiously worded.  At paragraph 63 the judge stated:

         "63. However it is not possible for  me  to  go  beyond  this  very
             generalised description of the printouts.  This is because  no
             translation has been provided for the non-English wording; and
             I do not consider that the photographs (apart from any showing
             the Appellant himself) speak for themselves in  the  sense  of
             being  supportive  of  the  KDPI  or   against   the   Iranian
             government".

    Given that the photos did include at least one appearing to feature the
    appellant himself attending a demonstration, it is not clear why it was
    not considered as evidence that the appellant supported the  KDPI.   Mr
    Diwnycz pointed out that this photo was blurred,  but  this  is  not  a
    point on which the judge sought to rely.

5.   For the above reasons I conclude that the  judge  materially  erred  in
    law.  I see no alternative to the decision being set aside and remitted
    to the FtT (not before  Judge  Cope).   No  findings  of  fact  can  be
    preserved.

6.   To summarise:

    The decision of the FtT Judge is set aside for material error of law.


    The case is remitted to the FtT to be heard de novo (not  before  Judge
         Cope).


7.   The appellant may wish to consider submitting  more  specific  evidence
    to show he had/has a Facebook account and that the photo of him  as  it
    appears in the KDPI website is not in fact blurry.



Signed:                                 Date: 3 April 2018
              [pic]

Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal


