

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/10386/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 10 July 2017                               |On 11 July 2017              |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER

                                   Between

                                     NA
                          ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the appellant:      Mr Adebayo, A2 Solicitors
For the respondent:     Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                                  DECISION

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI2008/269) an Anonymity Order is made. Unless the Upper Tribunal or  Court
orders otherwise, no report of any proceedings or any  form  of  publication
thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the original  Appellant.  This
prohibition applies to, amongst others, all parties.

       1. I have anonymised  the  appellant's  name  because  this  decision
          refers to his asylum claim.

Summary of asylum claim

       2. The appellant is a citizen of Kuwait.  He claims that if  returned
          to Kuwait he faces a real risk of persecution  because  he  is  an
          undocumented Bidoon.  NM  (documented/undocumented  Bidoon:  risk)
          Kuwait CG [2013] UKUT 00356 makes it clear that if accepted to  be
          an undocumented Bidoon the appellant is at risk of persecution  in
          Kuwait.   The  appellant  has   two   brothers,   both   of   whom
          successfully claimed asylum in the UK as undocumented Bidoons.

Procedural history

       3. In a decision dated 17  January  2017  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
          Holt comprehensively rejected the credibility of  the  appellant's
          claims and dismissed his appeal.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  heard
          evidence from the appellant's brother [A] and accepted  that  they
          are  related  as  claimed.   The   First-tier   Tribunal   however
          identified a number of concerns arising from the  appellant's  own
          evidence and found these to undermine his claims.


       4. First-tier Tribunal Judge ES Martins granted permission to  appeal
          observing that the wide-ranging grounds  submitted  on  behalf  of
          the appellant were arguable.

       5. The respondent submitted a rule 24 notice dated  11  May  2017  in
          which she submitted that the findings of fact  were  open  to  the
          First-tier Tribunal and the  grounds  of  appeal  merely  disagree
          with these.

Hearing

       6.  Upon  reflection,  Mr  McVeety  conceded  that   the   First-tier
          Tribunal's  approach  to  the  asylum  grant  to  the  appellant's
          brother [A] and to his oral evidence generally contains errors  of
          law, such that the decision needs to be remade completely.

       7. I have had regard to para 7.2 of the relevant  Senior  President's
          Practice Statement and  the  nature  and  extent  of  the  factual
          findings required in remaking the decision,  and  I  decided  that
          this is an appropriate case to remit to the  First-tier  Tribunal.
          Both parties agreed with this approach.

Error of law discussion

       8. I can state my reasons briefly given Mr McVeety's concession.


       9.  This  is  a  case  in  which  the  First-tier  Tribunal   clearly
          identified the potential importance of  the  grant  of  asylum  to
          [A].  The First-tier Tribunal stated at [21]  that  the  "starting
          point" was that the "DNA evidence was strongly supportive  of  the
          appellant's appeal"  [21].   In  addition,  the  "implications  of
          [A]'s  successful  asylum  claim"  are   acknowledged   at   [30].
          However,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  failed  to  make  any   clear
          findings regarding [A]'s evidence concerning the  appellant.   The
          record of proceedings records [A] as having confirmed his  witness
          statement  when  giving  oral  evidence  before   the   First-tier
          Tribunal.   This asserts: "the reason I claimed asylum is  because
          I was an undocumented Bidoon  in  Kuwait  and  did  not  have  any
          rights and  I  feared  persecution  because  of  this".   He  also
          confirmed that he saw his brother daily in  Kuwait  as  the  wider
          family all lived together.  He stated that the appellant  did  not
          know that he was in the UK until he found out  in  France  and  he
          was then able to track him down through the Manchester  community.
            Since  then  they  have  remained  in  "constant  touch".    The
          respondent's    representative    cross-examined    [A].      Both
          representatives made submissions on the proper approach  to  [A]'s
          evidence.  The respondent suggested that [A] might not be  granted
          asylum if he made the same application on the same  facts  at  the
          date of hearing.  The appellant's  representative  submitted  that
          the matters put in cross-examination to [A] did  not  support  the
          submissions relied upon by the respondent.

      10. The First-tier Tribunal was "not satisfied by the  wider  evidence
          in the case" [21] and gave reasons for this  at  [22-29].   As  Mr
          McVeety conceded, the First-tier Tribunal has failed to  make  any
          findings  regarding  important  evidence  addressing  the  pivotal
          issue in the case: [A]'s  evidence  that  he  was  granted  asylum
          because he is an undocumented Bidoon (in line  with  NM)  and  his
          brother, the appellant,  is  also  an  undocumented  Bidoon.   The
          First-tier Tribunal has therefore  failed  to  take  into  account
          relevant evidence when making findings on the determinative  issue
          in the appeal.  As Mr McVeety acknowledged  it  was  possible  for
          the First-tier Tribunal to make  adverse  findings  regarding  the
          appellant's credibility, yet accept that like his brother,  he  is
          an undocumented Bidoon.  The First-tier Tribunal has  declined  to
          speculate as to why the respondent granted [A] refugee  status  at
          [21].   Whilst  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was  correct   not   to
          speculate, it was still obliged to address the credibility of  the
          evidence available to it:  [A]'s  evidence  that  he  was  granted
          asylum because he was an undocumented Bidoon.  In response  to  my
          query, Mr McVeety was  able  to  easily  locate  the  file  minute
          explaining the reasons why [A] was granted  asylum.   In  summary,
          this  indicates  that  the  respondent  was  satisfied  that   [A]
          provided a consistent and credible account  and  it  was  accepted
          that he is an undocumented Bidoon.  It is  regrettable  that  this
          file minute was not disclosed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   Mr
          McVeety acknowledged that the 'asylum grant' letter was  requested
          by the appellant's solicitors and provided,  and  there  may  have
          been  a  misunderstanding  as  to  the  availability  of  relevant
          evidence i.e. the file minute, in support of [A]'s evidence.

      11. The  failure  to  make  findings  regarding  [A]'s  evidence  also
          infects the factual finding at [23].  The First-tier Tribunal  has
          not made any findings regarding [A]'s evidence in support of  when
          the appellant  found  out  he  was  in  the  UK.   The  record  of
          proceedings  establishes  that  there  was   a   factual   dispute
          regarding the credibility of [A]'s evidence, yet  no  findings  of
          fact have been made regarding this witness's  evidence.   Although
          the First-tier Tribunal refers to "unbelievable evidence" at  [24]
          this reference seems to be to the appellant's claim  that  he  did
          not know that [A] was in the UK, when [A] had  told  their  mother
          who the appellant was living with.

      12. The decision also contains an obvious error  of  law  not  clearly
          identified in the grounds of appeal.  When making its findings  of
          fact regarding the credibility and consistency of the  appellant's
          account to be an  undocumented  Bidoon,  the  First-tier  Tribunal
          failed to consider his evidence in  the  context  of  the  country
          background  evidence  as  set  out  in  NM  and  updated  in   the
          appellant's bundle.  Indeed, NM is not referred to at all.  As  Mr
          McVeety  observed  there  is  no  clear  finding   regarding   the
          credibility  of  the  appellant's  specific   claim   to   be   an
          undocumented Bidoon.   He  consistently  maintained  that  he  was
          unregistered and this was directly supported by [A].  That  it  is
          necessary in a case such as this to make specific  findings  on  a
          claim to be unregistered,  even  where  there  are  other  adverse
          credibility  findings,  is  demonstrated  by,  inter   alia,   the
          headnote and [116] of NM.

Decision

      13. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making  of  a
          material error of law.  Its  decision  cannot  stand  and  is  set
          aside.

      14. The appeal shall be remade by the First-tier Tribunal de novo.





Signed:

Ms M. Plimmer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date:
10 July 2017
