
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10111/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 17 December 2018                           |On 24 January 2019            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

                                  miss l r
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION continued)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Sarkar, counsel instructed by Adam Bernard
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Lindsay, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant, on or  about  25  May  2017,  made  an  application  for
    protection as a refugee  and/or  on  Humanitarian  Protection  grounds,
    which was refused by the Respondent  on  2  August  2018.   Her  appeal
    against that decision came before First-tier Tribunal Judge L  K  Gibbs
    (the Judge) who, on 1 October 2018, dismissed the appeal on  Convention
    and Protection grounds, as  well  as  under  the  Rules,  and  on  ECHR
    grounds.

2.   Permission to appeal was sought on three grounds, but unrelated to  the
    decisions under the Rules or on ECHR grounds  permitted  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Robertson on 31 October 2018, and perhaps the  grant  of
    permission reflects the limited time  given  to  the  consideration  of
    permissions to appeal.

3.   The Judge was faced with the interesting fact that  the  Appellant  had
    previously made an asylum claim on a fear of retribution on  return  to
    Pakistan on the basis of her being unwilling to enter into  a  marriage
    her parents wished for her with a cousin.   The  situation  had  rather
    moved on, insofar as by the time the matter was being considered by the
    Judge in this appeal, the Appellant had a child.  The issue was largely
    whether or not the child was illegitimate, or whether or not a  wedding
    had taken place.  The issue  of  risk  on  return  had,  to  a  degree,
    diverted to the issue of  her  father  believing  her  to  have  had  a
    relationship outside of wedlock, and 'if so' whether he would kill  the
    Appellant and the child, or whether she could not find  protection  for
    them because of  the  real  risk  of  honour  killings  being  in  fact
    accepted, or ignored, to a degree by the  Government  in  Pakistan.   A
    subsidiary argument, but not raising any further  grounds,  related  to
    the risks that might be thought to arise under Articles 2 and 3 ECHR.

4.   Despite the arguments of Mr Sarkar, it seemed to me that the Judge  had
    to grapple with three principal problems: First, contradictory evidence
    as to whether or not the  Appellant  was  married  and  the  child  was
    illegitimate; Secondly, the apparent lack of  evidence  to  demonstrate
    that there had been  an  Islamic  form  of  marriage  performed  and  a
    marriage Nikah produced in the United Kingdom; and Thirdly, whether  or
    not there really was a risk of  the  father  of  the  Appellant  taking
    action against his daughter as claimed,  let  alone  dealing  with  the
    child.

5.   I conclude that the Judge looked at the evidence  in  the  round,  took
    into account the apparent contradictions in the line that the Appellant
    was running.  It was significant to that extent that  the  Judge  dealt
    with the absence of the Nikah and did not reject the Appellant's  claim
    as to why evidence had not been produced for the reasons she claimed.

6.   Rather, it seemed to me for cogent reasons  the  Judge  concluded  that
    there had been a marriage in the UK and the birth of the child was  the
    result of that marriage union.  On the basis of what the Judge  put  to
    counsel and the registration of birth  provisions  then  in  being,  it
    seemed to me the evidence was  sufficient  to  discharge  to  that  low
    standard of proof in asylum cases, that  the  child's  birth  had  been
    registered, the father of the child had been registered, and  that  due
    process had been properly followed.  It seemed to me very unlikely that
    the UK register  of  births  was  in  error  or  that  the  Registrar's
    functions would have been neglected in the manner that is claimed.  The
    reasoning why the Judge did not accept the assertions by the  Appellant
    concerning the legitimacy of her child  and  the  registration  of  the
    child was sufficient.

7.   There was no evidence before the Judge, other than  the  Appellant  and
    her brother's say-so, as to why they could not obtain a Nikah from  the
    Iman at the mosque where the wedding  had  been  celebrated.   It  also
    struck me as significant that there was no evidence  whatsoever  before
    the Judge  from,  for  example,  persons  who  attended  the  ceremony,
    witnesses at the ceremony, or its celebration after, or indeed  anybody
    there who spoke to the issue of the existence of the marriage  and  the
    process that had been followed.  On a fair reading of the decision I do
    not accept the criticisms that were made of the Judge in ground 3  that
    he had not put these  issues  and  had  not  taken  into  account  such
    arguments as were advanced.

8.   As to the second ground, it is clear that the Judge  did  look  at  all
    the evidence.  The Judge was not  saying  he  would  not  consider  the
    documents  being  provided  because  they  came  from  the  Appellant's
    brother.  The Judge assessed the credibility of the Appellant's brother
    in the context that the Appellant's brother had previously  been  found
    to be unreliable in an earlier appeal before First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Miles.  I conclude that the Judge did properly consider the weight that
    could be given to the documentation as a whole.  He may have  expressed
    himself, somewhat ambiguously, to suggest that he could not  place  any
    weight on documentation because it had been submitted on behalf of  the
    Appellant in the manner expressed: Rather than simply saying he did not
    give weight to that documentary evidence, which  was  manifestly  self-
    serving  and  of,  as  has  been  accepted,  potentially  dubious   and
    unreliable production in Pakistan.  It was not asserted that  they  are
    false documents or fraud has been used, so much as it is accepted  that
    Pakistan may not be a reliable source of such documentation  given  the
    use of false documents, corruption and the production of false FIRs  in
    order to bolster claims.  Accordingly, I do not accept  that  ground  2
    has any merit at all.

9.   As to  the  first  ground.  The  documents,  produced  for  the  appeal
    appeared to be self-serving, and to some extent it  might  be  somewhat
    surprising that a lawyer acting for the Appellant's father, bearing  in
    mind the  claimed  factual  background,  should  disclose  client/legal
    adviser confidential information simply  through  friendship  with  the
    Appellant's brother or, indeed possibly the  Appellant.   Whether  that
    should have happened or is acceptable in terms of the standards of  the
    Pakistan Bar, I do not  speculate,  but  it  seemed  to  me  that  both
    documents, C1 and C3, contained within the  Appellant's  bundle,  raise
    considerable concerns about their real value as  corroboration  of  the
    claim of the Appellant's father lodging a false FIR  and  taking  legal
    advice as claimed.

10.  It seemed to me that  what  the  Judge  was  doing  was  assessing  the
    Appellant's credibility and reliability of those documents as  part  of
    the whole; simply the format of writing up had necessarily  dealt  with
    the matter in the order that he wished, rather than simply, as might be
    taken on a narrow view, to have been reaching conclusions, per  se,  on
    the credibility  of  the  Appellant  and  her  witness,  and  therefore
    rejecting the documentary evidence.  On a fair reading of the decision,
    the Judge carefully considered the claim as it developed  and  for  the
    reasons adequately and sufficiently given addressed the decision in the
    decision why the appeal failed.

11.  I find that the Original Tribunal made no  material  error  of  law  in
    considering the Appellant's appeal.

NOTICE OF DECISION

12.  The appeal is dismissed.  The Original  Tribunal's  decision,  dated  1
    October 2018, stands.

13.  An anonymity direction was made and it is continued.

DIRECTION REGARDING ANONYMITY - RULE 14 OF  THE  TRIBUNAL  PROCEDURE  (UPPER
TRIBUNAL) RULES 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal has failed and therefore no fee award is appropriate.

Signed                                  Date 9 January 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey
