
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-SAR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10305/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 13 March 2020                     |On 24 March 2020                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                     RE
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Wilford,
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant was born in 1988 and is a male citizen of  Kyrgystan.  He
    appealed to the First-tier Tribunal against a decision of the Secretary
    of  State  dated  15  August  2018   refusing   his   application   for
    international  protection.  The  First-tier  Tribunal,  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 24 September 2019, dismissed his appeal.  The  appellant
    now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. I find that the appeal should be allowed and the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal set aside. The first ground of appeal  asserts  that  the
    judge made a number of negative credibility findings on the appellant's
    evidence on matters which had not been raised by the Secretary of State
    in the refusal letter and which had not been addressed at  the  hearing
    during cross-examination. These included the reasons why the  appellant
    chose to change his name in September 2014 (when the first instance  of
    alleged  persecution  took  place  in  December  2014)  and   why   the
    appellant's evidence regarding his  attendance  at  hospital  different
    from that of the hospital records. It is clear that the judge  attached
    significant  weight  to  what   he   considered   to   be   significant
    inconsistencies in the appellant's  evidence,  describing  the  matters
    concerned  as  'indicative  of  the   appellant's   account   being   a
    fabrication' and the inconsistencies  as  'glaring...  significant  and
    inexplicable.' Both parties accept that the appellant was not given any
    opportunity to address concerns of the judge of which they were  wholly
    unaware before and during the hearing and which had not been raised  at
    any time before the judge prepared his decision  for  promulgation.  In
    the circumstances, there has been a procedural irregularity  which  has
    effectively denied the appellant a fair hearing of his appeal.

 3. I do not propose to consider the other grounds given that  I  have  set
    aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal and do not  preserve  any
    of the findings of fact. There will need to be a hearing de novo  which
    is best conducted in the First-tier Tribunal.

    Notice of Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  is  set  aside.  None  of  the
    findings of fact shall stand. The appeal is returned to the  First-tier
    Tribunal for that Tribunal to hear the appeal de novo and to remake the
    decision.


Signed                                           Date 13 March 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Lane



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.
