
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10497/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 5th January 2018                       |On 26th January 2018              |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                                    [K M]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss Warren, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Iraq born on [  ]  1984.   The  Appellant
    claims to have left Iraq in July or August 2015, to have entered the UK
    illegally concealed in a lorry and was encountered by  police  on  16th
    December 2015 - claiming asylum on the same day.  The Appellant's claim
    for asylum is based upon a fear that his  father  wishes  to  take  his
    children off him and send them to his family  and  have  the  Appellant
    remarried.  The Appellant asked to be recognised as a  refugee  on  the
    basis that she had a well-founded fear of persecution in  Iraq  on  the
    basis of her membership of a particular  social  group,  namely  single
    mothers in Iraq and due to the problems she had  experienced  with  her
    father and her husband's family.  That application was refused  by  the
    Secretary of State by Notice of Refusal dated 16th April 2016.

 2. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Durance sitting at Manchester on 22nd June  2017.   In  a
    decision and reasons promulgated  on  5th  July  2017  the  Appellant's
    appeal was dismissed.  Grounds of  Appeal  were  lodged  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  Those grounds contended:-

      i) That the judge had failed to deal  with  the  question  of  Article
         15(c)/humanitarian protection.

     ii) That the judge had failed to consider the  best  interests  of  the
         children as he has a statutory duty to do by virtue of  Section  55
         of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009.

    iii) That the judge made findings of fact  in  relation  to  the  asylum
         claim that were not open to him on the evidence.

     iv) In coming to the conclusion that the Appellant  could  relocate  to
         the IKR the judge gave  inadequate  consideration  to  the  factors
         relevant to  the  conclusion  that  the  Appellant  and  her  three
         children could reasonably relocate there.

 3. On 2nd October 2017 Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman  sitting  as  a
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal granted permission to appeal.  On  6th
    November 2017 the Secretary of State responded to the Grounds of Appeal
    under Rule 24.  It is on that basis that the appeal comes before me  to
    determine whether or not there is  a  material  error  of  law  in  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge.  The  Appellant  appears  by
    her instructed Counsel Miss Warren.  Miss Warren is familiar with  this
    matter.  She appeared before the First-tier Tribunal and  she  is  also
    the author of the Grounds of Appeal.  The Respondent appears by a  Home
    Office Presenting Officer, Mr Bates.

Submission/Discussion

 4. I start by noting that the Appellant has three children,  all  of  whom
    are dependent upon her claim.  She has  stated  that  she  is  a  Sunni
    Muslim and that she left Iraq  due  to  differences  with  her  in-laws
    following the death of her husband and that her marriage brought an end
    to a clan/land based dispute.  Further she  emphasises  that  her  late
    husband was a Shia Muslim while she is a Sunni Muslim.

 5. I note the above factors.  Miss Warren starts by emphasising that  this
    is not a case of returning to the IKR and that Kirkuk is  not  part  of
    the IKR.  She emphasises the Appellant has never lived anywhere else so
    if she is to be returned other than to her home she would be moving  to
    a fresh area.  She submits that the judge  did  not  consider  internal
    relocation and consequently the whole issue of humanitarian  protection
    was not considered and that the only consideration the judge  gives  to
    the possibility of the family being able to relocate is to be found  at
    paragraph 51(f) where he states

         "She has male family members who can look out for her interests  in
         the IKR and she will not be a lone female without family support.".



    Miss Warren points out that the judge has accepted that  the  Appellant
    is from Kirkuk and consequently it follows this  is  where  her  family
    members are.  She points out that the evidence of the  Appellant  which
    was unchallenged in the determination is that she has never visited the
    IKR and knows no one there.  Consequently she submits that the  finding
    at paragraph 51(f) is unsustainable.  Further she submits  that  it  is
    inappropriate  for  the  judge  to  have  dealt  with  a   humanitarian
    protection claim as a mere presumption when dismissing an asylum claim.
     She notes the contentions made by the Secretary of  State  within  the
    Rule 24 response, particularly by reference to the decision of  Amin  v
    SSHD [2017] EWHC 2417 (Admin)  and  fails  to  see  how  this  case  is
    applicable in the present circumstances.  This is not an issue that  is
    particularly addressed by Mr Bates for good reason and  I  accept  that
    whilst Amin may remain good law it can be factually distinguished  from
    the present case.

 6. Miss Warren then turns to  what  she  considers  to  be  a  substantial
    failure of the First-tier Tribunal Judge, namely to consider  the  best
    interests of the children, reminding me that the Appellant  is  a  lone
    mother and that the decision is silent with regards to the position  of
    the children and submits that they cannot merely be  considered  as  an
    adjunct to the Appellant's appeal.  She takes me to paragraph 49 of the
    decision and submits that it is very difficult to follow what the judge
    is trying to say here  and  opposes  her  view  the  paragraph  has  no
    relevance to the current scenario.  She points out that it is incumbent
    upon the judge to come to a decision as to whether or not return is  in
    the children's best interests or not and that the judge has  failed  to
    do so.

 7. Turning to the asylum claim she notes that  the  judge  has  found  the
    Appellant not to be credible.  She submits there is a limit to  what  a
    judge should presume and that he has made findings that are not open to
    him.  She specifically takes  me  to  paragraph  40  of  the  decision,
    pointing out that there is no evidence that the Appellant left  with  a
    male  relative  and  she  has  no  idea  how  the  judge  reached  that
    conclusion.  Further she takes me  to  paragraph  36  where  the  issue
    relating to the question of the passports being used particularly those
    of the children was not even in evidence at the hearing  and  that  the
    judge has made presumptions that he was not entitled to.  Reference  is
    made to the husband's activities with the militia and  the  Appellant's
    apparent lack of  knowledge.   The  Judge  has  made  conclusions,  she
    submits, that he was not entitled to and that he should have had regard
    to the fact the Appellant was living in a patriarchal society.  Further
    she reminds me that the Appellant was fleeing from male relatives.  She
    asks me to conclude that the decision has substantial errors of law  in
    it and to set it aside and to remit the matter back to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for rehearing.

 8. In response Mr Bates  seeks  to  rely  on  the  Rule  24.   So  far  as
    credibility is concerned he takes me to the issue of the passports  and
    that that was raised in the Record of Proceedings.  He submits that the
    judge has made strong credibility findings at paragraph 36 and that  it
    was open to the judge on the evidence to assess whether or not  it  was
    credible that the passports would have been taken to the hospital.   He
    further  submits  the  judge  goes  on  at  paragraph  43  to  consider
    discrepancies in respect of when the  Appellant  got  married  and  the
    nature of her husband's activities and that it would be reasonable even
    in a patriarchal society for the  Appellant  to  have  known  that  her
    husband was involved in either Sunni or Shia activities.

 9. So far as the best interests of the children are  concerned  he  points
    out that the family unit has only  been  in  the  UK  since  2015.   He
    accepts that as they are not qualifying children the Tribunal only  had
    to deal with the issue of return.  Therefore he  submits  there  is  no
    material error because  the  Appellant  would  be  returning  with  her
    children.  He takes me to the finding at paragraph 51(c) and emphasises
    that the judge has given his reasons as to why he feels he  can  depart
    from country guidance, bearing in mind that Kirkuk has  been  liberated
    from ISIS and that the judge was entitled to do this.  He further notes
    that the judge has found that the Appellant has  a  wealthy  family  in
    Iraq and submits that the position that the Appellant finds herself  in
    re an ability to return is even stronger today now that ISIS  has  been
    eradicated.  It is reasonable, he submits, to assume that the Appellant
    can fly to Irbil and reconnect with her family.  He submits the judge's
    findings are reasonable and that the Appellant  would  not  be  a  lone
    female with children but would be able to  return  to  Kirkuk  and  her
    family.  He submits that there is no difficulty now travelling from the
    IKR to Kirkuk and the children's best interests are covered by it being
    implicit that they would be travelling with their mother.   He  submits
    that there  would  be  wealthy  family  support  and  therefore  it  is
    questionable whether there  would  be  any  risk  pursuant  to  Article
    (15(c)).

The Law

10.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

11. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings on Error of Law

12. I have recited in  considerable  detail  the  submissions  of  the  two
    parties in this matter.  From this it is necessary to draw conclusions.
     In some areas I agree with Mr Bates's submissions,  particularly  with
    regard to the best interests of the children not being addressed by the
    judge.  It is implicit that they would be travelling with their mother.



13. However whilst noting  the  other  issues  raised  by  Mr  Bates  I  am
    satisfied that there are errors of law and that they are material.   It
    is incumbent upon the judge  to  deal  with  the  question  of  Article
    15(c)/humanitarian  protection   and   the   judge   has   made   scant
    consideration of this particular issue.  Further  the  judge  has  made
    strong findings on credibility  without  necessarily  the  evidence  to
    support them.  It is appropriate when a  judge  carries  out  a  proper
    approach to credibility that an assessment of the evidence and  of  the
    general  claim  is  made  and  that  this  can  include  the   internal
    consistency of the claim, the inherent plausibility of it and  external
    factors of  the  sort  typically  found  in  country  guidance.   I  do
    acknowledge that theoretically a claimant need do no  more  than  state
    his or her claim  but  that  claim  still  needs  to  be  examined  for
    consistency and inherent plausibility.  Looking at the findings made by
    the judge, in particular at  paragraphs  36  and  40  they  are  strong
    findings.  There is no evidence that the Appellant  left  with  a  male
    relative and whilst the judge is  open  to  make  findings  of  adverse
    credibility he has to give his reasons and these have not been properly
    given in this case, particularly bearing in mind the assertion that  is
    made that we are dealing with a patriarchal society.  That reflects  on
    some of the judge's findings.  I accept that the judge has made certain
    findings with regard to whether or not the Appellant would or would not
    have known that her husband was mixing  with  Sunni  or  Shia  militia.
    Again there is no evidence on  that  point  but  the  judge  heard  the
    evidence and he made findings on this particular aspect that I think he
    is entitled to.

14. So far as the return is concerned I have already indicated that I think
    that this is open to  the  judge  insofar  as  the  children  would  be
    returning with their mother.  I do not find that the finding  paragraph
    51(f) sits with the evidence that has been presented to me, namely that
    there are male family members to whom she can turn.   AA  is  authority
    for saying that it is necessary to look at each case on its  facts  and
    on the evidence and the Appellant appears to firmly rely  on  the  fact
    she has no friends and family in the IKR per se.  I find  the  failings
    of the judge to rule on this particular aspect to be  material  and  to
    constitute an error of law.

15. This is one of those cases where  consequently  some  of  the  findings
    reflect errors of law whereas others do not.  However in the  interests
    of justice the correct approach is to remit  the  matter  back  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal for rehearing with none of the findings of fact  to
    stand having found that there are material errors of law that taint the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge.  That is not to say - for it
    is a matter for another judge on another day - that another judge will
    not come to exactly the same conclusions to those of the original First-
    tier Tribunal Judge.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge contains  material  errors  of
law and is set aside.  Directions are given hereinafter  for  the  rehearing
of this matter.

 1) On finding that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge  contains
    a material error of law the decision is set  aside  with  none  of  the
    findings of fact to stand.

 2) The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal sitting at Manchester
    on the first available date 28 days hence with an ELH of  three  hours.
    The appeal is to be before any First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  other  than
    Immigration Judge Durance.

 3) That there be leave to either party to file  and  serve  an  up-to-date
    bundle of subjective and/or objective evidence upon which they seek  to
    rely at least 28 days prior to the restored hearing.

 4) That a Kurdish (Sorani) interpreter do attend the restored hearing.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 15 January 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.


Signed                              Date 15 January 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris


