
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/10193/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 30 November 2018                |On 12 December 2018                |
|                                   |                                   |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE


                                   Between

                                   AKO [A]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Childs (counsel) instructed by CK Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and  evidence  I
do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.


2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  the  decision  of  First-tier
Tribunal Judge  Carroll  promulgated  on  26/04/2018,  which  dismissed  the
Appellant's appeal on all grounds.

Background


3. The Appellant was born on 03/12/2001  and  is  a  national  of  Iran.  On
29/09/2017 the Secretary of State refused the Appellant's  protection  claim
but granted discretionary  leave  to  remain  in  the  UK  until  12/12/2018
because the appellant was an unaccompanied minor.

The Judge's Decision

4. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge Carroll ("the Judge") dismissed the appeal  against  the  Respondent's
decision. Grounds of appeal were  lodged  and  on  16/10/2018  Deputy  Upper
Tribunal Judge Chapman gave permission to appeal stating inter alia

    "4. Contrary to the assertion in ground 1, the Judge  provided  reasons
    for her findings at [19](a) -(i) albeit she asserts  that  "aspects  of
    his  evidence  were  characterised  by  extreme  evasiveness"   without
    identifying which aspects, which does raise an arguable error  of  law,
    albeit she directed herself to  make  allowances  for  the  appellant's
    youth. The weight to be attached to the expert and background evidence,
    which the Judge recorded at [11] and [12] is a matter  for  the  Judge,
    however. It is arguable that  she  failed  to  record  any  consistency
    between the appellant's account and that evidence and factor that  into
    her assessment of credibility. In respect of the appellant's  brother's
    claim, the Judge was  entitled  to  take  account  of  the  discrepancy
    between the oral evidence, when he said that he was in  Gloucestershire
    and he believed that he had had a hearing on  17  April  2018  and  his
    witness statement when he stated that he had no contact with him.


    5. Permission to appeal is granted, however, whether any of the  issues
    raised amount to material errors of law will be a matter for the  Upper
    Tribunal Judge hearing the appeal."

The hearing

5. (a) For the appellant, Ms Childs moved the grounds of  appeal.  She  told
me that the Judge's credibility assessment is flawed. She took  me  to  [19]
of the decision and  told  me  that  although  the  Judge  acknowledges  the
appellant's apparent youth, the Judge fails to follow the guidance given  in
KS  (benefit of the doubt)  [2014]  EWCA  Civ  10.  She  told  me  that  the
appellant's account is supported by  an  expert  report  and  by  background
materials, but the Judge does not place weight on the  supporting  evidence;
instead the Judge is critical of a child's performance as a witness.

(b) Ms Childs told  me  that  the  Judge  provided  inadequate  reasons  for
rejecting  the  appellant's  account  of  finding  that  the  appellant   is
"extremely evasive". She told me that the second sentence  of  [19]  is  not
explained and  has  no  support.  She  told  me  that  the  Judge's  opening
sentences of [19] are wrong  and  infect  the  Judge's  overall  credibility
assessment

(c) Ms Childs told  me  that  the  Judge  placed  too  much  weight  on  the
appellant's  inability  to   comply   with   directions   to   provide   the
determination in his brother's appeal, and  the  Judge  was  wrong  to  make
adverse credibility findings because the appellant's brother did  not  offer
evidence in this appellant's appeal. She urged me to set the decision  aside
but to preserve the findings in relation to the appellant's nationality.

6. For the respondent, Mr  Bramble  told  me  that  the  decision  does  not
contain errors, material or otherwise. He took me straight to  [19]  of  the
decision and told me that [19] contains adequate  reasons  for  the  Judge's
decision. He told me the Judge has written a carefully  balanced  and  well-
reasoned decision containing sufficient credibility  findings.  He  told  me
that the Judge's finding at [19] that the appellant was evasive refers  back
to a finding [17] and is adequately supported. He urged me  to  dismiss  the
appeal and allow the decision to stand.

Analysis

7. At [11] the Judge quotes from background materials.  At  [12]  the  Judge
rehearses paragraphs from a report prepared  by  Dr  Fatah.  The  background
materials and Dr Fatah's report confirm that there is  a  significant  trade
in smuggling across the Iranian border. The appellant claims that he  is  an
Iranian Kurd who became involved in smuggling at a young age.

8. The appellant was born on December 2001. He left  Iran  just  before  his
14th birthday. He claimed asylum  in  January  2016,  just  after  his  15th
birthday. The appellant's asylum interview took place on 12 July  2016  when
the appellant was 15. The appellant recounts events said  to  have  happened
in November 2015, when he was 13 years and 11 months old.

9. Between  [13]  and  [18]  the  Judge  considers  the  dispute  about  the
appellant's nationality. At [18] the Judge concludes that the  appellant  is
an Iranian national. At [19]  the  Judge  considers  the  substance  of  the
appellant's claim and assesses his credibility. In the second  sentence  the
Judge says

    "As  I  have  noted  above,  however,  aspects  of  his  evidence  were
    characterised by extreme evasiveness and I am not  satisfied  that  the
    appellant is credible ..."

10. The only  other  reference  to  evasiveness  is  at  [17],  where,  when
discussing how the appellant obtained a birth certificate, the Judge says

    "Much of the evidence given by the appellant  in  the  context  of  the
    obtaining and receipt of this document  was  characterised  by  extreme
    evasiveness ..."

11. The Judge does not  explain  why  she  concludes  that  the  appellant's
evidence is tainted by extreme evasiveness. The Judge does not say  why  she
finds the appellant to be not just evasive, but evasive in the extreme.

12. At [19] the Judge sets out her credibility findings. In KS  (benefit  of
doubt) [2014] UKUT 00552 it was held that the proposition in  paragraph  219
of the UNHCR Handbook, that when assessing the evidence of minors there  may
need to be a "liberal application of the benefit of the doubt" is  also  not
to be regarded as a rule  of  law  or,  indeed,  a  statement  of  universal
application. As a reminder about what the examiner should bear  in  mind  at
the end point of an assessment of credibility, the proposition adds  nothing
of substance to the lower standard of proof. If, for example,  an  applicant
possesses the same maturity as an  adult,  it  may  not  be  appropriate  to
resort to a liberal application of the benefit of the doubt.

13.  KS also sets out the principles where more  weight  must  be  given  to
objective indications of risk than to a child's state  of  mind.  The  Judge
quotes from objective materials and from Dr Fatah's  report,  but  does  not
factor the background materials and  the  expert  report  into  the  overall
assessment of either the appellant's credibility or risk on return.

14. The problem is that the Judge's credibility  assessment  is  incomplete.
At [19] she sets  out  criticisms  of  the  child's  evidence.  The  various
strands of the child's evidence are given when he was 15  and  16  years  of
age and refer back to recollection of incidents when he  was  less  than  14
years of age. The Judge finds that the appellant  is  an  Iranian  national,
the Judge quotes from background and  expert  materials  which  support  the
appellant's account, but no weight is  given  to  the  strands  of  evidence
which support the appellant. No attempt is made to reconcile the strands  of
evidence which support the appellant with  the  Judge's  criticisms  of  the
appellant's evidence at [19].

15. Because  the  credibility  assessment  is  incomplete  the  decision  is
tainted by a material error of law. I set the  decision  aside.  I  consider
whether I can substitute my own decision  but  find  I  cannot  because  the
bundle which was before the First-tier Tribunal is not before me.  All  that
I have is the  respondent's  bundle.  A  further  fact-finding  exercise  is
necessary because it is the Judge's credibility  findings  that  create  the
material error of law.

Remittal to First-Tier Tribunal

16. Under Part 3 paragraph 7.2(b) of the Upper Tribunal  Practice  Statement
of the 25th of September 2012 the case may be  remitted  to  the  First-tier
Tribunal if the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that:

    (a) the effect of the error has been to  deprive  a  party  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or  other  opportunity  for  that
    party's case to be put to and considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or



    (b) the nature  or  extent  of  any  judicial  fact  finding  which  is
    necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be re-made is such
    that, having regard to the  overriding  objective  in  rule  2,  it  is
    appropriate to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

17. In this case I have determined that the case should be remitted  because
a new fact-finding exercise is required.  None of the findings of  fact  are
to stand and a complete re hearing is necessary.

18. I remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal sitting  at  Taylor  House
to be heard before any First-tier Judge other than Judge Carroll.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is tainted  by  material  errors  of
law.

I set aside the Judge's decision promulgated on 26 April  2018.  The  appeal
is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be determined of new.

Signed
                       Date 7 December 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle


