

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                   Appeal Number:
PA/10948/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                       |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated: |
|On 31st May 2019                        |  On 8th August 2019              |
|                                        |                                  |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY


                                   Between

                                 EDRIS AZIZ
                          (Anonymity NOT DIRECTED)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:      Mr J Greer (Counsel)
For the Respondent:     Mr M Diwnycz (Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    On 30 August  2018  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  to  grant  the
       claimant  international  protection.  The  claimant   appealed   that
       decision to the First-tier Tribunal (the tribunal) but on 5  December
       2018, following a hearing of 9 November 2018, the tribunal  dismissed
       the claimant's appeal. Its written reasons for doing so are  dated  5
       December 2018 and its written decision was sent to the parties on  21
       December 2018. A successful application for permission to  appeal  to
       the Upper Tribunal followed and, on 28 March 2019, I  set  aside  the
       tribunal's decision whilst preserving certain of  its  findings  (see
       below). I directed that the decision should be remade  by  the  Upper
       Tribunal after a further hearing. That hearing took place, before me,
       on 31 May 2019. Representation at that hearing was  as  stated  above
       and I am grateful  to  each  representative  for  their  considerable
       assistance. What follows is an explanation of how I have  remade  the
       decision and why I have done so in the terms that I have.

2.    By way of background, the claimant is a national of  Iraq  and  is  of
       Kurdish ethnicity. He says he is a Sunni Muslim. It appears  that  he
       has previously given his date of birth as being 29 June 1998 but  his
       birthdate has officially been recorded as 1 January  1997.  Whichever
       is right he is clearly, by now, an adult. He is from Makhmour (though
       it is sometimes spelt differently) which is a town.  There  has  been
       some dispute and some misunderstanding in this  case  as  to  whether
       Makhmour  is  located  in  the  Erbil  Governorate  or  the   Ninewah
       Governorate. That matter does now seem to  have  been  resolved  (see
       below). It also now seems to be accepted that Makhmour is not  inside
       the part of Iraq  under  Kurdish  administrative  control  (the  IKR)
       though  when  the  Secretary  of  State   refused   the   claim   for
       international protection he appeared to  be  under  the  apprehension
       that it was (see the decision letter of 30 August 2018).

3.    The claimant entered the United Kingdom (UK) illegally,  on  19  April
       2015 having undertaken a journey  from  Iraq  via  various  countries
       including Turkey, Austria and Germany. It is recorded that he claimed
       asylum on 19 April 2015 and after an initial refusal on the basis  of
       "third country grounds" the Secretary  of  State  accepted  that  his
       claim should be considered and decided  in  the  UK.  In  making  his
       claim, the claimant asserted that he  had  a  brother  who  had  been
       involved with the Peshmerga in Iraq but who had angered his Peshmerga
       colleagues because he had informed the Kurdish  authorities  in  Iraq
       that the Peshmerga had been  doing  business  with  the  organisation
       sometimes referred to as ISIS. He explained that, in consequence, the
       Peshmerga wished to harm his brother but that his  brother  had  fled
       and the claimant thought they would harm him  instead.  It  was  also
       asserted on the claimant's behalf that Makhmour is located in what is
       to be regarded as a "contested area" (about which I  shall  say  more
       below) so that if he were to return there he would be exposed to  the
       risk envisaged in Article 15c of the Qualification Directive 2011/ 95
       EU. It was also argued on behalf of the claimant,  at  least  at  the
       appeal stage though perhaps not before, that he  did  not  possess  a
       CSID card (a crucial identity document in Iraq) and would not be able
       to obtain one. That was said  to  be  relevant  to  the  question  of
       whether he might be destitute  on  return  or  whether  it  would  be
       unreasonable or unduly harsh to require him  to  internally  relocate
       within Iraq. The Secretary of State refused the claim because he  did
       not believe the account of events concerning the claimant's  brother;
       because he did not accept that the claimant's home area  was  located
       in what was now to be regarded  as  a  contested  area;  and  because
       anyway he thought the claimant could safely relocate  somewhere  else
       in Iraq. He also thought he either his family had his  CSID  card  or
       that he would be able to get a new one. As to the  claimant's  family
       there was an issue as to where  his  close  family  members  are  now
       located. The claimant had asserted, when making his  claim  and  when
       appealing to  the  tribunal,  that  they  were  in  Turkey,  but  the
       Secretary of State believed that they were still in Iraq.

4.    The tribunal, like  the  Secretary  of  State,  did  not  believe  the
       claimant's account of events concerning his being at risk as a result
       of his  brother's  behaviour.  It  effectively  concluded  that  that
       account had simply been concocted. It did accept  that  the  claimant
       was from Makhmour but it found, on the basis of what it  regarded  as
       quite limited evidence on the point which had been presented  to  it,
       that it was located in the Erbil Governorate which was  not  and  had
       not been a contested area and that, in any  event,  even  if  it  was
       located in the Ninewah Governorate which had been a  contested  area,
       background country material indicated that it was no longer  such  an
       area. As to identity documentation it  concluded  that  the  claimant
       would be able to "access his CSID card in Erbil". So,  in  truth,  it
       found against the claimant on all of the key assertions  underpinning
       his claim to be entitled to international protection.

5.    I explained why I was setting aside the tribunal's decision  and  what
       I was preserving of its findings, in my decision of 28 March 2019. It
       is not necessary for me to go through  all  of  that  again  in  this
       decision. But as to my  reasons  for  setting  aside  the  tribunal's
       decision, I decided it had erred in failing to  adequately  consider,
       in light of what had been said by the Upper Tribunal  in  AAH  (Iraqi
       Kurds - internal relocation) CG 2018 [UKUT]  231  (IAC)  whether  the
       claimant, if he did return to Iraq and go to  live  in  Erbil,  would
       face  destitution  and,  therefore,  conditions  which  would  breach
       Article 3 of the European Convention on Human Rights  (ECHR)  or,  if
       moving to Erbil amounted to internal  relocation,  whether  requiring
       him to so relocate would be  unreasonable  or  unduly  harsh.  But  I
       specifically  preserved  findings  the  tribunal  had  made  in   its
       penultimate sentence of paragraph 17 of its written reasons and in  a
       passage running from paragraph 21 to 24 of those written reasons. So,
       I  preserved  the  tribunal's  finding  that  the  claimant  is  from
       Makhmour. I preserved its finding that the claimant was not  at  risk
       in consequence of his brother's claimed activities because such was a
       fabrication. I preserved its finding that his remaining close  family
       members were in Iraq and not in Turkey.  I  preserved  the  effective
       finding that he was still in touch with his family in Iraq  and  that
       that family had fled to a camp in Erbil. I preserved what amounted to
       a finding that the claimant had told the tribunal that his mother had
       "their CSID cards in Erbil" within their control. I did not  preserve
       anything else.

6.    I shall refer to the hearing which took place  before  me  on  31  May
       2019 as the "remaking hearing". At that hearing I heard oral evidence
       from the claimant (given with the assistance  of  a  Kurdish  Sorani-
       speaking interpreter whom he appeared to understand  throughout)  and
       oral submissions from the two representatives. I had before me at the
       hearing the various documents which had been before the tribunal when
       it had decided the appeal along with further documentation  including
       maps and geographical evidence concerning the  location  of  Makhmour
       and some background country  material  concerning  the  security  and
       humanitarian situation in various parts of Iraq  including  the  area
       where Makhmour is located.

7.    In remaking the decision, I have taken into account all  of  the  oral
       evidence I have heard and all of the  documentation  which  has  been
       placed before me. I have similarly taken into account  the  competing
       submissions which have  been  made  to  me  by  the  representatives.
       Insofar as it has been necessary for me to  consider  the  claimant's
       credibility, I have done so on the basis of a holistic  consideration
       of the evidence. I have reminded myself, as to that, that I should be
       cautious in rejecting what is said by an  anxious  and  inexperienced
       asylum seeker. As to the burden of proof I have reminded myself that,
       in cases where international protection is being sought, that  burden
       rests with the claimant. As to the standard of proof I have  reminded
       myself that I have to apply the lower  standard  of  proof  which  is
       often termed "the real risk test".

8.    As I say I have preserved  the  finding  that  the  claimant  is  from
       Makhmour. It has not been disputed, or does not  ever  seem  to  have
       been disputed, that the claimant is Kurdish, that  he  is  Iraqi  and
       that he is a Sunni Muslim. I did not preserve any finding made by the
       tribunal concerning the location of Makhmour. So, that  is  a  matter
       which I must decide but, first of all, I shall explain why it appears
       that the matter is of some importance.

9.    In AA (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG  [2015]  UKUT  000544  (IAC)  the  Upper
       Tribunal undertook a most  thorough  analysis  of  the  security  and
       humanitarian situation then prevailing in Iraq for  the  purposes  of
       issuing Country  Guidance.  It  identified  a  number  of  "contested
       areas", within Iraq where it was  said  that  there  was  an  intense
       internal armed conflict involving government security forces, various
       militias, and ISIS (though it  called  that  organisation  ISIL).  It
       decided that any civilian returned to any such an area would,  solely
       on account of his presence there, face a real risk of being subjected
       to indiscriminate violence amounting to serious harm within the scope
       of Article 15c. It identified the contested areas as  comprising  the
       governorates of Ambar, Diyala, Kirkuk, Ninewah and Salah  Al-Din.  It
       also said that the same risk was present  in  parts  of  the  Baghdad
       Belts (but not Baghdad City). It decided that  the  degree  of  armed
       conflict in the remainder in Iraq was not such as to give rise to the
       risk envisaged by Article 15c. So, if a claimant is from a  contested
       area as identified in AA and if it cannot be shown that there  should
       be a departure from Country Guidance, perhaps because of a change  in
       prevailing country conditions, then it will be concluded that such  a
       person cannot safely return to his home area. That means  if  such  a
       person cannot be required to take advantage  of  an  internal  flight
       alternative  he/she  will  succeed  in  establishing  entitlement  to
       humanitarian protection.

10.   Mr Diwnycz asserted that maps he  produced  to  me  demonstrated  that
       Makhmour is located outside of the  IKR  (despite  the  Secretary  of
       State seemingly thinking  something  different  when  the  claim  for
       international protection was refused) but was, nevertheless,  located
       within the Erbil Governorate. That is, indeed, what the  maps  appear
       to demonstrate and I did  not  understand  Mr  Greer  to  be  arguing
       otherwise before me,  although  he  had  argued  something  different
       before  the  tribunal.   The   various   shifts   in   position   are
       understandable because the matter is not as  straightforward  as  one
       might expect. But I am satisfied that as a question of the  technical
       location  of  Makhmour  the  maps  do  demonstrate  what  Mr  Diwnycz
       asserted. I find, therefore, that Makhmour is located  close  to  but
       not within the Ninewah Governorate. It has never been argued that  it
       falls within any of the other geographical areas identified in AA  as
       contested areas. So, I find that the claimant is  not  from  an  area
       which was identified as a contested area by the Upper Tribunal in AA.

11.   There is a stringent test which applies when a tribunal  or  when  the
       Upper Tribunal, if making findings itself,  must  apply  when  it  is
       considering whether to depart from Country Guidance. But  because  of
       what I have just decided, it is not necessary for me to  ask  whether
       departure from Country Guidance is something I should or  should  not
       do. Had it been otherwise I would have had to  apply  that  stringent
       test and if I had concluded it was  not  met  I  would  have  had  to
       conclude that Makhmour is in a  contested  area  where  there  is  an
       Article 15c risk. But my decision is that he is not from one of those
       areas which were properly to  be  characterised  as  contested  as  a
       result of what was said in AA.

12.   That is not, however, the end of my consideration as to  the  security
       and humanitarian situation in Makhmour and its surrounding areas.  Mr
       Greer took me to some background  material  concerning  Makhmour.  In
       particular, in his oral submissions to me, he drew  to  my  attention
       the content of a European Asylum Support  Office  Country  of  Origin
       Information  Report  of  11  March  2019  excerpts  from  which  were
       contained in  a  supplementary  bundle  provided  on  behalf  of  the
       claimant. He also referred me to another  such  report  of  the  same
       date. Those reports comprised items 6  and  8  of  the  supplementary
       bundle. Mr Greer argued that that material demonstrated that the area
       around Makhmour was one of the few remaining areas which were  "under
       the cosh from ISIS" and he argued that the Article 15c risk  remained
       in that area. That might have been intended as an argument as to  why
       I should not depart from Country Guidance but given what I have found
       regarding the location of Makhmour  and  the  identification  of  the
       specific contested areas in AA, I think that now translates  into  an
       argument that there is, in fact, a prevailing  Article  15c  risk  in
       Makhmour. At least, that is how I have approached matters.

13.   In the above report it is said that the "ISW", which I think  must  be
       an abbreviation for the Institute for the Study of War, has  reported
       that while ISIS (once again the term ISIL is used)  no  longer  holds
       territory, it nevertheless exerts  "a  great  deal  of  psychological
       pressure over the  population"  in  numerous  districts.  ISW  itself
       identifies what it  calls  "contested"  areas  as  including  "Erbil:
       Makhmour District". ISW, it is said, has expressed the  opinion  that
       in such areas the  civilian  population  cannot  rely  upon  security
       forces to provide adequate protection. In the other report  mentioned
       above which bears the same date, Makhmour is identified as a location
       where ISIS has retained  "permanently  operating  attack  cells".  Mr
       Greer also took me to other  material  in  the  supplementary  bundle
       indicating problems  concerning  looting  and  a  recent  history  of
       violent attacks and clashes which took place in  the  region  between
       2014 and 2017. So, I accept  from  that  material  that  the  current
       situation in Makhmour is one involving a degree of insecurity. But  I
       am simply asking myself whether, as things stand  now,  the  evidence
       before me demonstrates that there is currently an Article 15c risk in
       Makhmour. That is a somewhat different question  from  whether  there
       has been a change such as to justify departure from Country Guidance.



14.   The threshold set by Article 15c is a high one  and  that  is  evident
       simply from the words used in that Article itself. What Mr Greer  has
       placed before me demonstrates that there continues to  be  a  limited
       amount of insurgent activity though ISIS does not occupy territory in
       Makhmour or its immediate environs or,  it  now  seems,  anywhere  in
       Iraq. I accept there are problems but, as a  matter  of  judgment,  I
       have concluded that I cannot be satisfied on the material  before  me
       that the high threshold required for Article 15c to apply is met. So,
       I have concluded that if the claimant does return to his home area of
       Makhmour he will not face such a risk.

15.   The above is not sufficient of itself,  though,  for  me  to  conclude
       that the claimant  can  safely  return  to  Makhmour.  There  is  the
       possibility that he might face destitution in Makhmour, or indeed  at
       any place of any internal relocation he might go to, such as to  lead
       to a breach of his rights under Article 3 of the ECHR. As  an  aspect
       of my consideration as to that, I now move on to  make  findings  and
       reach conclusions about what documentation he possesses or is able to
       obtain. To explain briefly why that  is  of  real  significance,  the
       Court of Appeal stressed in its judgment in AA (Iraq) v  SSHD  [2017]
       EWCA Civ 944, that  a  CSID  card  is  a  document  which  should  be
       considered as being essential for life in Iraq especially  for  those
       who lack private resources to access food and basic services. Such  a
       card is, indeed, required for those who wish  to  work  lawfully  and
       access support services and educational and medical services.

16.    As  to  documentation,  the  claimant  had,  according  to  preserved
       findings, told the tribunal  at  the  hearing  of  his  appeal  on  9
       December 2018, that his mother had the family's CSID cards in  Erbil.
       But the tribunal had also noted his contention (though it disbelieved
       him also in preserved findings) that his family had actually fled  to
       Turkey. The claimant  had  been  asked  about  documentation  in  his
       substantive asylum interview. In answer to question 58 he  said  that
       he had previously had a passport. In answer to question 60 he said he
       had previously had other identity documentation  though  he  did  not
       specify which particular type or types of documents. But he said that
       "that group" by which he meant the people he had claimed (dishonestly
       as has been found) had wished to harm him, had  taken  his  documents
       from him. In a witness statement of 28 September 2018, he  said  that
       he did not use any documents to enable him to  leave  Iraq.  In  oral
       evidence before me he said in response to questions put by Mr  Greer,
       that he had left his identity documentation with his mother and  that
       such  included  his  CSID  card  and  what  was  translated  as   his
       "naturalisation certificate of  Iraq"  but  which  was  presumably  a
       nationality certificate. There is nothing to suggest  that  he  is  a
       naturalised citizen of Iraq. In  response  to  questions  put  by  Mr
       Diwnycz, the claimant said that his mother could  not  send  him  his
       CSID card and his nationality certificate from Erbil because  she  is
       not there. He said that when he had last had contact with her she had
       been in Turkey.

17.   It is clear from the above that  the  claimant  has  not  always  been
       consistent about his identity documentation. But, nevertheless he had
       told the tribunal, in effect, that his mother had his CSID  card  and
       he told me in reply to his  own  representative  that  that  was  so.
       Insofar as it is necessary to make my own independent finding on  the
       point, given the existence of the preserved findings anyway,  I  find
       that he did previously have a CSID card and he gave it to his  mother
       for safekeeping when he decided to leave Iraq.

18.   The claimant has asserted on a number of occasions  that  his  family,
       including his mother, went to Turkey. The tribunal  did  not  believe
       him and in preserved findings decided that his family had gone  to  a
       camp in Erbil. The finding that they were not in Turkey was  made  in
       reliance on  an  indication  given  by  the  claimant  himself  in  a
       screening interview that his close family members were, in  fact,  in
       Iraq. The claimant,  before  me,  seemed  to  wish  to  maintain  his
       contention that his family did go to Turkey. But he has to accept the
       preserved findings. In any event, had the matter been a live issue  I
       would have reached the same finding as did the tribunal on the  basis
       of what he had willingly indicated in his screening interview.  There
       does, however, I suppose, remain the possibility  that  although  the
       claimant left his CSID card with his family in Iraq, his family might
       not possess it now. But that is  not  the  claimant's  case.  In  any
       event, a CSID card is, as has been highlighted  above,  an  important
       document and I believe that his family,  his  having  entrusted  them
       with the card, would have made efforts to retain it. I find  that  it
       remains in their possession. I find that they will have it with  them
       in the camp in Erbil.

19.   the claimant does say that (as  I  understand  it)  he  has  now  lost
       contact with his family. In answer to questions put by Mr Diwnycz  he
       said that he had last had contact with his family members  in  either
       2016 or 2017. He had tried to telephone them since but had  not  been
       successful. He said he had approached the Red Cross to  try  to  have
       them traced but those attempts had been unsuccessful. He said he  had
       a letter from the Red Cross about that but he had left  it  at  home.
       Given the preserved findings that his family are not in  Turkey,  the
       claimant  has  been  untruthful  about  their  whereabouts.  It   is,
       therefore, but a small step from that to conclude that  he  has  been
       untruthful about the question of  whether  or  not  he  is  still  in
       contact with them. It is apparent that he is prepared to  mislead  in
       circumstances  where  he  thinks  doing  so  might  secure   him   an
       immigration advantage. Were that not  the  case  he  would  not  have
       concocted the account regarding his brother and the Peshmerga forces.
       I have concluded that the claimant remains in contact with his family
       in Iraq. It follows from that, that there is no reason why they would
       not be able to send to him his CSID card and, indeed, other  identity
       documentation including the nationality certificate he  has  referred
       to.

20.   The above findings are  of  assistance  to  me  with  respect  to  the
       question of whether he  would  face  destitution  and,  consequently,
       treatment which would breach Article 3 of the ECHR,  if  he  were  to
       return to his home area of Makhmour.  He  is,  on  the  face  of  it,
       healthy. He is young. HIs ability to travel through various countries
       and arrive safely in the UK does suggest a degree of resourcefulness.
       He has previously lived in Makhmour and so, in general terms, will be
       familiar with the pattern of life there though I do not underestimate
       the upheaval that there will have been in that area as well  as  many
       other areas of Iraq in recent years. He told me in oral evidence that
       he  had  had  a  school  education   but   had   not   obtained   any
       qualifications. He also told me that he had undertaken some labouring
       work in the past but had not performed any skilled work.  I  was  not
       taken to any material specifically addressing the economic  situation
       and the employment situation in Makhmour as opposed to, for  example,
       the IKR. But given  the  well  documented  upheaval  in  Iraq  it  is
       reasonable to suppose that there is nothing  approaching  a  thriving
       economy as matters stand, in Makhmour and its immediate environs. But
       the claimant does have his  CSID  card  and  will,  if  he  can  find
       employment, be able to work and access services in Iraq. He did  give
       oral evidence to the effect that immediately prior to leaving Iraq he
       had been living in what he described as "a garage". But it  does  not
       follow that that would be  the  situation  he  would  now  face  upon
       return. There are competing arguments with respect to Article 3  here
       but despite matters being quite finely balanced I have concluded that
       given his youth, his demonstrated resourcefulness, the  lack  of  any
       indication of health difficulties and his ability to  have  his  CSID
       card sent to him, requiring him  to  return  to  Makhmour  would  not
       result in his facing conditions which  would  quite  reach  the  high
       threshold required by Article 3 of the ECHR.  So,  my  conclusion  is
       that if he is to return to Makhmour he will not face a real  risk  of
       persecution; he will not face a real risk of serious harm such as  to
       give rise to a grant of humanitarian protection either on  the  basis
       of Article 15c or otherwise; and he will not  face  conditions  which
       will breach Article 3 of the ECHR. Strictly speaking, that is  enough
       to dispose of the claimant's appeal. However,  in  case  I  am  wrong
       about any of the above, I have decided that I should go on to address
       the question of internal flight.

21.   So, if the claimant could not return to his  home  area  of  Makhmour,
       what alternative would be open to him? The usual places of  suggested
       internal relocation for Iraqi Kurds are Baghdad City and the  IKR.  I
       cannot see, though, that the Secretary of State  has  ever  suggested
       that this claimant can relocate to Baghdad. Such was not asserted  in
       the decision letter of 30 August 2018 nor before me. It seems  to  me
       there might have been an argument to say that it would not be  unduly
       harsh to expect the claimant to do that but I do not think  it  right
       that I should pursue that point given that it could have  been  taken
       by the Secretary of State but has not been. So, I  shall  focus  upon
       the possibility of internal flight to the IKR. Indeed, at the hearing
       before me, Mr Greer specifically addressed me on that matter. I  have
       taken into account what he has had to say about  that  and  what  the
       Upper Tribunal had to say about such a possibility in AAH. The  first
       thing to consider is whether, since he will be returned to Baghdad (I
       say that on the basis of my understanding that all  returns  to  Iraq
       are currently to Baghdad) he will be able to travel safely or at  all
       to the IKR border. Here, as with a number of other matters,  the  key
       is the CSID card. He would not be  permitted  to  board  an  internal
       flight from Baghdad to the IKR without one as the Upper Tribunal made
       clear in AAH. But  it  also  made  clear  that,  armed  with  such  a
       document, he would in principle be able to do so and that flights are
       affordable and frequent. Failed asylum seekers are entitled to  apply
       for a grant under the Voluntary Returns Scheme (VRS) which  can  give
       access to a sum amounting to �1500. I am satisfied that the  claimant
       will be able to make his way safely, by air, from Baghdad to the  IKR
       border.

22.   Logically, the next question is whether or not he will be admitted  to
       the IKR. In AAH it was  said  that  Kurdish  persons  seeking  entry,
       subject to security screening, would normally be permitted entry  and
       then be permitted  to  reside  in  the  IKR  with  no  further  legal
       impediments or requirements. It was also said that there would be  no
       sponsorship requirement for those of Kurdish ethnicity.  It  was  not
       argued before me that security screening would be likely to give rise
       to any particular difficulties with respect to this  claimant  and  I
       cannot see that it would. I find, following the guidance in AHH, that
       he would be admitted to the  IKR  and  would  then  be  permitted  to
       lawfully reside there.

23.   There is then the question, an important  one,  of  how  the  claimant
       would be able to survive in the IKR. This is really the  crux  of  my
       internal flight  deliberations.  As  Mr  Greer  points  out,  I  have
       preserved a finding that he has family members including his  mother,
       in a camp in the IKR. That, says Mr Greer, is  something  which  aids
       the claimant because persons who have been reduced  to  living  in  a
       camp are unlikely to be able to provide any practical, in  particular
       financial, assistance. I accept Mr Greer's submission as to  that.  I
       also accept that, as was stated in AAH, the camps in the IKR are now,
       generally speaking, full and unable to take new potential  occupants.
       So, I would conclude that the claimant would  not  be  able  to  take
       advantage of the facility of residing in that camp or any other  such
       camp that there might be in the IKR. I would  also  accept  that  his
       family members would not be in a position,  in  all  probability,  to
       afford him any significant financial assistance  or  to  aid  him  in
       seeking accommodation. But they would though,  I  find,  be  able  to
       afford him emotional support  which  will  not  be  relevant  to  the
       question of destitution but will be of value to him if he is able to,
       in any event, avoid destitution.

24.   Mr Greer makes the point that the claimant has family  members  living
       in the camp who have (presumably because they are  still  there)  not
       been able to find employment and that, according to AAH, unemployment
       amongst IDPs living in the IKR is running at a  rate  of  70%.  Those
       points do resonate. Further, as again identified in  AAH,  rents  for
       apartments tend to be significantly expensive. An alternative  source
       of accommodation might be the "critical shelter arrangements" but, as
       identified in AAH, the conditions in such shelters  vary  and  whilst
       some are capable of providing basic standards such as sanitation  and
       protection from the elements, others are  not.  So,  there  are  some
       significant factors weighing against the argument that it  would  not
       be unduly harsh to expect the claimant to relocate to the IKR.

25.   That said,  as  noted  in  the  context  of  my  consideration  as  to
       destitution in Makhmour, there are some  considerations  which  might
       suggest an opposite conclusion. The claimant, to repeat,  appears  to
       be  healthy  and  is  young.  He  has  demonstrated   a   degree   of
       resourcefulness. Whilst he does not, I accept, possess obvious skills
       or qualifications which would aid him in seeking employment, he  does
       have a CSID card, which may give him advantage over some IDPs seeking
       work, and his relative youth might make  him  more  attractive  to  a
       potential employer. He is Kurdish so speaks an appropriate  language.
       He may be able to benefit from a VRS payment which might afford  some
       assistance with respect to the initial process of resettlement.  Even
       if he had to have resort to a critical shelter  arrangement  it  does
       not appear, from what is said in AAH,  that  all  such  shelters  are
       unable to provide basic requirements.  The  matter  might  be  finely
       balance but, putting all of  that  together,  whilst  life  would  be
       difficult for the claimant in the IKR, it would  not  be  so  to  the
       extent that requiring him to take advantage  of  internal  relocation
       there would be unreasonable or unduly harsh.


26.   In light of the above, therefore, in remaking the decision  I  dismiss
       the claimant's appeal from the Secretary of State's  decision  of  30
       August 2018 refusing to grant him international protection. I  do  so
       because I conclude that he will be able to return to his home area of
       Makhmour and that, in the  alternative,  he  will  be  able  to  take
       advantage of an internal flight alternative.

27.   I have not made an anonymity direction in this case. The tribunal  did
       not do so and no such order was sought before me. Further, I can  see
       no basis for the making of any such direction.


Decision

The claimant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

Anonymity is not directed.


M R Hemingway
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
31 July 2019
