
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/10098/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 30 May 2019                             |On 07 June 2019               |
|                                           |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

                                     FQ
                          ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Holt, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless  the  Upper  Tribunal  or  a
Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  the  original
Appellant identified as FQ.



Introduction

       1. In a decision sent on 18 March 2019 I found that the  decision  of
          the First-tier Tribunal ('FTT') dated 11 October  2018  dismissing
          the appellant's appeal on asylum  grounds  contains  an  error  of
          law.  I now remake the decision.

Background


       2. The appellant, a citizen of Iran of Kurdish ethnic origin,  is  27
          years old.  He claims that he would be persecuted if  returned  to
          Iran because he left illegally and has participated in  sur  place
          pro-Kurdish  rights  activities  whilst  in  the  United   Kingdom
          ('UK').

       3. The appellant initially claimed asylum in the UK  in  2010.   This
          was based upon his and his family's claimed  connections  to  pro-
          Kurdish political activities in  Iran.   In  a  decision  dated  3
          December 2010, FTT Judge Gordon dismissed the  appellant's  appeal
          on asylum grounds, having found the entirety  of  the  appellant's
          account to be a fabrication.

       4.  In  response  to  fresh  claim  submissions  focussing  upon  the
          appellant's sur  place  activities  in  the  UK  after  2010,  the
          respondent refused a further asylum claim in a  decision  dated  7
          August 2018.  In his decision dated 11 October 2018, FTT  Judge  M
          Davies accepted that the  appellant  had  been  involved  in  pro-
          Kurdish  political  activities  in  the  UK,  including  attending
          demonstrations and  Facebook  entries  but  concluded  that  these
          activities  were  not  motivated  by  any  genuine  commitment  to
          Kurdish  activism.    Judge  Davies  found  that   the   appellant
          participated in these  activities  in  bad  faith  and  solely  to
          substantiate an asylum claim and did not  accept  the  appellant's
          claim to have departed Iran illegally and dismissed his appeal  on
          asylum and human rights grounds.

       5. Having already  identified  an  error  of  law  in  Judge  Davies'
          decision, the matter now comes before me to remake the decision.

Evidence

       6. The appellant relied upon a voluminous 593-page bundle  containing
          witness statements from him and two  supporting  witnesses.   This
          included  evidence  of  his  sur   place   pro-Kurdish   political
          activities  dating  back  to  2014  together  with   evidence   of
          extensive pro-Kurdish and anti-Iranian  regime  Facebook  postings
          from January 2017 to shortly before the hearing.


       7. The appellant attended the hearing with his two  witnesses.   They
          each  relied  upon  evidence  of  the   appellant's   longstanding
          participation in pro-Kurdish political  views  that  continued  to
          the present.

Hearing

       8. At the beginning of the hearing, Mr Diwnycz clarified that he  did
          not wish to cross-examine the  appellant  or  his  witnesses,  and
          accepted their evidence on behalf of the respondent.   Mr  Diwnycz
          made it clear that although  the  FTT  did  not  accept  that  the
          appellant departed Iran unlawfully,  the  FTT  did  not  have  the
          advantage of considering  the  initial  screening  interview  from
          2011, and this was now accepted.   Mr  Diwnycz  acknowledged  that
          the FTT did not accept that  the  appellant  participated  in  sur
          place activities in good faith.  However, he noted that there  was
          now  corroborative  and  more  detailed  evidence  concerning  the
          appellant's sur place activities, but in any  event  even  if  the
          sur place activities  were  not  motivated  by  a  genuinely  held
          political opinion, that was likely to make  little  difference  to
          the outcome, in the light of the country guidance  in  HB  (Kurds)
          Iran CG [2018] UKUT 00430 (IAC) (12 Dec 2018).


       9. Mr  Diwnycz  relied  upon  the  respondent's  Country  Policy  and
          Information  Note,  Iran:  Kurds  and  Kurdish  political  groups,
          Version  3.0,  January  2019  ('the  2019  COIN').    Mr   Diwnycz
          confirmed that he did not dispute the country guidance  summarised
          in my 'error of law' decision and submitted  that  the  2019  COIN
          merely confirmed the accuracy of  this  country  guidance  without
          dissenting from it.  For this reason, he did not take  me  to  any
          passage in the 2019 COIN.   He  also  accepted  that  the  country
          guidance specific to Kurds returned to Iraq is set out in  HB  and
          SSH and HR (illegal exit: failed asylum  seeker)  Iran  CG  [2016]
          UKUT 308).  When read with AB  and  Others  (internet  activity  -
          state of evidence) Iran [2015] UKUT 257 (IAC) at [465]  and  [472]
          and BA (Demonstrators in Britain - risk on return) Iran CG  [2011]
          UKUT 36 (IAC) at  [65],  Mr  Diwnycz  accepted  that  the  Iranian
          authorities are concerned less with motivation and more  with  the
          nature and extent of the activities.  Mr  Diwnycz  noted  that  in
          many cases a returnee to Iran might  be  expected  to  delete  his
          Facebook account, but given the length of  time  this  appellant's
          account  had  been  very  active  and  the  number  of   followers
          associated with it, deletion of the account is unlikely to make  a
          difference because its contents  may  have  already  come  to  the
          attention of the Iranian authorities.

      10. Mr Diwnycz acknowledged  that  it  was  very  difficult  to  argue
          against the proposition that this appellant faces a real  risk  of
          persecution, in the light of HB and invited me  to  determine  the
          appeal on the basis of the accepted facts as applied to HB.

      11. Mr Holt relied upon a skeleton  argument  drew  attention  to  the
          nature and extent of the appellant's sur place activity, which  is
          now accepted.

      12. After hearing from both representatives, I indicated  that  I  the
          appeal was allowed, for the reasons I now provide.

Remaking the decision

      13. Having applied the lower  standard  of  proof  to  the  undisputed
          factual matrix, in the light  of  the  relevant  country  guidance
          referred to above, I make the following findings:

              i) As an illegal departee from Iran, the  appellant  shall  be
                 questioned at the point of return in  Iran  -  he  will  be
                 returned without a passport, having never  had  any  -  see
                 [97] of HB.


             ii) The initial  questioning  would  be  for  a  "fairly  brief
                 period" (at [12]  of  SSH  the  Internal  Organisation  for
                 Migration considered  that  in  the  context  of  voluntary
                 returnees, questioning might take a few hours).


            iii) If "particular concerns" arise from activities in  the  UK,
                 then there is a real risk that there would be the  risk  of
                 further  questioning  accompanied  by  ill-treatment.   The
                 assessment of whether "particular concerns" are  likely  to
                 arise turns upon all  the  individual  factors,  considered
                 cumulatively.  However, as  set out in HB, since  2016  the
                 Iranian authorities have become increasingly suspicious of,
                 and sensitive to,  Kurdish  political  activity.  Those  of
                 Kurdish ethnicity  are  thus  regarded  with  even  greater
                 suspicion than hitherto and are  reasonably  likely  to  be
                 subjected to heightened scrutiny on  return  to  Iran.   In
                 addition, the  Iranian  authorities  demonstrate  a  "hair-
                 trigger" approach to those  suspected  to  be  involved  in
                 Kurdish  political  activities  i.e.  the   threshold   for
                 suspicion is low and the likely reaction extreme.


             iv) The appellant would be expected to tell  "the  truth"  when
                 questioned.  This includes, inter alia: (i) the appellant's
                 Kurdish identity; (ii) the respondent's acceptance that  he
                 left  Iran  unlawfully  and   (iii)   the   appellant   has
                 participated in pro-Kurdish / anti-Iranian regime sur place
                 activities in the UK since 2014.   It  is  clear  from  the
                 country  guidance  case-law   that   (i)   and   (ii)   are
                 insufficient to support prospective risk  or  a  reasonable
                 degree of likelihood of "particular concerns" without more,
                 and it is  therefore  necessary  to  carefully  assess  the
                 nature and extent of the appellant's sur place activities.


              v) The appellant's sur place activities include the following:


                  - He has been an extensive poster of pro-Kurdish posts  on
                    Facebook from January 2017.  At  the  time  of  the  FTT
                    hearing  he  had  1052  followers.   He  now  has   2360
                    followers.  I accept that this internet activity at  the
                    more active end of the spectrum.


                  - He has attended numerous pro-Kurdish  demonstrations  in
                    cities throughout the UK from 2014.


             vi) I accept the appellant's  evidence  that  he  is  genuinely
                 committed to  these  political  activities.   He  has  been
                 disbelieved by two Tribunals.  However, they did  not  have
                 the  extensive  evidence  available  to  me  including  the
                 supporting evidence from two apparently credible witnesses,
                 both of whom now have refugee status.   As I have  set  out
                 above Mr Diwnycz did not cross-examine any of the witnesses
                 and accepted that this signalled that  their  evidence  was
                 accepted by the respondent.  Even if I am  wrong,  and  the
                 appellant's activities were undertaken in bad faith, it  is
                 reasonably likely that the Iranian authorities will be less
                 interested in the reasons or motivation for undertaking the
                 activities.  The mere fact of  having  undertaken  the  sur
                 place activities would be sufficient,  when  combined  with
                 the other risk factors to prompt a "hair trigger" approach.




            vii) For these reasons, the authorities are reasonably likely to
                 have "particular concerns" regarding this appellant.

Conclusion

      14. There is a real risk  that  the  Iranian  authorities'  will  have
          "particular concerns"  about  the  appellant,  by  reason  of  the
          factors set out  above.   The  appellant  faces  a  real  risk  of
          persecution because the authorities  will  impute  an  anti-regime
          political opinion to him as a  result  of  a  combination  of  his
          Kurdish ethnic origin, illegal departure and sur place  activities
          (whether undertaken in good faith or not and whether his  Facebook
          account is deleted or not).

Decision

      15.  I  remake  the  decision  by  allowing  the  appeal  on   Refugee
          Convention grounds.


Signed: UTJ Plimmer
Ms M. Plimmer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date:
30 May 2019

