


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
PA/10661/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 12 October 2017                        |On 17 October 2017                |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between

                                salam rashidi
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Basharat Ali instructed by Aman Solicitors
Advocates
     (London) Ltd
For the Respondent:    Ms K Pal, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a national of Iran  born  on  12  December  1987.   He
    arrived in the United Kingdom and claimed asylum on 20 March 2016.  The
    basis of his claim is that on 7 May 2015 he attended a demonstration in
    Mahabat in  protest  against  Ettela'at  because  a  Kurdish  girl  had
    committed suicide following an attempted sexual assault by  members  of
    Ettela'at.  During this demonstration the Appellant  asserted  that  he
    set fire to an Iranian flag.  Approximately a month  later,  whilst  he
    was at his maternal uncle's house, Ettela'at attended his mother's home
    stating they wished to question him and had  an  arrest  warrant.   His
    mother subsequently telephoned the Appellant and told him not  to  come
    home.  The Appellant then fled the country, fearing  if  he  stayed  in
    Iran that he would be executed for demonstrating and  for  burning  the
    Iranian flag.

 2. His asylum claim was refused in a decision  dated  16  September  2016.
    The Appellant appealed against this decision and his appeal came before
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Miller for hearing on  4  April  2017.
    In a Decision and Reasons  promulgated  on  21  April  2017  the  judge
    dismissed the appeal.  He found there were a number  of  aspects  which
    caused him concern.   He  found  implausibilities  in  the  Appellant's
    account and made adverse credibility findings.

 3. An application for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was  made
    in time.  The grounds in support of the application asserted:-

      a) that the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was  unreasonable
         and/or irrational in respect of its reasoning, all of  which  could
         be found at [37] of the decision;

      b) that in respect of the finding at 37(ii) it was unreasonable of the
         judge to conclude because the  Appellant  had  no  prior  political
         involvement it was  implausible  that  he  would  take  part  in  a
         demonstration; and

      c) that at 37(iii) it was irrational for the judge  to  conclude  that
         the Appellant would have covered his face  had  he  taken  part  in
         burning the Iranian flag, because the Appellant's evidence was that
         he had not planned to burn the flag and it was done in the heat  of
         the moment and that his evidence was he decided to  burn  the  flag
         only when it was brought down from where it was hanging.

    It was submitted that the judge had provided inadequate reasons for his
    decision and that his decision was thus unsustainable.

 4. In a decision dated 17 August 2017 permission to appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan in  the  following
    terms:-

         "It is at least arguable that the judge might have given inadequate
         reasons for rejecting the credibility of  the  Appellant's  account
         without considering whether there were any matters  that  supported
         the Appellant's claim.  It is arguable that he  might  have  placed
         too much emphasis on his  own  view  of  the  plausibility  of  the
         Appellant's account without  placing  it  in  the  context  of  the
         background evidence relating to Iran: see HK v SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ
         1037 and Y v SSHD [2006]  EWCA  Civ  1223.   The  judge  also  made
         negative findings on matters that were found to be plausible by the
         Respondent and did not appear to be in dispute [37(ii) decision and
         22 refusal letter].  The grounds merit further consideration  at  a
         hearing."

 5. A Rule 24 response was filed by the  Respondent  on  5  September  2017
    which asserted, in essence, that the judge made findings that were open
    to him on the facts as presented and had supported those findings  with
    adequate reasons.

     Hearing

 6. At the hearing before me Mr Ali relied on  the  grounds  of  appeal  as
    drafted and the terms of the grant  of  permission  of  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Canavan.  He also drew my attention to the background evidence in
    support of the appeal  as  contained  in  the  Appellant's  bundle,  in
    particular the Amnesty International Report at page 7; the Home  Office
    Country Information and Guidance document in  respect  of  Kurds  dated
    August 2015 at 2.2.4, 2.4 and 4.1.3.  He also referred to  page  35  of
    the bundle  which  refers  to  the  largest  wave  of  arrests  by  the
    Revolutionary Guards.  This is a document dated 19 November  2015,  and
    he submitted that this was the context in which a proper  consideration
    of the case should have been carried out.

 7. In her submissions Ms Pal took  me  through  the  Respondent's  refusal
    letter and the fact that whilst at [19] of that decision the  Secretary
    of State accepted that the  Appellant's  account  was  consistent  with
    external sources, one also had to look at [34] where the  Secretary  of
    State had said that the benefit of the doubt would not be given to  the
    fact that the Appellant attended a demonstration on 7  May  2015.   The
    Respondent's refusal letter however, at [22] states as follows:-

         "You claim that during the demonstration you, along  with  4  to  5
         others, burnt an Iranian flag (AIR Q76-78).  You believe that  this
         is the reason why Ettela'at came to  arrest  you  (AIR  Q94).   You
         claim that you knew that the consequences of  burning  the  Iranian
         flag is a political offence and the punishment can be as severe  as
         hanging (AIR Q94).  You claim that although you knew the risks  you
         participated in the burning of the flag because you felt so angered
         by the assault on this aforementioned Kurdish girl (AIR  Q95).   It
         is considered that this part  of  your  account  is  plausible  and
         reasonably explained."

 8. Ms Pal submitted that it is clear from the judge's findings of fact  at
    [37] of his decision that he had regard to the core of the  Appellant's
    claim, i.e. attendance at the demonstration  and  the  burning  of  the
    Iranian flag.  The judge did not accept that the Appellant attended the
    demonstration and found that it was not credible  the  Appellant  would
    take such action without disguising himself or masking his face,  given
    that  he  was  aware  that  members  of  the  intelligence  service  do
    infiltrate demonstrations.  She submitted that the  grounds  of  appeal
    were no more than a disagreement with  the  judge's  findings  at  [37]
    which were not irrational or perverse and that that the judge had given
    adequate reasons for the findings that he made.

 9. In response Mr Ali submitted that the Respondent's refusal  letter  was
    equivocal and that [19] read with [22] is a  clear  acceptance  of  the
    Appellant's account.  He submitted that this was not undermined by  the
    subsequent referral at [31] to [34] of the decision letter.  In respect
    of the judge's findings at [37](ii) and (iii) he submitted that it does
    not follow that people who attend demonstrations  disguise  themselves.
    This was not an adequate reason for failing to accept  the  Appellant's
    evidence on this point and did not constitute an adequate reason, given
    that there were hundreds of people at the demonstration  and  this  was
    speculation by the judge devoid of evidence.   Mr  Ali  submitted  that
    when the Appellant's case is looked at in the context of the background
    evidence which supports the fact that a  demonstration  took  place  in
    Mahabat on 7 May 2015 as a consequence of an alleged sexual assault  on
    a young Kurdish woman by Ettela'at, it is clear  that  the  Appellant's
    case is plausible and that the judge had erred materially in law.



Notice of Decision

10. I find there are material errors of law in the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Miller, essentially for  the  reasons  set  out  in  the
    grounds of appeal and identified by Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan in the
    grant of permission.

11. The background evidence clearly supports the Appellant's  claim  as  to
    the circumstances that caused him to  flee  Iran.   Whilst  he  is  not
    unsurprisingly in a position to  corroborate  his  specific  action  in
    respect of burning the Iranian flag, the fact of the demonstration  and
    the reason for it are clearly  set  out  in  the  background  evidence.
    Moreover,  the  Home  Office  in  their  Country  Information  Guidance
    document of August 2015 accept that pro-Kurdish activities are unlawful
    and that even activities perceived to be pro-Kurdish can  lead  to  the
    serious risk of torture.

12. I find when the judge's conclusions are considered as a whole  they  do
    not, in my considered view, engage sufficiently with the  substance  of
    the Appellant's claim in light of the background  supporting  evidence.
    In particular they focus on what are  more  marginal  issues,  i.e.  an
    error as to the date of departure, bearing in  mind  that  there  is  a
    different calendar, at least as  between  Iran  and  the  UK,  and  the
    Appellant's journey to the United Kingdom, rather than  the  underlying
    substance of the claim.  In this sense the decision could  be  seen  as
    somewhat perfunctory and devoid of the level of anxious  scrutiny  that
    one would expect in consideration of an asylum appeal.

13. In light of my decision I remit the appeal to the  First-tier  Tribunal
    for a hearing de novo before a judge  other  than  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Miller.

14. No anonymity direction is made.



Signed   Rebecca Chapman                     Date 16 October 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman








