
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10137/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 26 January 2018                            |On 23 February 2018           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY


                                   Between

                                     as
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Z Nasim, of Counsel instructed by M-R Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Secretary of State appeals,  with permission,  against  a  decision
    of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Jerromes who,  in  a  determination
    promulgated on 20 November 2017, allowed the appeal  of  AS  against  a
    decision of the Secretary  of  State  to  refuse  her  application  for
    asylum.

2.   Although the Secretary of State is the appellant before me I  will  for
    ease of reference refer to  her  as  the  respondent  as  she  was  the
    respondent in the  First-tier.   Similarly  I  will  refer  to  AS  the
    appellant as she was the appellant before the First-tier Judge.

3.   The appellant is a citizen of India born on [ ] 1962.  She was born  as
    a Hindu and has a Hindu name. She lived in  Gujarat where she  attended
    university and graduated with a  Bachelor  degree  in  Commerce  before
    obtaining  a diploma in hospitality. She worked  in  hospitality  in  a
    hospital there.  She met and married  a  Muslim  man,   converting   to
    Islam in 2000 when she married. She came to Britain in  2002,  and  her
    husband joined her in February 2003.  In April 2003 her husband claimed
    asylum with the appellant as his dependant.  An appeal was lodged   and
    dismissed in the First-tier in September 2003.  A  fresh  asylum  claim
    was made in 2007 and in September 2014 she lodged  an  application  for
    judicial review of a decision to refuse to grant her leave  to  remain.
     Although permission  was refused in April 2015. She made    a  further
    application for JR in November that year which was  also  refused.  she
    then made a further  application for leave to remain in November  2015,
    which was refused in April 2016 with an out of country right of appeal.
     The  refusal  decision  was  reconsidered  under   the  provisions  of
    paragraph 353 in August 2016, and again  refused  without  a  right  of
    appeal.  In April 2017 there was a fresh asylum claim which was refused
    in October 2017 with a right of  appeal,   and  thus  the  appeal  came
    before the Fist-tier Tribunal.

4.   It was accepted by the respondent  that  the  appellant  had  converted
    from Hinduism to Islam, but it was  not  accepted  that  she  had  been
    attacked as she had claimed by Hindu extremists in India  or  that  she
    had been threatened by her cousins at work.   The  Secretary  of  State
    stated that she had provided no evidence that she would  be  harmed  in
    India due to her religion.  The appellant  had said that her family did
    not know she had converted to Islam while in India and that she had had
    no contact with anyone in India since she moved to Britain and had  not
    received any threats.  The Secretary of State took the  view  that  she
    could seek protection given the background information about  religious
    freedom, which indicated  that  India  was  a  secular  state  with  no
    official religion and religious minorities were able to practise  their
    faith freely.  In the Reasons for Refusal Letter  it  was  stated  that
    "'anti-conversion'  laws  have  been  used  to   discriminate   against
    minorities  and  to  arbitrarily   arrest   minorities   perceived   to
    proselytise, though the conviction rate is low".  It  was  accepted  by
    the respondent that there had  been  instances  of  abuse  which  might
    amount  to  persecution  in  individual  cases,  but   the   respondent
    considered that they were not at a level to pose a  general  risk.   It
    was  therefore  considered  that  there  would  be  a  sufficiency   of
    protection within India and it was pointed out that before she left her
    husband had sought protection in India, although that was over 25 years
    ago.  It was also considered  that, should she not wish  to  return  to
    her home area,  she could internally relocate in India given  the  fact
    that she spoke Hindi, Gujarati and English and had spent  the  majority
    of her life in India where she was educated and had worked.

5.   The judge heard evidence from the appellant  and  from  a  friend,  Mrs
    KPJMZ.  In paragraphs 43 onwards the judge  set  out  her  findings  of
    fact, accepting the appellant had  been born in 1962 in India  and  had
    lived with her family in Gujarat, had been educated in  India  and  had
    worked in a hospital, that she had been raised as a Hindu but that  she
    had married a Muslim on 22 February 2000 and had  then  converted  from
    Hinduism to Islam.   She had entered Britain as a visitor  in  December
    2002 being joined by her husband in February 2003.   The  judge  stated
    that she did not accept that the appellant had sought protection at the
    earliest opportunity and said that that damaged her  credibility.   She
    considered that the appellant's family had been  displeased  when  they
    had found out about her marriage but the judge did not accept that they
    were looking for her to kill her, and she noted that in any  event  the
    appellant's parents and brother had died since  she  came  to  Britain.
    The judge indicated that she  believed  that  the  appellant's  parents
    would have known about her marriage after  2000  as  she  had  remained
    living with them.  The judge did not accept that the appellant's  wider
    family would be able to trace her when she went into  hiding  following
    the riots in Gujarat to which the appellant  had referred and concluded
    that the appellant's family would not  be  interested  in  pursuing  or
    punishing her.  The judge accepted, however, that given her  conversion
    the wider family would not accommodate or support her.

6.   From paragraphs 50 onwards the judge assessed the appellant's  risk  on
    return.  She accepted that the appellant would not  voluntarily  modify
    her Muslim appearance or exercise discretion with regard to  her  faith
    on return and would therefore present as a Muslim.  She stated that  in
    general Muslims were able to practise their faith freely, attend places
    of worship and participate in religious  activities.   There  had  been
    instances of societal  abuse  which  might  amount  to  persecution  in
    individual cases but that was not at a level as to pose a general  risk
    of persecution.

7.   In paragraph 50.3 she considered the appellant's position as  a  Muslim
    who had converted from being a Hindu.  She stated that the  appellant's
    appearance as a Muslim would present as an inconsistency with her Hindu
    name, which she would be obliged to use for official purposes.  As  her
    passport and other Indian identification was in that name she would  be
    identified as a convert and the judge  said that  therefore  she  would
    "draw  adverse  attention   at  a  level  which   I  find  amounts   to
    persecution." The judge  said that  she  had  drawn  support  for  this
    conclusion  from  the  respondent's  policy  "Country  Information  and
    Guidance India: religious minority groups April 2015".  She stated that
    whilst it was clear that religious minorities  were  able  to  practise
    their faith freely,  religious conversion was a different matter.   She
    said that anti-conversions laws in seven states including  Gujarat  had
    been used to discriminate against  minorities,  including  Muslims  and
    that said that these anti-conversion laws had been described as "deeply
    problematic",  "one-sided  and  discriminatory,  placing  hurdles   and
    penalties for converting out of Hinduism, but  not  towards  it".   She
    said that these laws "have led to  higher  incidents  of  intimidation,
    harassment  and  violence  against  religious   minority   communities,
    particularly  Christians  and  Muslims,  with  few   arrests   and   no
    convictions".  She said that they "have fostered a climate of  societal
    impunity against minorities and had led to police harassment".

8.    She  stated  that  there  was  therefore  an  insufficiency  of  state
    protection,  referring to the report entitled  "Country Information and
    Guidance India:  religious minority groups  April  2005"  which  stated
    that whilst the government generally  enforced  legal  protections  for
    religious freedom, it  had  been  criticised  for  failing  to  respond
    effectively to abuses committed by  state  and  local  authorities  and
    private citizens.  She stated that it would be  unduly  harsh  for  the
    appellant to relocate as:

         "The problems she will face as a Muslim, and in particular  someone
         who has converted from Hindu, will be exacerbated by the  fact  she
         will be returning as a lone woman with no  family  support/network.
         She is educated and has previously worked in India but  only  as  a
         Hindu; the country background information says that on  return  she
         will face discrimination, both as a Muslim and as a lone woman  and
         this will make it difficult to find accommodation and work  and  be
         able to support herself."

     The judge therefore allowed the appeal.

9.   The Secretary of State appealed stating that  the  underlying  findings
    of the judge was not that the appellant was at risk of  persecution  on
    account of her own experience historically in India or that the  family
    had sought to harm her. The respondent then  went on to say that:-

         "The reasoning in respect of the risk of  persecution  is  perverse
         and/or fails to take into account other material evidence, such  as
         - whilst there may be 7 states in India where anti-conversion  laws
         are deployed the background evidence indicates that  there  are  29
         states in the whole of India as well as 7 union  territories.   The
         judge has failed to identify why the Appellant would be at risk  in
         other states of India - this was either perverse or  a  failure  to
         resolve the matter materially in dispute between the parties".

10.  The grounds went on to say  that  the  judge  had  failed  to  identify
    sufficient evidence to  indicate  that  "the  level  of  discrimination
    (apparently amounting to persecution) is reasonably likely to effect  a
    Muslim in India bearing in mind that the  total  population  exists  at
    around 160 million people of the same guidance".

11.  It was pointed out that the judge had failed to take into  account  the
    "Country  Information  and  Guidance  (India:  Background  information,
    including actors of  protection  and  internal  relocation  -  February
    2015)" report when finding that there would be no  reasonable  internal
    relocation for the appellant on return to India.  It  was  argued  that
    the judge had failed to reflect on the fact  that  discrimination  that
    had been identified in the judgment only existed in a small minority of
    the states in India and there was no background evidence to support the
    judge's contention that a lone  Muslim  woman  would  not  be  able  to
    support herself in India and therefore there was a failure to take into
    account evidence of internal relocation which showed  there  were  over
    800 working women hostels across India, there was NGO support and  that
    the expansion of the Indian economy has led to  increasing  numbers  of
    lone women working in the major cities.

12.   Mr  Jarvis  relied  on  the  background  information  which  had  been
    submitted and to which  the  judge  referred  in  paragraph  6  of  the
    determination.  He pointed out  the  judge  did  not  accept  that  the
    appellant was at risk from her family and  argued  that  she  had  been
    wrong to find that there would be an insufficiency of state protection.
     He stated that there was no clear findings to indicate why  the  judge
    considered that  the  appellant  could  not  internally  relocate.   He
    repeated the information in the grounds of appeal that  there  are  160
    million Muslims in India and pointed out that the judge had found  that
    there was not  general  persecution  of  that  group.   There  were  no
    specific findings, he argued, that the appellant would face persecution
    on return.  Moreover, when considering the  issue  of  the  appellant's
    circumstances  on  return,  he  stated  that  it  was  clear  from  the
    background evidence that there were 800  working  women's  hostels  and
    that there were increasing numbers of single woman working  and  living
    on their own, particularly  in  the  larger  cities.   He  stated  that
    therefore there was nothing to indicate that the appellant, as  a  lone
    woman would face persecution on return.  It was important,  he  stated,
    when considering the issue of  internal  relocation,  to  consider  the
    specific circumstances of the appellant - this was an appellant who had
    worked in the past and was educated.  There was no reason why she would
    not be able to work again.  Moreover he  referred  to   the  fact  that
    there were a number  of  states  where  there  was  a  majority  Muslim
    population and he again referred in  some  detail  to  the  documentary
    evidence in the papers before the judge.  He  referred  to  the  report
    "Country Information  and  Guidance  (India):  Background  information,
    including actors of protection  and  internal  relocation  of  February
    2015" where,  at paragraph 2.4.7 the Refugee Board of Canada was quoted
    as saying: -

         "According to India's Ministry  of  Women  and  Child  Development,
         since 1972, the government has funded NGOs and other  organizations
         ... to build hostels for working women.  The hostels  are  intended
         to provide safe and affordable housing  to  single  working  women;
         widowed, separated or divorced women; working women living  outside
         their home towns or  living  without  their  out-of-town  husbands;
         women  undergoing  employment  training;  and  women  studying   in
         professional programs.


         There are reportedly 887 working women's hostels  throughout  India
         providing accommodation for approximately 65,000 women.  Women  can
         stay in the hostels for up to three years, with the possibility  of
         an  extension  in  exceptional  circumstances.   According  to  the
         Ministry, the hostels have day  care  centres  for  residents  with
         children".

    He accepted that it was indicated that the sanitary conditions in  most
    hostels were said to be "very  bad"  but  pointed  out  that  what  was
    relevant was standards of accommodation in the appellant's own country,
    not the standard of living which she might have  here.   He  emphasised
    that the appellant would receive  the  sum  of  �1,500  when  she  left
    Britain voluntarily, which would help to ease her into life in India on
    return.  He asked me to find that the judge had erred  by  not  finding
    that internal relocation was open to her.

13.  In reply Mr Nasim argued that there was no error in  the  determination
    as the judge had relied on  the  background  evidence  before  her.  He
    referred to  the appellant's individual circumstances and said that the
    judge had clearly looked  at  the  relevant  question  which  was   not
    whether or not Muslims in general would face persecution but whether  a
    woman such as the appellant, who had converted, would face persecution.
     It was on that basis that  the  judge  had  allowed  the  appeal.   He
    referred to the fact that it was stated in the  background  information
    dated February  2015  that  there  are  some  difficulties  with  state
    protection and  said that there were  human rights violations in  Jammu
    and Kashmir.  He argued that the judge had  reached  conclusions  which
    were open to her.

14.  In  reply  Mr  Jarvis  referred  to  the  refusal  letter  and  to  the
    background evidence and stated that in a country of  approximately  1.2
    billion people and over  160  million  Muslims  there  was  nothing  to
    indicate that the appellant would  be  sought  out  for  ill-treatment.
    With regard to the claimed persecution because she  had  converted,  he
    referred to paragraph 4.1.1. of the Country  Information  and  Guidance
    India: religious minority groups pamphlet which stated:-

         "India is a secular republic and all religions are considered equal
         under the law.  The constitution and other laws  protect  religious
         freedom  and  this  is  generally  respected  by  the   government.
         However, some laws and policies restrict this freedom including the
         enforcement of 'anti-conversion' laws by  some  state  governments.
         Some local police and enforcement agencies  failed  to  effectively
         respond  to  attacks  against  religious  minorities  and  communal
         violence in certain areas."

    He stated that the reality was that it was clear  from   section  4.1.4
    of that report that there were seven states which  had  anti-conversion
    laws but stated that:-

         "These laws generally require government officials  to  assess  the
         legality of conversions and provide for fines and imprisonment  for
         anyone who uses force, fraud, or 'inducement' to  convert  another.
         These laws have resulted in few arrests  and  no  convictions,  but
         have  created  a  hostile  atmosphere  for  religious   minorities,
         particularly Christians."





    He pointed out that that  paragraph  went  on  to  quote  from  the  US
    Department of State's International Religious Freedom Report 2013 which
    had stated that:-

         "Arunachal Pradesh anti-conversion law was not implemented due to a
         continuing lack of  enabling  legislation.   Authorities  explained
         these laws  as  protective  measures  meant  to  shield  vulnerable
         individuals from being induced to change their faith.  For  example
         the   Gujarat   Law   prescribes   religious   conversion   through
         'allurement, force or fraud".

    It was pointed out that under Himachal Pradesh law:

         "No person shall convert or attempt to convert, either directly  or
         otherwise, any person from one religion to another by  the  use  of
         force or by inducement or by any other fraudulent means  nor  shall
         any person abet any such conversion".

Discussion

15.  The judge makes it clear that she does not accept  that  the  appellant
    would be persecuted by her wider family on return but accepts that they
    would not look  after  her  or  give  her  support  and  accommodation.
    Moreover,  the reality is that the judge went on to  find  that,  as  a
    Muslim, the appellant would not face persecution.  The judge then  went
    on to consider the issue of internal relocation.  She makes, I consider
    a fundamental error by stating that, as a lone woman that it  would  be
    unduly harsh for the appellant to relocate.  That clearly cannot be the
    case - I  consider  that  the  appellant  would  be  able  to  relocate
    throughout India, but in particular she would be able to relocate to  a
    state where there is  either a substantial minority of Muslims or where
    a majority of  the  population  are  Muslim.   I  cannot  see  how  the
    appellant would be discriminated against if she did so.  The judge  was
    clearly wrong to find that if in seven states there is  anti-conversion
    legislation which she believed could lead to the appellant being harmed
    she would not be able to go to any of the other states where  there  is
    no anti-conversion legislation.

16.   I consider that the judge has erred in  two  ways.   Firstly,  in  not
    considering that  the issue of internal relocation relates  to  all  of
    the appellant's country not  merely  to  the  seven  states  which  she
    mentioned, but also, and  more importantly she misunderstands the anti-
    conversion law. It  is clear from the  paper "Country  Information  and
    Guidance India: religious minority groups"  that the laws-   which  may
    not  necessarily  have  been  enacted-   are  in  any   event   against
    proselytising by forcible conversion or undue persuasion.   It  is  the
    person who converts the individual who would be breaking the  law,  not
    the person who themselves is converted.  The appellant would  not  face
    legal sanction because she converted.  I can  therefore  only  conclude
    that there is nothing in the papers  before  me  to  suggest  that  the
    appellant would face persecution on relocation within  India  or  could
    not relocate and I consider that the judge erred  in  law  by  reaching
    that conclusion.  Indeed her conclusion is at odds with the  background
    documentation which was before her.  For  these  reasons  I  find  that
    there is a material error of law in the determination of the First-tier
    Judge and I set aside her decision.

17.  I consider that it  is  appropriate  for  me  to  remake  the  decision
    because the  findings  of  fact  of  the  judge,  with  regard  to  the
    appellant's personal circumstances - that she  met  a  man  who  was  a
    Muslim and married him, converting to Islam,  and then came with him to
    Britain and claimed asylum and  that the application was  then  refused
    and the appeal dismissed and further that her parents and  brother  are
    now dead and although the wider family would not  support  her  if  she
    returned, they would not seek her out or indeed would not  be  able  to
    seek her out if she did return - can clearly be accepted. Moreover, the
    background evidence is clear: there is nothing whatsoever  to  indicate
    that the appellant would  be persecuted by the state.  The  reality  is
    that the anti-conversion laws do not target the person who is converted
    but targets the person who  proselytises or  attempts  to  convert  the
    individual.  I consider that the appellant could, should she  not  want
    to return to her own state, relocate without  difficulty  to  a   state
    where there is a majority of Muslims or a large number of Muslims.  The
    appellant's conversion would not lead to any discrimination against her
    - there is nothing to indicate that that would be the case.   Moreover,
    she would be able to seek work and should be able to obtain work  using
    the skills which she has, not  only  her  ability  to  speak  Gujarati,
    English and Hindi, but also using her  former experience in India  and,
    of course,  she will have gained further experience  here.   There  are
    hostels available for lone woman and there are  increasing  numbers  of
    single women moving to the towns  to  work.   The  appellant  would  of
    course be assisted by the funds given to her by the British  government
    when she leaves.  In these circumstances  I  find  that  the  appellant
    would not face persecution on return, nor would the circumstances which
    she would face on relocating  internally  be  such  that  it  would  be
    unreasonable to expect her to do so.

18.  I therefore, having set aside the decision  of  the  First-tier  Judge,
    remake the decision and dismiss this appeal.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed   [pic]                      Date: 17 February 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy
