
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/10910/2017


                             THE IMMIGRATION ACT


|Heard at Field House                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 25th March 2018                      |On 12th April 2018                  |
|                                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCCLURE


                                   Between

                                     TJ
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Seehra counsel instructed by of Barnes Harrild
                    & Dyer Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Z Ahmad, Senior Home Officer Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Devittie promulgated on the 12th December  2017  whereby
    the judge dismissed the appellant's appeal against the decision of  the
    Respondent to refuse his protection claim on  the  grounds  of  asylum,
    humanitarian protection and Articles 2 and 3 of the ECHR.

 2. I have considered whether or not it is appropriate to make an anonymity
    direction. Taking that and all of  the  circumstances  into  account  I
    consider it appropriate to make an anonymity direction.

 3. Leave to appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  was  granted  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Doyle on 16 January 2018. Thus the case appeared  before
    me to determine whether or not there was a material error of law in the
    decision.

    Factual background

 4. The appellant is a national of Iran. The appellant left Iran  illegally
    on the 19th February 2016.

 5. Whilst in Iran the appellant claims to have been  introduced  into  the
    Baha'i faith by his wife's second cousin. The appellant claims that  he
    became a convert to the Baha'i faith after attending 15  classes  about
    the religion. Further whilst in  Iran  the  appellant  claims  that  he
    practiced the Baha'i faith at  home  praying  three  times  a  day  and
    attending further classes.  The appellant also claims to have attempted
    to convert a friend to the  faith.  However  the  friend  reported  the
    appellant's  actions  to  the  Basiji  and  the  Basiji  came  to   the
    appellant's shop to question him.

 6. In his screening interview the appellant claimed that the  Basiji  came
    to his shop in March 2015 [see page A5]. In the screening interview the
    appellant claims that a case was made against him for renouncing Islam.
    The appellant also claimed that he was beaten severely.  The  appellant
    was threatened with execution but he refused to name any one  that  had
    been involved in his instruction in the Baha'i faith.  The  appellant's
    representatives did in a letter dated the 25th June 2017 amend the date
    of the incident to February 2016.

 7. In his substantive interview the appellant claimed the Basiji  came  to
    his shop in February 2016 on two occasions, one of which he  claims  to
    have been beaten and then escaped from the shop to go home. In  dealing
    with the circumstances in Iran the judge  has  made  specific  findings
    that those elements of the appellant's account were not  credible.  The
    judge specifically deals with such at paragraph 7 (i-iv).

 8. Since coming to the United Kingdom the appellant  claims  that  he  has
    continued with the Baha'i faith and that he has been attending  classes
    and has therefore converted to the Baha'i faith.

    Grounds of appeal

 9. The appellant had called Mr Masoud Darab Poor to support his  claim  to
    have converted to the Baha'i faith. It was further claimed  that  there
    were supporting letters from Ms Jaleh Alaee. It is suggested  that  the
    judge has failed properly to take account of the  strong  corroborative
    evidence in assessing the appellant's case.  It  is  alleged  that  the
    judge has failed to give anxious scrutiny  and  failed  to  give  valid
    reasons for rejecting the evidence.

10. The second challenge to the judgement sets out that there is  an  error
    an approach by the judge and a failure to properly assess the  evidence
    and give valid reasons for the conclusions reached.  The  challenge  in
    that respect relates to the circumstances of the incident in Iran where
    the appellant claims he was given opportunity by the Basiji to  provide
    names and addresses of those that were instructing him  in  the  Baha'i
    faith and others that were involved with the Baha'i faith.

11. It is suggested that the judge has failed to take account of  the  fact
    that the authorities in Iran need not  necessarily  act  in  a  logical
    fashion. It is submitted  that  there  was  nothing  illogical  in  the
    authorities seeking to extract information from the appellant by way of
    a voluntary disclosure. It is  also  asserted  that  there  were  other
    examples of the judge making adverse findings  in  respect  of  matters
    that were not put to the appellant.

    Consideration

12. First and foremost this was a case which related to the  conversion  of
    the appellant from Islam to the  Baha'i  faith.  In  that  respect  the
    principles set out in the case of Dorodian 01 TH 01537 as  approved  in
    the case of Shirazi v SSHD (2003) EWCA Civ. 1562 have to be considered.
     The case law emphasises the need to call a minister of religion  or  a
    person of seniority within a religion to speak to the conversion of  an
    individual. The appellant had only called his friend, as identified  in
    paragraph 4 of the decision, Mr Darab  [otherwise  referred  to  as  Mr
    Poor]. Whilst Mr Poor was a  convert  to  the  religion  there  was  no
    evidence that he held a position of seniority or authority.  The  judge
    does consider the fact that Mr Poor had converted to the Baha'i faith.

13. The judge goes on within paragraph 5 to consider the  fact  that  there
    was a letter of support from Jaleh Alaee, a person that appeared to  be
    instructing individuals in the principles  of  the  Baha'i  faith.  The
    judge does consider the appellant's activities in pursuit of the Baha'i
    faith.

14. However the judge found it significant that there was a letter  written
    by the UK Baha'i Centre, which was  an  organisation  coordinating  and
    organising and promoting the Baha'i faith in the  United  Kingdom.  The
    organisation kept in touch with members of  the  faith  and  sought  to
    promote the faith. The letter indicated that they had no  knowledge  of
    the appellant whatsoever. The judge pointed out that the appellant  had
    taken no steps to contact the UK Baha'i Centre to question why they had
    written such  a  letter.  The  judge  found  it  significant  that  the
    appellant had not sought to contact the main UK Baha'i Centre.

15. The appellant had not called any born in a  senior  position  from  the
    Baha'i faith to give evidence on his behalf. The central  authority  of
    the faith in the United Kingdom had indicated they were  not  aware  of
    the appellant. The judge was entitled to look at the evidence submitted
    and conclude that the  appellant  had  failed  to  prove  that  he  had
    genuinely converted to the Baha'i faith.  The  judge  has  given  valid
    reasons for coming to that conclusion.

16. With regard to the second ground of challenge, the  grounds  constitute
    nothing more than a disagreement with the findings of fact made by  the
    judge. The judge has examined the evidence and given valid reasons  for
    concluding that he did not find it credible that organisations such  as
    the Basiji would not arrest the appellant and would act in  the  manner
    that the appellant has claimed.  The  appellant  claimed  that  he  had
    sought to promote the faith to another member of the Islamic faith. The
    judge was entitled to conclude, where the  Basiji  had  clear  evidence
    that an individual had converted from  Islam,  they  would  arrest  and
    detain  the  individual  for  offences  related  to  apostasy.  In  the
    circumstances the judge was entitled to come to the conclusions that he
    did on the evidence.

17. On the basis of the  evidence  submitted  the  judge  was  entitled  to
    conclude that he did not find the appellant's account credible and that
    the appellant had not proved that he had converted to the Baha'i faith.



18. The appellant's representative was seeking to adduce  further  evidence
    in respect of the appellant's claimed conversion. However on the  basis
    of the evidence that was before the judge the  judge  was  entitled  to
    come to the conclusions that he did.

19. In the circumstances I do not find that there is any error  of  law  in
    the approach of the judge to the evidence is presented. The  judge  has
    given valid reasons for the conclusions reached.

20. In the light of the matters set out the judge has not made  a  material
    error of law.

    Notice of Decision

21. I dismiss the appeal.

22. I make an anonymity direction




Signed      Date 9th April 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McClure





Direction regarding anonymity- rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise, the appellant is
granted anonymity. No report of these proceedings shall directly or
indirectly identify the appellant or any member of the appellant's family.
This direction applies both to the appellant and the respondent. Failure to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings





Signed      Date 9th April 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McClure

