
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
PA/10061/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Liverpool                       |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 3 May 2018                            |  On 9 May 2018                        |
|                                         |                                       |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PICKUP

                                   Between

                              WAAD KANAN KAMAL
                        [NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the appellant:     Ms N Patel, instructed by Lei Dat Baig Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the appellant's  appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Herwald promulgated 22.11.17, dismissing on all  grounds
    his appeal against the  decision  of  the  Secretary  of  State,  dated
    21.9.17, to refuse his protection claim.

 2. First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Holmes  granted  permission  to  appeal  on
    28.12.17.

 3. Thus the matter came before me on 3.5.18 as  an  appeal  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

Error of Law

 4. For the reasons summarised below, I found no error of law in the making
    of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal sufficient  to  require  the
    decision to be set aside.

 5. In granting permission to appeal, Judge Holmes considered  it  arguable
    that the judge failed to properly engage with the case before  him.  It
    was suggested that there is no finding on the risk relied on, namely to
    a  Sunni  Kurd,  from  Shia  forces  who  may  suspect  him   of   ISIS
    participation; no analysis of how he would be perceived  on  return  to
    his home area as one with a Kurdish father and Arab mother; no adequate
    analysis of whether he could travel from Baghdad to his  home  area  of
    Mosul, or relocate to the IKR or Baghdad. It was  also  suggested  that
    there was no adequate analysis of the country guidance case law.

 6. With all due respect to Judge Holmes, the grant of permission fails  to
    understand that Judge Herward accepted that the appellant would not  be
    able to return safety to Mosul or be able to relocate to  the  IKR  and
    thus safety of travel or how he would be perceived on return to  either
    place are entirely irrelevant issues. The  judge's  conclusion  was  in
    fact that the appellant would be able to settle in Baghdad.

 7. The tribunal was satisfied, on the appellant's own evidence that he had
    issued to him a valid passport, still current,  and  national  ID,  and
    that he would be able to obtain replacements in the  UK,  but  had  not
    attempted to do so. Return  was  judged  to  be  feasible.  Whilst  the
    appellant did not currently have a CSID, AA established that  there  is
    an alternative CSA  office  for  Mosul  in  Baghdad  and  thus  it  was
    reasonable to conclude that he would be able to obtain a  CSID  shortly
    after return to Iraq.

 8. The judge concluded at [22] that it would not be unreasonable  for  the
    appellant to relocate to Baghdad City, on the basis that  he  would  be
    able to obtain a CSID, that he speaks Arabic, and  claimed  to  not  be
    from a minority background.  There  are  Sunni  majority  areas  within
    Baghdad and the appellant is an Arab.

 9. BA (Returns to Baghdad) Iraq CG [2017] UKUT 18 (IAC), established  that
    Sunni identity alone is not sufficient  to  give  rise  to  a  risk  of
    serious harm. The general treatment of  Sunnis  by  the  state  is  not
    sufficiently serious by its nature and repetition  to  reach  the  high
    threshold of persecution or otherwise inhuman or  degrading  treatment.
    The judge carefully  considered  but  ultimately  found  no  particular
    factors relevant to the appellant  that  would  make  him  particularly
    vulnerable or at risk on return from Shia militia simply on  the  basis
    of his being Sunni. All Ms Patel could point to was a  general  country
    background information that persons  such  as  the  appellant  find  it
    difficult  to  persuade  the  authorities  that  he  was  not  an  ISIS
    participant. That Shia militia had abducted Sunni residents in Mosul or
    other parts of Iraq has no bearing if the appellant is to  relocate  in
    Baghdad. There was no evidential basis to establish that this appellant
    would attract adverse attention from Shia militia in  Baghdad.  In  the
    circumstances, I am satisfied that there was insufficient to  establish
    that the concerns raised by Ms Patel had  any  real  relevance  to  the
    appellant.

10. In the circumstances, there was no merit in this appeal. I can  see  no
    error of law in the decision of Judge Herwald and no basis to interfere
    with the conclusions reached on the findings made, all  of  which  were
    open to the judge on the evidence and for which  cogent  reasoning  has
    been provided.



Conclusion & Decision

11. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law such that the decision  should
    be set aside.

     I do not set aside the decision.

                    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands  and  the
                    appeal remains dismissed on all grounds.
     [pic]
     Signed
         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup



Anonymity

I have  considered  whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  any
anonymity direction. No submissions were made on the issue.  The  First-tier
Tribunal did not make an order  pursuant  to  rule  13(1)  of  the  Tribunal
Procedure Rules 2014.

Given the circumstances, I make no anonymity order.



Fee Award         Note: this is not part of the determination.

I make no fee award.

Reasons: No fee is payable and thus there can be no fee award.
     [pic]
     Signed
         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup


