
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10222/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 22 October 2019                   |On 31 October 2019                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEITH


                                   Between

                                     NP
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Z McCallum, instructed by Sutovic & Hartigan
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

 1. These are the approved record of the decision and written reasons which
    were given orally at the end of the hearing on 22 October 2019.

 2. It is worth setting out some of  the  history  to  the  current  appeal
    before the Upper Tribunal.

 3. The appellant had arrived in the United Kingdom ('UK') on  3  September
    2007; had previously been a dependant on an asylum claim brought by her
    estranged husband, which was unsuccessful and refused.  The couple  are
    now estranged, following the husband's conviction in the UK  for  child
    sex offences, for which he was sentenced to eight years in prison.

 4. The appellant in her own right initially claimed  asylum  on  21  April
    2014  which  was  both  refused  and  certified  but  the  decision  on
    certification was reconsidered and the appellant was offered  right  of
    appeal on 23 April 2015. She appealed, but her appeal was refused.  The
    appellant's appeal against that refusal  was  dismissed  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Watson on 14 March 2016.  However, the Upper Tribunal in
    that appeal found an error  of  law  and  remitted  the  appeal  to  be
    considered again by the First-tier Tribunal.  The appeal was considered
    and dismissed by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Parkes,  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 11 May 2017.  Notably,  whilst  dismissing  the  appeal,
    Judge Parkes  found,  at  paragraph  [21]  of  his  decision  that  the
    appellant was not only an evangelical Christian but also  somebody  who
    proselytised.  However, Judge Parkes concluded that  the  risk  to  the
    appellant was reduced because the prime focus of the  previous  adverse
    interest was on the appellant's husband; and was not directed by  state
    actors, such as police or prosecutors, but rather by third parties. The
    appellant could seek state protection and  Judge  Parkes  concluded  at
    [24] that the appellant could internally  relocate  within  Sri  Lanka.
    Judge Parkes noted that the appellant  was  a  professional,  namely  a
    doctor, and could find employment in Sri Lanka.    While  Judge  Parkes
    considered articles 3 and 8 of the ECHR, these were not  considered  by
    reference to the appellant's health.

 5. The appellant appealed Judge Parkes' decision, and permission to appeal
    was refused by First-tier Tribunal Judge Pullig on 7 June 2017; and  by
    Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Keki?  on  2  August   2017.    The   appellant
    subsequently applied for permission to bring a  'Cart'  JR,  which  was
    refused by the High Court and while further submissions  were  made  to
    the Court of Appeal,  the  JR  application  does  not  appear  to  have
    progressed any further.

 6.  Following  Judge  Parkes'  decision,  the   appellant   made   further
    submissions on 13 February 2018, which the appellant treated as a fresh
    claim.  Much is made by the respondent of the fact that a large part of
    the  further  submissions  comprised  a  criticism  of  Judge   Parkes'
    decision, but nevertheless  importantly  there  were  also  two  expert
    reports from experts whose expertise was unchallenged, Dr De Votta  and
    Dr Briffa.  Dr  De  Votta  provided  expert  evidence  in  relation  to
    objective county evidence on risks to Christians in Sri  Lanka,  whilst
    Dr Briffa was a psychiatrist who  gave  evidence  in  relation  to  the
    appellant's mental health.  Broadly speaking, it was said  that  Dr  De
    Votta's report dealt with the risks not only to  Christians,  but  sub-
    sets  of   those   within   the   Christian   community,   specifically
    proselytising Christians, and female Christian converts.  The appellant
    was said to fall within both sub-sets and so was at particular risk.

 7. The gist of Dr Briffa's report was that the appellant suffered  from  a
    number of complex mental health issues, including PTSD,  for  which  it
    was claimed that the risk of a relapse could not be  prevented  if  the
    appellant were returned to Sri Lanka; and that  there  was  a  risk  of
    suicide.  The appellant's  PTSD  was  in  the  context  of  her  having
    previously been the subject of gang rape, prior to fleeing  Sri  Lanka,
    while  also  witnessing  her  husband  being  tortured,   by   Buddhist
    extremists.  Neither fact had been disputed.

 8. In response to the fresh submissions the respondent  issued  a  further
    refusal letter on 6 September 2018, concluding that as previous adverse
    interest had focussed on the appellant's husband and  that  the  couple
    had reported matters to the police, that the risk to the appellant  was
    lower; there was sufficiency of protection; and the option of  internal
    relocation was available.  The appellant could also work in Sri  Lanka.
    It was that refusal letter which was  the  subject  of  an  appeal  and
    decision by Judge Lever, promulgated on  5  February  2019.   At  [10],
    Judge Lever referred to the well-known  authority  of  Devaseelan  2002
    UKIAT 00702 and noted at [10] that the appellant was  an  'evangelical'
    (as opposed to actively proselytising) Christian.  While she may suffer
    discrimination and harassment as a result, this would  not  be  adverse
    treatment at the level of persecution.   Judge Lever  referred  himself
    to extracts of source objective evidence from  the  appellant's  bundle
    and concluded that Dr De Votta's report had  been  dealt  with  in  the
    refusal letter.    He referred at [16] to the March 2018 Country Policy
    and Information Note (CPIN) for Sri Lanka,  which  was  not  consistent
    with a level of risk amounting  to  persecution.   While  Dr  De  Votta
    referred to 96 attacks against evangelical Christians, this had  to  be
    considered in the context of  the  Christian  population  as  a  whole.
    Judge Lever concluded that the appellant had not shown that there  were
    any significant exacerbating features that placed her at  higher  risk,
    or that she would be unable to relocate, should she wish to do so.

 9. A claim by the appellant in respect of her mental health  by  reference
    to article 3 of the ECHR did  not  reach  the  high  threshold  needed.
    There were medical facilities available in Sri Lanka and there had been
    an analysis of a potential suicide  risk  within  the  refusal  letter.
    Judge Lever said regarded the  appellant's  appeal  as  reflecting  the
    appellant's determination to remain in the UK rather than a  real  fear
    or risk on return to Sri Lanka.

10. Both representatives acknowledged the brevity of Judge Lever's analysis
    under article 8 of the ECHR at [29] to [30]; initially by reference  to
    paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration; then  noting  the  fact  that  the
    appellant's children did not have leave to remain in  the  UK,  with  a
    possible implication that the appellant might be able  to  return  with
    her adult children as a family unit, although I  accept  Ms  McCallum's
    submission that there was not a finding to  this  effect.  Judge  Lever
    included  a  single  sentence  referring  to  section   117B   of   the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 Act as not  assisting  the
    appellant.

11. Permission to appeal against Judge  Lever's  decision  was  granted  by
    Upper Tribunal Judge S Smith on 16 May 2019, who noted that  there  was
    an arguable error of law  when  considering  the  risk  to  evangelical
    Christians, specifically in failing  to  engage  in  previous  findings
    about the appellant's likely activities, by implication of the fact  of
    proselytization.  At paragraph [5], Judge Smith regarded Judge  Lever's
    reasoning concerning paragraph 276ADE as light, with a single paragraph
    devoted to article 8 without an articulation of  the  applicable  test,
    and was by reference to the length of the appellant's residence in  the
    UK, rather than integration on return.

The grounds of challenge

12. In terms of the grounds before me, these fell into three areas.

13. Ground (1) was that that Judge Lever had erred in his assessment of the
    risk to the appellant,  not  only  as  an  evangelical  Christian,  but
    somebody whom Judge Parkes had expressly accepted  was  a  proselytiser
    and a convert.  In other words, there was a distinction  between  those
    of Christian evangelical faith who might feel compelled to tell  others
    of their faith but in more guarded terms, as opposed to those who  were
    active in their proselytising.  The emphasis on the risk to  those  who
    actively proselytised was accepted in other contexts,  specifically  SZ
    and JM (Christians - FS confirmed) Iran CG [2008] UKAIT 82; as was  the
    additional risk to those who had converted, AS  (Iran)  v  SSHD  [2017]
    EWCA Civ 1539. Judge Lever had failed to consider that  the  appellant,
    in seeking to proselytise, would not only explain her faith  but  would
    also feel compelled to describe her conversion, something it is said by
    Dr De Votta would place her at particular risk.

14. Ground (2) was that Judge  Lever  had  inadequately  reasoned  how  the
    appellant would be able to integrate in Sri Lanka, both by reference to
    paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of the Immigration Rules and also by  reference
    to  a  wider  analysis  under  article  8  of  the  ECHR.   There  were
    unchallenged findings that the appellant was  suffering  from  PTSD  by
    virtue of the context of being a victim of the previous gang rape; that
    there was a risk of suicide on return; and also expert medical evidence
    that by virtue of her mental ill-health, the appellant would be  unable
    to work on her return to Sri Lanka.  Judge Lever had simply  failed  to
    consider these factors in concluding whether  the  appellant  would  be
    able to integrate in any meaningful sense, as understood in  the  well-
    known authority of Kamara v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 813.  Judge Lever  had
    also failed to consider the support which the appellant received in the
    UK, including from her daughter, who was  of  support  with  night-time
    anxiety; and separately had failed to consider  whether  the  appellant
    would be further shunned by relatives  in  Sri  Lanka  because  of  the
    stigma associated with her husband's conviction for child sex offences.
     All this was said to have been inadequately reasoned and  assessed  by
    Judge Lever when considering the Article 8/paragraph 276ADE analysis.

15. Ground (3) was that  Judge  Lever  had  failed  to  consider,  for  the
    purposes  of  section  117B  of  the  2002  Act,  whether  there   were
    exceptional circumstances meriting a greater weight to be  attached  to
    the appellant's private and family life in the UK, as permitted by  the
    Court of Appeal in the case of Rhuppiah v SSHD [2016] 1 WLR 4203.





The respondent's response

16. The gist of the respondent's response was that the grounds were  merely
    a disagreement with Judge Lever's conclusions, which were open  to  him
    to reach on the evidence before him. Whilst the article 8 analysis  was
    brief, it had considered the respondent's  decision;  and  adopted  the
    findings in Judge Parkes's earlier decision, whose reasoning  had  been
    upheld at higher appellate  level.   Judge  Lever  had  considered  the
    expert reports of Dr De  Votta  and  Dr  Briffa.  He  was  entitled  to
    conclude that while the appellant had suffered adverse interest in  the
    past, she would not face the same level of risk on return given the low-
    level number of attacks against evangelical  Christians  and  that  she
    would be able to receive the support of her family as part of a  family
    unit, as well as police protection.  There was also  no  evidence  that
    there would be any state actors persecuting her.

The hearing - further oral submissions

The appellant

17. Ms McCallum re-emphasised that Judge Lever had failed to appreciate and
    assess the risk to proselytising Christians. While  objective  evidence
    such as the CPIN referred to discrimination against evangelicals, there
    was other evidence suggesting  a  higher  level  of  adverse  treatment
    amounting to persecution, in particular the  report  of  Dr  De  Votta,
    which had referred to attempts to outlaw proselytization; the  impunity
    with which attacks by Buddhist extremists had taken place; and the fact
    that any statistical analysis needed to  be  made  on  the  appropriate
    comparator pool - in other words, if there were 96 attacks, then  Judge
    Lever should have considered the size of the proselytising community.

18. In relation to article 8, the risk to  the  appellant's  mental  health
    worsening needed to be considered in the context of  a  high  level  of
    discrimination against proselytising Christians.  The medical  evidence
    was clear that the appellant was not medically fit to work  and  mental
    ill-health was an acknowledged  factor  in  an  ability  to  integrate.
    Judge Lever's analysis at [29] of  his  decision  did  not  assess  the
    appellant's ability to work and her risk of  suicide  and  had  instead
    made a superficial assessment of  the  availability  of  mental  health
    treatment available in Sri Lanka.  In contrast,  the  written  skeleton
    argument before Judge Lever had  referred  expressly  to  this  in  the
    context of the appellant's limited ability to relocate.

The respondent

19. Mr Melvin reiterated that Judge Lever had considered and  assessed  the
    new evidence and he was entitled to conclude that it did not justify  a
    departure from the previous findings of Judge Parkes.  The  distinction
    between  evangelical  Christianity  and  proselytising  should  not  be
    'overly' considered, as evangelical Christianity  necessarily  included
    the latter.  There was also no evidence of persecution by state actors.
     Evidence of heighted risk to  Christian  evangelicals  from  Christian
    'pressure groups' such as 'Open Doors' (which was before Judge  Lever),
    was not objective evidence.   Judge Lever was entitled to consider  the
    risk to Christians as a whole.  The question of why the appellant might
    conceal her faith was not relevant here, as there was  no  risk,  at  a
    level of ill-treatment amounting to persecution, to her.

20. Much had been made at the hearing of Judge Lever's article 8  analysis.
    In reality, in various different appeals, the appellant had  sought  to
    emphasis different aspects of her case, frankly  as  the  opportunities
    arose, in order to ensure that the appellant need never leave  the  UK.
    The appellant had got family to support her, including in Sri Lanka, or
    even if it were the case that they would shun her, she also  had  adult
    children in the UK who could support her on her return to Sri Lanka.

21. Mr Melvin candidly accepted that  the  reasoning  by  Judge  Lever  was
    'scant', but that Judge Lever was entitled to refer back to,  and  rely
    on, Judge Parkes's reasoning.  There could  not  be  much  reliance  on
    private, as opposed to  family  life,  given  the  appellant's  limited
    integration in the UK.

Discussion and Conclusions

The protection claim

22. I conclude that Judge Lever did err in law in his reasoning in relation
    to the protection claim. While he correctly  referred  himself  to  the
    case of Devaseelan, when considering Judge Parkes's  earlier  decision,
    he failed to assess adequately  the  crucial  additional  element,  not
    necessarily encompassing all evangelical Christians, of  a  sub-set  of
    those who seek to actively proselytise.  Judge Parkes had  referred  at
    [21] to  his  finding  that  that  the  appellant  was  an  evangelical
    Christian and would take part in proselytising in the UK and Sri Lanka.
     Judge Lever accepted that the appellant and  her  daughter  were  also
    converts to Christianity. Dr De Votta had described in his  report,  at
    [D154] of the appellant's bundle, to the  particular  risks  to  female
    converts, who were regarded by Buddhist extremist  as  that  religion's
    'biggest  traitors,'  ([D155])  as  a  Sinhalese  Buddhist   woman   is
    considered the 'bearer' of Sinhalese Buddhist 'nationhood'. Having  had
    the benefit of both the CPIN and Dr De  Votta's  report,  the  specific
    risks to the appellant as a proselytising female Christian convert were
    clearly potentially identifiable.  While  Judge  Lever  had  considered
    what he regarded as a relatively small number of attacks (identified by
    Dr De Votta at [D157]) as being only 96, in a single year,  considering
    the wider Christian community in Sri Lanka, I  accepted  Ms  McCallum's
    submission that the failure to consider the appropriate comparator pool
    undermined the statistical analysis. To pick one hypothetical  example,
    had the proselytising Christian female convert community in  Sri  Lanka
    comprised only 96 people, and every member of that population had  been
    singled out for attack, a comparison with the wider Christian community
    would have resulted in the conclusion that only  96  people  out  of  a
    wider community had been attacked and therefore the risk to that  small
    sub-set was slim. That analysis would have ignored the fact that  those
    sharing the appellant's risk profile  had  a  100%  chance  of  adverse
    interest; and the analysis would then have failed to consider why those
    with the common risk profile suffered adverse interest, or whether  the
    characteristics and adverse interest were not causally connected.

23. Even though Judge Lever referred to Dr De Votta's report,  his  failure
    to adequately assess the statistic evidence, as well as  the  suggested
    cultural causes of adverse interest identified by Dr De Votta, infected
    the overall analysis of the appellant's protection claim,  so  that  it
    cannot be said that Judge Lever applied the level of  anxious  scrutiny
    to the appellant's particular circumstances.  It cannot  be  said  that
    the flaws in the analysis were  immaterial.  The  consequence  is  that
    Judge Lever's conclusions on the protection claim are unsafe and cannot
    stand.

Article 8

24. I also  concluded  that  Judge  Lever's  article  8  analysis  was  not
    adequately reasoned.  As pointed out by UT Judge Smith in his grant  of
    permission to appeal,  Judge  Lever  had  considered  paragraph  276ADE
    solely on the very narrow limited basis of  the  possibility  that  the
    appellant's children would be returning with her and on  the  basis  of
    the continuing availability to of her medical treatment in  Sri  Lanka.
    While Judge Lever made a brief reference to Dr Briffa's report, he  did
    not consider adequately the potential obstacles  to  integration  in  a
    meaningful  sense,  noting  the  authority  of  Kamara,  including  her
    inability to find  work;  or  her  risk  of  suicide,  particularly  as
    somebody who, even on the respondent's  case,  would  be  discriminated
    against in Sri Lanka.  Once again, Judge Lever's conclusions on article
    8 are unsafe and must be set aside.

Preserved findings

25. In setting aside Judge Lever's conclusions,  I  preserve  his  findings
    that:

      a) the appellant and her daughter are evangelical  Christian  converts
         who will seek actively to proselytise in both the UK and Sri Lanka;

      b) the appellant was, at the date of  Dr  Briffa's  report,  suffering
         from PTSD, having previously been the victim of gang rape.

Disposal of proceedings

26. In terms of how these proceedings should be resolved, on the one  hand,
    I am very conscious that the appellant's previous appeals have been the
    subject of First-tier and Upper  Tribunal  proceedings,  so  that  this
    would ordinarily be a prime case to be retained by the Upper  Tribunal.



27. On the other hand, Ms McCallum points out that the appellant's children
    in the UK currently have protection claims, with  substantive  hearings
    listed in Newport on 23 December 2019, although  she  informs  me  that
    directions have been stayed pending the appellant's appeals.  While she
    was not able to inform me of the precise  detail  of  those  protection
    claims, it is reasonable to suppose that there is a substantial  degree
    of overlap between the appellant's protection claim and  those  of  her
    children.  Ms McCallum's instructing solicitors have  also  written  to
    this  Tribunal  indicating  that  if  her  Upper  Tribunal  appeal   is
    successful, the intention is also to seek legal aid funding for further
    expert evidence on the risk to heightened risk  to  Christians  in  Sri
    Lanka, following their additional targeting by Islamist  extremists  in
    Easter 2019. In other words, further submissions are anticipated.

28. In that context, I regarded  it  as  appropriate  for  the  appellant's
    appeal to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal in Newport.   While  I
    do not presume to cut-across the First-tier Tribunal's listing  of  the
    protection appeals of the appellant's  children,  I  direct  that  this
    appeal is referred to the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  consideration  of
    whether it should be linked with those of  her  children.   Their  case
    numbers are: PA/06188/2019 and PA/06159/2019.

29. The First-tier Tribunal will have a better understanding of the precise
    nature of those appeals, with which to make  an  informed  decision  on
    whether they should be linked to this appeal.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

                   J Keith
      Signed:


                         Upper Tribunal Judge Keith


     Dated:              30 October 2019
