
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                 Appeal number:
PA/10964/2017


                            the immigration Acts

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 27 November 2019                           |On 13 December 2019           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GILL

                                   Between

                                     AM
                                                 (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                             Appellant

                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                 Respondent


                                  Anonymity


I make an order under r.14(1) of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008 prohibiting the disclosure or publication of  any  matter  likely
to lead members of the public to identify the appellant. I make  this  order
because this is a protection claim. No report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify the appellant.  This  direction  applies  to
both the appellant and to the respondent and all other persons.  Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.  The
parties at liberty to apply to discharge this order, with reasons.

Representation:

For the appellant:         Mr D Sellwood, of Counsel, instructed  by  Wilson
                 Solicitors LLP.
For the respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Senior Presenting Officer.


                           Decision and Directions


 1. The appellant, a national of Uganda born on  31  August  1986,  appeals
    against the decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  P-J  S  White
    who, in a determination promulgated  on  23  August  2019  following  a
    hearing on 19 June 2019, dismissed his appeal on  asylum,  humanitarian
    protection  and  human  rights  grounds  against  a  decision  of   the
    respondent of 19 July 2017 to refuse his protection claim.

 2. The basis of the appellant's protection claim was that he would  be  at
    risk of persecution in Uganda on account of his sexuality. He is gay.

 3. It is unnecessary to set out in detail the evidence that was before the
    judge. It is sufficient to say that this  included  evidence  that  the
    appellant began his only same-sex relationship when he was 15 years old
    with a boy named ET whom he met at school in  2001  and  that,  on  one
    occasion in 2001, ET got drunk in a pub and  kissed  the  appellant  in
    public. They otherwise kept their relationship secret. The relationship
    continued  for  3  years  until  2004,  when  they  went  to  different
    universities.

 4. The judge said that he was "not persuaded  that  the  appellant  was  a
    credible or indeed a truthful  witness"  (para  29).  He  rejected  the
    appellant's claim to be a homosexual and said that  he  was  unable  to
    accept his account of events in Uganda.

 5. The judge gave his reasons for his adverse  credibility  assessment  at
    paras 16-29 of his decision. It is unnecessary to set his  reasons  out
    in detail. The following is sufficient:

 6. At para 20 of his decision, the judge said that it was "of far  greater
    concern" (than the matters he had considered at paras 16-19), that  the
    appellant maintained that he had met ET when  they  were  in  the  same
    class at school, that they had been in the same stream and had finished
    school together. The judge noted that there was a 4-year difference  in
    age between the appellant and ET, that they met when the appellant  was
    15 years old and ET was 11 years old and that they went  to  university
    when they were respectively 18 years and 14 years old. The  judge  then
    said, at para 20:

         "The suggestion that they went through school together despite
             this difference in their ages is not credible...."

 7. The judge also considered that the appellant's evidence,  that  ET  had
    gone to the pub with him at a time when ET would  have  been  11  years
    old, lacked credibility (para 21).

 8. The judge then went on to consider other aspects of the evidence before
    stating, at para 29:

         "I have considered all this evidence with care and  in  the  round,
             and reminding myself of the low  standard  of  proof.  I  give
             weight to the fact that there are people who know and  believe
             the appellant, and that that [sic] the two experts have  found
             his account plausible. Against that I note what seem to me  to
             be  significant  credibility  concerns  over  aspects  of  the
             appellant's account. And in particular that the central claim,
             to have formed a relationship with a person in the same  class
             at school, cannot be true, given [ET's] actual age...."

         (my emphasis)

The grounds

 9. There are two grounds. Ground 1  is  that  there  has  been  procedural
    unfairness on account of the judge's failure to put  to  the  appellant
    his concern about the age difference between the appellant  and  ET  in
    relation to the credibility of the appellant's evidence that he and  ET
    had been in education together and that ET had attended a pub with  the
    appellant notwithstanding that he was 11 years old at the time.

10. An application was made under 15(2A) of the Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008 (the "UT Rules") to admit the following documents:

     i)  ET's academic transcript from [MUST] showing that ET  had  attended
         university between 2004 and  2007  from  the  ages  of  14  to  17,
         consistent with the appellant's account; and

     ii) a report by SALVE international on education in Uganda,  confirming
         school classes in Uganda are not  based  on  age  which  (ground  1
         contends) means that children might be in classes with students who
         are a lot younger or older than them.

11. The appellant also submitted a witness statement dated 5 September 2019
    in which he said, inter alia, that, if he had been asked about the  age
    difference between ET and himself, he would have explained as follows:

     i)  Classes in Ugandan schools are made up  of  children  of  different
         ages. This is because children in Uganda do not all start school at
         the same time as it is dependent upon when the parents are able  to
         afford to send them. In  addition,  when  he  attended  university,
         there was a mix of ages.

     ii) It was not unusual for younger people to go to the pub because  the
         owners do not mind how old a person is if he has the money  to  buy
         from them.

12. It is not necessary to refer to or deal with ground 2.

Assessment

13. The first issue is whether the post-hearing evidence described at paras
    10 and 11 above is admissible in order to establish that there has been
    procedural unfairness and, if so, whether it  should  be  admitted  for
    that purpose.

14. Mr Tarlow accepted that the  evidence  was  admissible  and  should  be
    admitted. I agree. My reasons are as follows:

15. It is axiomatic that, in general, evidence that was not before a  judge
    cannot be relied upon in order to establish that the judge had erred in
    law.  However,  in  certain  circumstances,  post-hearing  evidence  is
    admissible. One such circumstance is in order to establish  that  there
    has been procedural unfairness. This is consistent with  the  reasoning
    of the Court of Appeal in R (Iran) v  SSHD  [2005]  EWCA  Civ  982;  in
    particular, at para 28 onwards, where the Court discussed the admission
    of post-hearing evidence in order to establish that the outcome in  the
    lower court was unfair as a result of a mistake of fact.

16. In the instant case, the appellant seeks to rely upon the  post-hearing
    evidence  in  order  to  establish  that  there  has  been   procedural
    unfairness due to the judge's failure to put to him the concern of  the
    judge in relation to the credibility of certain aspects of his  account
    due to the age difference between himself and ET. It is clear from  the
    judge's reasoning, as Mr Tarlow accepted,  that  the  judge  considered
    that the difference in ages between the appellant and ET  went  against
    the appellant's credibility  on  what  the  judge  considered  was  his
    central claim, that he had formed a relationship  with  a  person  four
    years younger who was in the same class. The difference in  their  ages
    had not been raised by the respondent in the decision letter or by  the
    respondent's representative before the judge. I am satisfied that  this
    issue is  not  one  that  the  appellant  and  his  representative  can
    reasonably be expected to have anticipated and dealt with on their  own
    volition in evidence before the judge. The judge therefore took a point
    against the appellant, which the appellant could  not  reasonably  have
    anticipated, in the absence of evidence on the issue.

17. If the judge had put the issue to the appellant,  the  appellant  would
    have had an opportunity  to  put  in  evidence  before  the  judge  the
    evidence which he now seeks to rely  upon.  It  is  evidence  which  is
    potentially  capable  of  addressing  the  judge's  concern  about  the
    credibility of  what  he  considered  to  be  a  central  part  of  the
    appellant's claim and which should have been considered along with  the
    remainder of the evidence. It was not considered because the  appellant
    did not have notice of the judge's concern and therefore did  not  have
    an opportunity to submit the evidence to the judge.

18. In all of the circumstances, it is clear in my view, not only that  the
    post-hearing evidence is admissible in order  to  establish  procedural
    unfairness, it must be admitted for that purpose. I therefore  exercise
    my discretion and admit the evidence for that purpose.

19. Having admitted the evidence, I am satisfied that the judge did err  in
    law, in that, his failure to put to the appellant his concern, that the
    difference in ages between himself and ET went against the  credibility
    of his evidence that he and ET had been in the same class in school and
    that ET had been able to go with him to a pub at a time when ET was  11
    years old, has given rise to procedural unfairness. I am satisfied that
    the judge's failure means that  the  appellant  did  not  have  a  fair
    hearing.

20. I therefore set aside the decision of the judge in its entirety.

21. In the majority of cases, the Upper Tribunal  when  setting  aside  the
    decision will re-make the relevant decision itself.  However, para  7.2
    of the Practice Statements for the Immigration and Asylum  Chambers  of
    the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  the  Upper  Tribunal   (the   "Practice
    Statements") recognises that it may  not  be  possible  for  the  Upper
    Tribunal to proceed to re-make the decision when it is satisfied that:

         "(a) the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before the
             First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other opportunity for
             that party's case to be put to and considered by the First-
             tier Tribunal; or

         (b)  the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding which is
             necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be re-
             made is such that, having regard to the overriding objective
             in rule 2, it is appropriate to remit the case to the First-
             tier Tribunal."

22. In view of my conclusion that the appellant has not had a fair hearing,
    this case falls within para 7.2 (a).

23. I therefore remit this appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for the First-
    tier Tribunal to decide the appeal on the merits on all issues.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  on
a point of law such that the decision is set aside  in  its  entirety.  This
case is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  for  a  fresh  hearing  on  the
merits on all issues by a Judge of the First-tier Tribunal other than  Judge
of the First-tier Tribunal P-J S White.


[pic]Signed                                  Date: 11 December 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Gill
