
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10479/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Field House               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On : 7 May 2021                      |On : 26 May 2021                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                                     FA
                           (Anonymity Order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Mustafa, instructed by Briton Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This has been a remote hearing to which there  has  been  no  objection
    from the parties. The form of remote hearing was skype for business.  A
    face to face hearing was not held because it was  not  practicable  and
    all issues could be determined in a remote hearing.

 2. The appellant is a national of Pakistan born on 4 July 1990. He entered
    the United Kingdom on 22 February 2011 with leave to enter as a student
    and was granted further periods of leave on the same basis.  His  leave
    was curtailed on 26 November 2014, to 30 January 2015, when his sponsor
    college closed down, but he remained in the UK  as  an  overstayer.  He
    claimed asylum on 12 February 2019  after  being  served  with  illegal
    entry papers.

 3. The appellant's claim was made on the basis that  he  was  at  risk  of
    being the victim of an honour killing if he returned to Pakistan  after
    refusing the marriage his parents had arranged for  him  in  2016.  The
    appellant claimed to have had  a  child  in  the  UK  with  his  Indian
    partner, N, who was in a relationship with someone  else  at  the  time
    they met. He had moved in with  her  in  December  2017  and  they  had
    commenced their relationship in July 2018, following which he told  his
    family that he would not be coming home to get married and he  received
    threats from them as a result. N's family also  threatened  and  ousted
    her and she was therefore at risk if she had to return to India. N  was
    Sikh whilst the appellant was Muslim.

 4. The respondent accepted the appellant's account  of  his  relationship,
    but did not accept that his family had arranged a forced  marriage  and
    did not accept his claim to have fallen out with his family. It was not
    accepted that he had a  genuine,  subjective  fear  of  persecution  in
    Pakistan, but in any event it was considered that he could relocate  to
    another part of Pakistan where his family would not be able  to  locate
    him. The  respondent  considered  that  the  appellant  could,  in  the
    alternative, move to India with his family.  The  respondent  concluded
    that there were no very significant obstacles to the appellant and  his
    family integrating into Pakistan or  India  and  that  the  appellant's
    removal would not breach his human rights.

 5. The appellant appealed against that decision. His appeal was  heard  by
    First tier Tribunal Judge Rowlands on 7 January 2020 and was  dismissed
    in a decision promulgated on 23 January 2020. Judge Rowlands heard from
    the appellant and his partner, N. He set out the appellant's  evidence,
    that he was at risk in Pakistan because of his inter-faith marriage and
    because he had a child out of wedlock, that he could  be  charged  with
    adultery and faced animosity from his  family  and  that  it  would  be
    impossible for him to obtain a visa to reside in India. He also set out
    N's evidence  of  the  support  the  appellant  had  provided  for  her
    following the break-up of a previous  relationship  with  a  Hindu  man
    which had ended after her family had threatened them because  of  their
    different religions and sects, and had warned her ex-partner  to  leave
    her, and of the fear she felt about  returning  to  India  because  her
    family was highly influential and had threatened to kill her.

 6. The judge considered that the appellant had always intended to stay  in
    the UK, did not accept his account of being threatened  by  his  family
    and did not find  him  to  be  a  credible  witness.  He  accepted  the
    appellant's account of his relationship but considered that the  family
    could relocate to Pakistan or India together. He  did  not  accept  the
    claim that they would be unable to marry as a result of their different
    religions and did not consider that there was a real risk of them being
    punished with death as a result of having committed Zina. He  concluded
    that they could marry or co-cohabit and live away from the  appellant's
    family in Pakistan or alternatively that they could  live  together  in
    India. The judge found that the appellant's removal  would  not  breach
    his human rights under Article 3 or 8 and he accordingly dismissed  the
    appeal on all grounds.

 7. The appellant sought, and was granted,  permission  to  appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal.

 8. In light of the need to take precautions against the spread  of  Covid-
    19, and following directions from the Upper  Tribunal  and  submissions
    made in response by both parties, the error of law matter  was  decided
    on the papers without a hearing. In a decision promulgated on 1 October
    2020, I found that Judge Rowlands had materially erred in law and I set
    aside his decision on the following basis:

         "11. Although Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt,  in  granting  permission,
         accepted that all grounds were arguable, her  reason  for  granting
         permission focussed on the question of risk on return  in  relation
         to  inter-faith  marriages,  rather  than   the   judge's   adverse
         credibility findings. In so far as the grounds  seek  to  challenge
         the judge's adverse credibility findings, it is the case  that  the
         judge gave proper reasons for making the adverse findings  that  he
         did, at [31] and [32]. The judge had the benefit  of  hearing  from
         the appellant in person and he made an assessment of credibility on
         the basis of the evidence as a  whole,  including  the  appellant's
         immigration  history,  the  oral  evidence  and   the   documentary
         evidence. For the reasons properly given, the  judge  rejected  the
         appellant's account as to why he did not wish to return to Pakistan
         and rejected his claim to have been threatened by his family and he
         concluded that it had always been his intention to stay in the  UK.
         The grounds make reference to section 8 and delay  in  relation  to
         the judge's credibility findings, but it is difficult to understand
         the point being made in that respect, and in any event that was not
         a matter upon which the judge based his adverse findings.


         12. Having found that the appellant's reason  for  not  wishing  to
         return to Pakistan was not because of threats from his family,  the
         judge went on to consider  the  general  security  position  for  a
         Muslim Pakistani male  with  a  Sikh  Indian  female  returning  to
         Pakistan.  The  grounds  assert  that  the  judge's  approach   was
         inconsistent  with  the  background  material  in  regard  to   the
         possibility of marrying in Pakistan and in regard to  the  risk  of
         living as a couple outside  a  recognised  marriage.  However,  the
         judge plainly  had  full  regard  to  the  background  material  in
         concluding that there was no risk of persecution on that basis. The
         judge referred to a lack of evidence to show that  the  couple  and
         their child could not go  to  Pakistan  together  and  to  evidence
         within the appeal bundle showing that marriage was possible  for  a
         Muslim man and a Sikh woman (page 72). Indeed, the evidence  relied
         upon by the appellant in his grounds, namely extracts from the Home
         Office Country Information and  Guidance  report  of  January  2016
         (sections 3 and 7), does not contradict the  judge's  findings  and
         does not show that such a  marriage  was  not  possible.  What  the
         evidence  shows  is  that  such  a  marriage  may  not  be  legally
         recognised  and  may  thus  give   rise   to   some   difficulties,
         particularly where the families are opposed to the  marriage,  but,
         bearing in mind that the judge rejected the appellant's account  of
         threats from his family, it is consistent with his conclusion  that
         there was not a risk of persecution on that  basis.  Likewise,  the
         judge's finding on the risk arising  from  being  a  couple  living
         together outside a recognised marriage is not inconsistent with the
         background evidence and the judge was fully and  properly  entitled
         to rely on the fact that there was no evidence  of  the  punishment
         for Zina having been carried  out  recently  in  Pakistan.  In  the
         circumstances I find no merit in the assertion in the  grounds,  or
         the grant of permission, that the judge erred in  his  approach  to
         the question of protection and I uphold  the  judge's  decision  in
         that regard.


         13. Having said that, I do find merit in  the  assertion  that  the
         judge failed to undertake a full and proper assessment of Article 8
         and the question of "very significant obstacles to integration"  in
         relation to the claimed difficulties faced  by  being  in  a  mixed
         marriage in Pakistan. His findings at [40] were wholly  inadequate,
         given the nature of the issues raised. Likewise, whilst I  consider
         that the judge's findings  on  risk  on  return  to  India,  albeit
         limited, did not give rise to any material  error  of  law  on  the
         evidence  available,  it  seems  to  me  there  was  an  inadequate
         assessment of the difficulties claimed by the  appellant  in  being
         able to relocate there with his partner.


         14. For all these reasons I accept that the judge materially  erred
         in law to the limited extent stated and that his decision  must  be
         set aside in that regard. The re-making of  the  decision  will  be
         limited to a determination of the issue of Article 8, in particular
         'very significant obstacles to integration', in relation to removal
         to Pakistan and, if  appropriate,  in  regard  to  the  ability  to
         relocate to India as an alternative. The appropriate  course  would
         be for the decision to be re-made in  the  Upper  Tribunal  on  the
         basis of further submissions."


Hearing and Submissions

 9. The matter then came before me  for  the  decision  to  be  re-made  in
    relation to Article 8. A previous hearing listed for 12  February  2021
    was adjourned at the request of the Home Office owing to the fact  that
    they had not received a 124-paragraph  expert  report  upon  which  the
    appellant was relying. The appellant also produced a birth  certificate
    confirming the birth of his daughter on 7 December 2020 together with a
    skeleton argument from Mr Mustafa.

10. Mr Mustafa relied upon his skeleton  argument,  submitting  that  there
    were very significant obstacles to integration in Pakistan  and  India.
    He referred to the case of Secretary of State for the Home Department v
    Kamara [2016] EWCA Civ 813 and to the need for there to  be  a  "broad
    evaluative judgement" made when assessing the question  of  integration
    and he took the Tribunal  through  the  expert  report  of  Dr  Maryyum
    Mehmood. He submitted that the report confirmed that there was no legal
    status for an interfaith marriage and that  it  was  a  crime  of  Zina
    punishable by the Hudood Ordinance, with a  five-year  sentence  and  a
    fine, for engaging in sexual relations outside marriage. That in itself
    was  a  significant  obstacle.  The  appellant's   partner   would   be
    pressurised to convert to Islam, but there  was  a  stigma  and  social
    taboo attached to Muslims marrying someone not originally from the same
    faith, even if the other party converted prior to the marriage. It  was
    considered to be blasphemy, and thus illegal, to convert from Islam  in
    Pakistan. Such a relationship would also attract serious  repercussions
    from extremist Islamic groups and there would be  a  risk  of  physical
    assault for cohabiting outside marriage. There would also be a risk  of
    honour-killing. It was therefore not possible for the appellant and his
    partner to live together in Pakistan. The same applied  to  India.  The
    police would not provide protection as they were corrupt. In  addition,
    the expert stated that it would be difficult for the appellant and  his
    partner to obtain visas for India or Pakistan as there was a clear  and
    historical enmity between the two countries. All of  that  amounted  to
    very significant obstacles to integration or  alternatively  compelling
    circumstances outside the immigration rules.

11. Mr Kotas, in his  submissions,  relied  upon  the  cases  of  AK  &  SK
    (Christians: risk) Pakistan (CG) [2014] UKUT 569 and SB (India) and  CB
    (India) v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2016]  EWCA  Civ
    451, together with the Home Office Country Information and Guidance for
    January  2016,  "Pakistan:  Interfaith  Marriage".  He  submitted  that
    paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) applied only to the appellant  as  his  partner
    was not a party to the proceedings. This was a private  life  case  and
    the focus was on Pakistan. The appellant had lived in Pakistan  for  21
    years and could re-establish himself there and build up a private life.
    If it was considered that  the  question  of  the  appellant's  partner
    returning with  him  was  relevant,  there  were  three  issues  to  be
    considered,   namely   state   persecution/   discrimination,    family
    persecution/discrimination and  societal  persecution/  discrimination.
    With regard to the state, there was no evidence that the  state  sought
    to enforce Zina and no evidence that a  sentence  of  imprisonment  had
    ever been imposed. A fine would not come anywhere near impeding  family
    or private life. The COI report focussed on the  backlash  from  family
    members, which chimed  with  the  expert's  report,  but  there  was  a
    preserved finding that the appellant was not at risk  from  his  family
    and that he could relocate to another part of Pakistan  in  any  event.
    There was therefore no risk in terms of the state and  the  family.  As
    for the issue of societal discrimination, the expert report  made  wide
    and unsourced generalisations. AK & SK made  it  clear  that  the  main
    problems were for Muslim women  marrying  outside  their  faith.  In  a
    patriarchal society the appellant, as a man, would get away with  more.
    He would be able to find employment. The expert did  not  say  that  it
    would be impossible for the appellant's  partner  to  get  a  visa  and
    neither was it the case that the couple could not cohabit.  The  couple
    were able to get  married,  albeit  that  their  marriage  may  not  be
    officially recognised. In terms of the judgment in  SB  and  CB,  there
    would be no "flagrant denial of rights". There was nothing  approaching
    very significant obstacles and it could not be  said  that  there  were
    unjustifiably harsh consequences outside the immigration rules.

12.  Mr  Mustafa  reiterated  the  points  previously  made  in   response,
    submitting that the test was not "flagrant denial of rights" but  "very
    significant obstacles to integration" in Pakistan.

Discussion and Findings

13. As a starting point, it is necessary that I clarify the relevant issues
    arising under Article 8  which  I  unfortunately  addressed  in  rather
    misleading terms in my earlier decision at [13] and [14] and which have
    since become crystallised as a result of Mr Kotas's submissions.

14. As Mr Kotas properly submitted, the appellant is not able to rely  upon
    Appendix FM on the basis of his family life, given that  it  has  never
    been claimed  that  his  partner  meets  the  eligibility  relationship
    requirements and therefore, since it is the appellant alone who is  the
    party to this appeal, the question of "very significant  obstacles"  in
    paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) arises only in the context of his private  life
    rather than in relation to the ability of the  family  as  a  whole  to
    integrate into Pakistan. The only suggested  obstacles  to  integration
    into Pakistan have been on the basis of the family returning there as a
    whole and no reasons have been provided for there to be obstacles faced
    by the appellant himself in integrating into his  home  country,  aside
    from the issues relating to  his  relationship.  The  question  of  the
    appellant being at risk from his family  has  been  rejected  and  that
    finding preserved and there is therefore no evidence  to  suggest  that
    the appellant himself would have any problems integrating back into the
    country where he lived for the majority of his life.  Accordingly,  the
    relevant issue is one outside the immigration rules, on a wider Article
    8 consideration.

15. There is no evidence to show that the appellant's partner and  children
    would be unable to relocate to Pakistan together as a family. There  is
    no issue of the family being separated.  As  found  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, the couple would be able to marry in Pakistan. Whilst such  a
    marriage may not be accorded legal status, it could still  take  place.
    In any event there is no reason why  the  couple  could  not  marry  in
    another  country  such  as  India.  The  expert  report   referred   to
    difficulties obtaining a visa, but as Mr Kotas submitted, there  is  no
    evidence to show that that was not possible.

16. In terms of the appellant's claim as to difficulties he and his partner
    would face in Pakistan, this is essentially  a  "foreign"  case,  which
    gives rise to the relevant question of whether or not there would be  a
    "flagrant denial  or  violation  of  rights"  in  order  for  the  UK's
    obligations under Article 8 to be engaged on the basis of family  life.
    That was precisely the point made by Mr Kotas in his  submissions.  The
    case of SB, upon which  he  relied,  directly  addresses  such  issues.
    Whilst that case concerned a lesbian couple and their ability  to  have
    as open a lifestyle in India as they did in  the  UK  and  to  enjoy  a
    status having legal recognition in India, the situation  was  expressed
    at  [57]  as  being  analogous  to  that  of  couples  in   inter-faith
    relationships. The Court of Appeal decided in that  case  that  neither
    the  existence  of  laws  operating  against  the   appellants   in   a
    discriminatory manner and which did not accord legal  status  to  their
    partnership, nor societal and familial discrimination was sufficient to
    amount to a flagrant denial of their rights and thus to engage  Article
    8. Accordingly, the question is whether the evidence  produced  by  the
    appellant meets that elevated test and the appellant's submissions  and
    his  reliance  upon  the  expert  report  of  Dr  Maryyum  Mehmood   as
    demonstrating very significant obstacles to integration for the  family
    in Pakistan, or compelling circumstances giving rise  to  unduly  harsh
    consequences, are therefore somewhat misplaced.

17. Turning to the expert report, I agree with Mr  Kotas  that  the  report
    makes generalisations without providing specific details  or  evidence.
    With regard to  the  reference  to  the  offence  of  Zina,  First-tier
    Tribunal Rowlands made relevant findings  in  that  regard,  concluding
    that there was no risk of serious harm on that basis. That finding  has
    been preserved. The evidence now produced does  not  suggest  otherwise
    and, as Mr Kotas submitted, neither is there evidence of  the  sentence
    of five years' imprisonment having recently been  imposed.  The  expert
    report focusses largely on the risk to Muslim/ non-Muslim couples  from
    their families, including the risk of  honour-killing,  but  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Rowlands did not accept the appellant's  claim  on  that
    basis and there is no further evidence to undermine his conclusions  in
    that regard. The expert report refers to stigma and  social  taboo  and
    also makes generalised references to the risk of  physical  abuse  from
    extremists, and  it  may  well  be  that  the  couple  face  some  such
    difficulties in Pakistan. However, as in the case of  SB  and  CB,  the
    evidence does not show that they would  be  unable  to  continue  their
    family life in that country. They also have the  option  of  living  in
    India as an alternative.  Little has been said about the best interests
    of the children and the focus of  the  appellant's  claim  was  on  the
    difficulties he and his partner would face in Pakistan as belonging  to
    different faiths. In any event, as Mr  Kotas  submitted,  there  is  no
    evidence suggesting that the  children  could  not  access  healthcare,
    education or other services in Pakistan. The children  are  very  young
    and their best interests clearly lie in remaining with  their  parents,
    wherever that may be. There is nothing  to  indicate  that  their  best
    interests would not be met by being with their parents in Pakistan.

18. For all of these reasons I agree with Mr Kotas that the  evidence  does
    not go anywhere near demonstrating  that  the  appellant's  removal  to
    Pakistan would result in a flagrant denial and violation of his rights.
    As in the case of SB and CB I do not consider that Article  8  is  even
    engaged on that basis, but even if it was, any  interference  with  the
    appellant's private and family life must be weighed against the  public
    interest factors under section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and
    Asylum Act 2002. In accordance with section 117B(4), his  private  life
    and his relationship with his partner, formed at a time when he had  no
    leave, should be accorded little weight. As the Court of  Appeal  found
    in SB and CB, at [77]:

         "... in the alternative I would also hold, if necessary,  that,  on
         the particular facts of this  case,  and  even  on  the  assumption
         (contrary to my conclusion) that a removal would  give  rise  to  a
         flagrant denial or violation of their rights to family  life,  such
         removal was nonetheless  proportionate.  This  was  a  case  where,
         having already become  "extremely  close  friends"  in  India,  the
         appellants had chosen to come to this country and to enter  into  a
         civil partnership, when their presence here  was,  so  far  as  the
         future was concerned, necessarily precarious. There is no  evidence
         to support any risk of violence to them on  their  return,  or  any
         risk of prosecution, and whilst, no doubt, the family and  societal
         discrimination which they might encounter on their return would  be
         unpleasant, and something which they would not experience  in  this
         country, that would not be sufficient to outweigh the need for  the
         UK  to  maintain  proper  immigration  controls  in  the   economic
         interests of the country."


19. For the same reasons, and on the basis of the evidence  before  me  and
    the facts of this case, I consider that the  appellant's  removal  from
    the UK would not be disproportionate and would not breach his Article 8
    rights. As stated in my earlier  decision  of  1  October  2020,  Judge
    Rowlands' decision  dismissing  the  appellant's  protection  claim  is
    upheld. The appellant's appeal is accordingly dismissed on all grounds.

DECISION

20. The original Tribunal was found  to  have  made  an  error  of  law  in
    relation to the appellant's Article 8 claim and the  decision  was  set
    aside on that limited basis. I re-make the decision by  dismissing  the
    appellant's appeal on all grounds.


Signed   S Kebede
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede                               Dated: 11 May
2021
