
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10318/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 11th January 2019                         |On 5th February 2019          |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ZUCKER


                                   Between

                                    A L N
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr G Dolan, Counsel, instructed by Duncan Lewis & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Vietnam whose date of birth  is  recorded
    as 1st June 1996.  She made application for international protection as
    a refugee on 17th July 2017.  Although a positive "reasonable  grounds"
    decision had been made in her case with respect to trafficking, on 31st
    July 2017 a negative "conclusive grounds" decision was made.

 2. On 3rd August 2018 a decision was made to refuse  the  application  but
    the Appellant appealed.  Her appeal was heard by Judge  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Andrew on 24th October 2018 at Birmingham.

 3. Judge Andrew came to the view that the Appellant, overall,  was  not  a
    credible witness.  She identified a number of  inconsistencies  in  the
    account and came to the view ultimately set out at paragraph 36:

         "I am satisfied she has come to the United Kingdom as  an  economic
         migrant with the intention of working here in a nail  bar,  as  she
         has said".

 4. Not content with that  decision  by  Notice  dated  9th  November  2018
    application was made for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

 5. There were three grounds.  The first ground attacks paragraph 30 of the
    Decision and Reasons wherein the judge had found that the Appellant had
    not claimed asylum despite being offered to do so, though  that  ground
    is not pursued before me.

 6. In  relation  to  Ground  2  it  is  submitted  that  insufficient,  or
    inadequate,  findings  were  made  in  relation  to  the  risk  of  re-
    trafficking.  Although Judge Andrew had  had  regard  to  the  case  of
    Nguyen (Anti-Trafficking Convention: respondent's duties)  [2015]  UKUT
    170, it is the Appellant's contention that there was, before the judge,
    other country material postdating the country guidance case which would
    have entitled the judge to come to the view that as an orphan and  lone
    woman returning to Vietnam without economic means, she would have  been
    at real risk of being trafficked or re-trafficked as the case may be.

 7. The third ground submits that the judge went behind the concession made
    at paragraph 34 of the refusal letter, dated 3 August 2018.

 8. The focus of the submissions made before me however was on  whether  it
    was open to the judge to find that the Appellant had lacked credibility
    and more particularly whether the decision was adequately reasoned.

 9. Mr Dolan submitted that the Appellant's case was rather complex and yet
    the decision was rather brief given the amount of evidence  that  there
    was.  He also pointed to the fact that the judge at paragraph 22 of the
    decision had accepted that the Appellant had been broadly consistent in
    relation to part  of  her  claim,  which  related  to  forced  domestic
    servitude in Vietnam, so that she was satisfied that the Appellant  was
    taken to Russia by a third party and then passed to another.

10. Mr Dolan invites me to find that the judge's  approach  to  credibility
    overall  was  flawed  given  that  initial  positive  finding  in   the
    Appellant's favour.  However I disagree.  The  judge  was  required  to
    have regard to the totality of the evidence.  Paragraph 23  immediately
    following the  recognition  that  there  had  been  an  aspect  of  the
    Appellant's case in respect of which the  Appellant  had  been  broadly
    consistent said as follows:

         "However, I find much of the Appellant's claims following  this  to
         be inconsistent and implausible.  The Appellant claims that one day
         she was asked to accompany Mrs Hanh to her market stall  where  she
         spoke to some men and disappeared.  In evidence the Appellant  told
         me that there was a melee and during this she was captured  by  men
         who put her in a lorry".

11. In other words, having considered that part of the case  in  which  the
    Appellant was broadly consistent, the judge immediately turned her mind
    to the rest of  the  evidence  and  then  set  out  why,  overall,  the
    Appellant was found not to be a reliable witness.  The judge has  taken
    from paragraph 23 to 36 albeit  in  short  paragraphs  to  explain  her
    reasoning.

12. In my view the findings which the judge made were open to her and  once
    she came to the view overall that the  Appellant  was  not  a  reliable
    witness, the circumstances in which the Appellant was taken  to  Russia
    and passed from one person to another has to be seen in the context  of
    the overall finding that this was part of the Appellant's desire to get
    to the United Kingdom to work.

13. The failure on the part of the judge even if made out that she did  not
    have regard to any other background material  is  not  material  in  my
    judgment once it was found that the Appellant lacked credibility.

14. I invited Mr Dolan to tell me whether there were any matters with which
    I ought to deal more fully, given the other grounds and  the  issue  of
    whether they were material which given the general credibility finding,
    for the avoidance of doubt, I considered, were  not.   He  was  content
    that I had dealt with all the matters and had nothing to add.

15. In the light of what I have said above it follows that  the  appeal  to
    the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed                              Date: 28 January 2019





Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Zucker
