
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10613/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 15 March 2019                              |On 3 April 2019               |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                      v

                                     A S
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr B Bundock, Counsel, instructed by Ata and Co
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Respondent, to whom I shall refer as the Claimant, is a national of
Afghanistan, born on 5 August 2000.  He arrived in the UK on 16 February
2018 and claimed asylum.

The basis of his claim is that he is from a village in the Sorkh Parsa
district of Parwan province and he is a member of the Hazara ethnic
minority group and a Shia Muslim.  His parents were killed in a car
accident in 2009 or 2010.  Following the death of his parents, the Claimant
and his sister moved to live with his aunt, [G] and her family members.
His aunt died of natural causes in 2016, following which he was looked
after by his cousin, [AM].  However, he was not treated well by [A]'s wife
and during this period of time he was at risk from the Taliban, who were
very active in his home area.  This was in the village of [~].  He would
sometimes visit Kabul with his cousin in order to get supplies for the shop
his cousin ran and they would be stopped by the Taliban from time to time,
who would be abusive due to the fact that they were Hazara Shias and the
situation worsened and was unsafe. Consequently, he fled the country.

The Claimant had three brothers who were killed in the war when he was
younger.  He has one older brother, [N], who is in the UK, and a sister,
[F], who has been living in Canada for some time.

The Claimant's asylum application was refused in a decision dated 16 August
2018.  The Claimant appealed against this decision and his appeal came
before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Herbert for hearing on 4 December
2018.  In a Decision and Reasons promulgated on 28 December 2018, the judge
allowed the appeal on the basis of asylum, Articles 2, 3 and 8 of the
European Convention on Human Rights and under the Immigration Rules.

Permission to appeal was sought in time by the Secretary of State on the
basis that the judge had erred materially in law

in failing to identify any Convention risk specific to the Claimant;

in failing to take into account and/or resolve conflicts of fact or opinion
on material matters.  This related to the expert report of Tim Foxley;

in failing to give reasons and the judge conflated his reasons at [49] to
[71] with those that were more appropriate for the grant of humanitarian
protection, and

in allowing the appeal on Article 8 grounds absent any reasoning or
assessment of the public interest or proportionality as per section 117B of
the NIAA 2002 and Razgar [2004] UKHL 27.

6.   Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal
Foudy in a    decision dated 18 January 2019, on the basis that the grounds
disclose arguable errors   of law.

     Hearing

7.   At the hearing before the Upper Tribunal, Mr Bramble submitted that at
the heart of  the Secretary of State's argument was that his position that
he accepted that the   Claimant was a Hazara and a Shia Muslim but he has
not been targeted by the   Taliban and thus he would not be at risk in his
home area in Parwan province or in  Kabul.  Mr Bramble submitted that the
judge had essentially cherry-picked from the     expert report of Mr
Foxley, which was balanced, and had focused on some aspects    but had not
considered it as a whole.

8.   At [71] the judge concluded that the Claimant satisfies the Convention
criteria but  fails to say why this was his finding.  Mr Bramble submitted
that the judge had     ignored material elements of the expert report, e.g.
[25] at page 20 of the     supplementary bundle, [36] at page 25, [45] at
page 31, [71] at page 44, [56] at page  36 and see also [55].  Mr Bramble
accepted that the judge appeared to find that there   was a general risk to
the Claimant in an Article 15 sense but the judge failed to    engage
properly with this evidence and his findings were not sufficient to show
that     Hazaras per se are at a well-founded fear of persecution or a real
risk in the home  area.

9.   Mr Bramble submitted that in the context of what is said by the expert
about the     Hazara community in Kabul, the Claimant does have money
potentially from his   brother in the UK and connections with the Hazara
community through his brother's     marriage, his brother's wife continuing
to live in Kabul.  Although he could not be  expected to live with his
sister-in-law, he could obtain support from the community.     Those were
Mr Bramble's submissions in respect of the first two grounds of appeal.

10.  In respect of the third ground of appeal, the failure by the judge to
give proper or    adequate reasons for his decision, cf. MK (duty to give
reasons) Pakistan [2013]   UKUT 00641 (IAC), Mr Bramble submitted that the
judge had treated this more like a  humanitarian protection case, but his
findings were not sufficient so as to depart     from the country guidance
case on humanitarian protection.

11.  In relation to the fourth ground of appeal, Mr Bramble submitted that
the judge had     not directly dealt with Article 8 and if errors were
found in respect of the judge's     approach to the Refugee Convention then
his findings in respect of Article 8 were    also flawed.

12.  In his submissions, Mr Bundock for the Claimant asserted that the
Secretary of State's   position was essentially no more than an extended
disagreement with the reasons   and findings of the First-tier Tribunal
Judge and that there had been no articulation    of an error of law.  He
sought to rely on the judgment of Lord Hoffmann in    Piglowska v.
Piglowski, [1999] 1 WLR 1360 at 1372, cited at [20] of his rule 24
response.  He submitted that the judge was experienced and one should not
assume   that an error has been made.  Mr Bundock submitted that the
Secretary of State's   position seemed to be that a Convention claim cannot
succeed absent an      individualised risk, albeit that Mr Bramble was not
specifically pursuing that point.   He submitted that the Convention basis
is clearly that the claimant is a Hazara and a   Shia and this would put
him at   heightened risk in Afghanistan.

13.  In relation to ground 2 and the assertion that the judge had cherry-
picked from the   expert report, Mr Bundock submitted that this did not
constitute an error of law and  it had not been asserted in this respect
that the judge had provided insufficient     reasons for his findings.  He
submitted it was clear the judge took the relevant    passages of the
expert report into account and that he had cited it extensively, for
example [32]-[34] and [55] -[57] of the judge's findings.

14.  Mr Bundock further submitted that in relation to the issue of the
Claimant's home   province and the expert's findings at [45], "it is
difficult to be confident about the level of     risk specific to your
client", the expert had also gone on to say as follows at [46]:

"A chance encounter, however, at a checkpoint or travelling through an area
where the Taliban operate such as Parwan province could put your client at
risk if his background became known, i.e. that he was a Hazara Shia Muslim
and had fled to the UK, perhaps through being searched or questioned."

Mr Bundock submitted that the judge had taken the expert report fully into
account, including points that were not in the Claimant's favour.  It was
agreed that there was no risk to the Claimant from the authorities and that
he had not been targeted or threatened before he left and the judge
recorded that.  Therefore, he submitted, there was no sustainable argument
that the judge had failed to take material considerations into account.

15.  In respect of ground 3, which is a reasons challenge, Mr Bundock
submitted that the     judge had given clear and sustainable reasons for
his findings.  He did not find that     the Claimant would be at risk of
persecution in Kabul, but rather that it would be     unduly harsh to
expect him to relocate there.  In relation to [62] of the judge's
findings, where there was reference to the fact there was no family to turn
to in the     area for support, Mr Bundock submitted it was clear the judge
was here referring to  the Claimant's home area because he thereafter went
on to deal with the issue of    support in relation to Kabul further down
in [62].  Notably, the Claimant was only 18  at that time and the skeleton
argument dealt fully with the internal relocation risk.

16.  In relation to the fourth ground of appeal, in terms of the Article 8
assessment, Mr    Bundock sought to rely on what is set out at [22] and
[23] of his Rule 24 response,   which is in essence that any omissions in
relation to the Article 8 assessment were    immaterial if the decision is
upheld under the Refugee Convention.  Mr Bundock      emphasised that the
judge had provided adequate reasons for his decision, which    should be
upheld.

     Findings and Reasons

17.  In respect of the first ground of appeal, that the Judge erred in
failing to identify any    Convention risk specific to the Claimant, I find
that is not made out on the findings    of the Judge, read holistically.
Whilst at [71] the Judge found simply that the   Appellant satisfied the
material criteria of the 1951 Convention to the lower standard     of
proof, it is clear from [51]-[69] that the Judge clearly considered the
appeal from   the perspective that the Claimant is an unaccompanied young
man of 18 who     claimed it would be unsafe for him to return to his home
area because there is a high    level of violence against ethnic Hazaras of
the Shi'a faith: see eg. [51].

18.  At [56] the Judge noted the expert, Tim Foxley's conclusion, that the
Claimant's    home district of Parwan has become increasingly dangerous due
to Taliban and    Islamic State activity and at [62] the expert's
conclusion that return to his home area      would carry a significant
degree of risk, given the Claimant has no family to turn to    in the area
for support. It is thus tolerably clear that the Refugee Convention reason
is the Claimant's ethnicity and/or religion.

19.  The second ground of appeal asserts that the Judge erred in failing to
take into     account and/or resolve conflicts of fact or opinion on
material matters, in particular     that there was no specific risk to the
Claimant of being targeted on return, which the  Respondent asserts was the
position set out in the expert report of Tim Foxley. The  Respondent
further took issue with the findings at [18]-[31] and [67] that the judge
accepted the evidence of the Claimant and his brother that there is no
family to     support the Claimant in Kabul, when his brother's wife lives
there and his brother  has visited. The grounds submitted that the finding
at [20] that it would be culturally     improper for the Claimant to live
with his sister in law's family was a "conveniently   self-serving
explanation."

20.  I accept the submission on behalf of the Claimant by Mr Bundock that
the first aspect  of Ground 2 is misconceived, because as a matter of law
it is established that an  applicant is not required to demonstrate that he
would necessarily be specifically   targeted or "singled out| for
persecution, in light of the judgment in R v SSHD ex  parte Jeyakumaran
[1994] Imm AR 45, which was followed by their Lordships in R v     SSHD ex
parte Adan [1999] UKHL 15, per Lord Lloyd. The issue is whether the
Claimant could show that he would face a real risk of persecution if
returned to   Afghanistan on account of his protected characteristics. It
is clear and I find that the    judge's findings were not inconsistent with
the expert report of Tim Foxley, but    rather were properly based upon his
conclusions at [55]-[59].

21.  As to the second aspect of Ground 2, this is no more than a
disagreement with the  judge's acceptance of the credibility of the
Claimant and his brother, which was     open     to him on the evidence
before him and properly reasoned: see [49] where the  judge found that the
Claimant gave a cogent and credible account of his flight from
Afghanistan and further found the Claimant's evidence to be consistent and
not  subject to any exaggeration and provided an example of this at [50].
Further,      contrary to the assertion in this ground of appeal, the Judge
found at [66] that it  would not be "viable" for the Claimant to live with
his sister in law or her   family in    Kabul. This finding was based on
the evidence of the Claimant's brother to that   effect, recorded at [22].
Given that the cultural tradition is that upon marriage   women move in
with their husband and his family, the Judge's finding was clearly     open
to him on the evidence before him, including that of the expert, Tim Foxley
at   [59] that: "It is very problematic, culturally, for a single adult
male to share the same house    with non-    related women and girls." The
assertion in the grounds of appeal that this     was a "conveniently self-
serving explanation" is unwarranted in light of the evidence.

22.  The third ground of appeal asserts that the judge erred in failing to
give adequate     reasons for allowing the appeal on asylum grounds cf. MK
(duty to give reasons)     [2013] UKUT 00641 (IAC)    and conflated his
reasons at [49] to [71] with those that      were more appropriate for the
grant of humanitarian protection. I find, for the     reasons already
provided above, that there is no substance in the first element of this
ground of appeal. The judge found the Claimant to be credible and gave
reasons for   his finding at [49] and [50] and gave clear and adequate
reasons at [52] through to      [71] as to why he considered that the
Claimant would be at risk on return to  Afghanistan, including findings
that internal relocation to Kabul would be   unreasonable or unduly harsh.
It is further clear and I find that the Judge's findings  were clearly made
in the context of the fact that the Claimant is a young,  unaccompanied
Hazara Shi'a muslim i.e. in the context of the Refugee Convention  and not
simply on the basis of a generalised risk to him viz humanitarian
protection.   The fact that he is Hazara will be apparent from his physical
appearance.

23.  The fourth ground of appeal asserts that the Judge erred in allowing
the appeal on     Article 8 grounds absent any reasoning or assessment of
the public interest or     proportionality as per section 117B of the NIAA
2002 and Razgar [2004] UKHL 27.  I  find that this ground of appeal
succeeds in that, whilst the judge allowed the appeal     in general terms
at [73] on the basis of Articles 2, 3 and 8 of ECHR, he made no    findings
in respect of Article 8 to substantiate this finding. Nor, as the ground of
     appeal identifies, did the Judge consider the statutory public
interest considerations    set out at section 117B of the NIAA 2002 or
apply the test set out in Razgar [2004]      UKHL 27. Similarly, although
this particular ground was not pleaded, there are no  findings to
substantiate his decision to allow the appeal with regard to Articles 2 and
     3 of ECHR.

24.  However, read as a whole, the Secretary of State's first three grounds
of appeal are     essentially an attempt to re-run the arguments put before
the First tier Tribunal    Judge, which were rejected for reasons which are
adequate and were based on the  evidence before him, including the expert
report of Tim Foxley. Those grounds of  appeal do not disclose any errors
of law in the decision and reasons of the First tier  Tribunal Judge.

Notice of Decision

The First tier Tribunal Judge  erred  in  failing  to  provide  reasons  for
allowing the appeal on human rights grounds.  However,  the  appeal  by  the
Secretary of State in respect of the Judge's  findings  in  respect  of  the
Claimant's asylum claim is dismissed, with the effect that the  decision  of
the First tier Tribunal to allow the appeal on asylum grounds is upheld.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court  directs  otherwise,  the  Claimant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Claimant and to the  Secretary  of  State.   Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Rebecca Chapman                              Date 31 March 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman
