
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
PA/10752/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Leeds Combined Court Centre    | Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 15 July 2019                         | On 08 August 2019                  |
|Decision given at hearing               |                                    |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     THE HON. MR JUSTICE LANE, PRESIDENT

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                     EG
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                  Respondent
                                                                  (Claimant)

Representation:

For the Appellant:         Mrs Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent (Claimant):  Mr Sills, Counsel, instructed by JD Spicer
                  Zeb Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal  brought  by  the  Secretary  of  State  against  the
    decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Cox  who,  in  a  decision  that
    followed  a  hearing  on  1  November  2018,  allowed  the   claimant's
    protection appeal.

 2. The claimant is a national of  Ethiopia.   He  arrived  in  the  United
    Kingdom at some point in 2018 and claimed asylum.  In August  of  2018,
    the Secretary of State refused the  claimant's  asylum  and  protection
    claims.  The judge heard evidence from the claimant and had  regard  to
    the country materials and submissions of the parties.

 3. In essence, the claimant is an  Amharic  Ethiopian  who  in  June  2016
    started supporting an organisation known as Ginbot 7.  He was  inspired
    to do so by his sister, who had  been  a  supporter  since  2015.   The
    claimant attended secret monthly meetings at Ginbot 7. There were  five
    members of his  particular  cell.   Meetings  were  held  in  different
    houses.  The claimant contributed financially to  the  cell.   He  also
    distributed leaflets in support of Ginbot 7.

 4. In December 2017, whilst a meeting  at  the  cell  was  occurring,  the
    police raided the house.  The claimant was arrested, along  with  other
    cell members, and was  taken  to  the  police  station,  where  he  was
    detained for about fifteen days and interrogated.   He  was  also  ill-
    treated by the police during that time.  The claimant was then released
    after his father had paid a bribe.   The  claimant  was  taken  to  his
    father's and arrangements were then made  for  the  claimant  to  leave
    Ethiopia with the assistance of an agent.

 5. Since arriving in the United Kingdom, the claimant had become a  member
    here of Ginbot 7, having joined a branch of  the  organisation  in  May
    2018.

 6.  The Secretary of State accepted that the claimant was  a  national  of
    Ethiopia; that he was a supporter of Ginbot 7 in Ethiopia; and that  he
    is also now a low-level member  of  that  organisation  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  The Secretary of  State,  however,  rejected  the  claimant's
    claim that the authorities had arrested and detained him in Ethiopia.

 7. Having heard evidence, the  judge  came  to  the  conclusion  that  the
    claimant's account  of  what  had  happened  to  him  in  Ethiopia  was
    reasonably likely to be true.  In so doing, the  judge  undertook  what
    can only  be  described  as  a  painstaking  and  careful  exercise  in
    analysing the evidence.  There  is  nothing  remotely  wrong  with  the
    judge's conclusions.  Having made those findings  of  fact,  the  judge
    then considered the evidence regarding Ethiopia and the attitude of the
    authorities there to Ginbot 7.

 8. At paragraph 45 the judge considered the CIPN  summary.   That  summary
    was in the  judge's  view  significant  in  that  it  remained  on  the
    Secretary of State's website notwithstanding the  changes  in  Ethiopia
    that the judge mentioned in paragraph 46.  The CIPN summary stated that
    those who had been arrested  in  connection  with  being  a  member  of
    various groups or who had previously come to the adverse  attention  of
    the authorities through activities  connected  to  such  a  group  were
    likely to be at risk of persecution or serious  harm  on  return.   The
    judge considered that that was relevant to the  appellant's  case.   He
    did so notwithstanding the finding at paragraph 46 that  in  July  2018
    the government removed Ginbot 7 from its list of banned groups.

 9. The judge noted the submissions of  the  Presenting  Officer  that  the
    situation in Ethiopia continued to improve.  In that regard, the  judge
    noted at paragraph 49 that in  September  2018  the  exiled  leader  of
    Ginbot 7 had returned to Ethiopia.  Nevertheless, the judge recorded at
    paragraph  50  the  submission  by  Counsel  for  the  claimant   that,
    notwithstanding the above events, the situation was "fluid".   In  that
    regard,  the  judge  noted  evidence  from  Human  Rights  Watch  which
    suggested a more equivocal position on the ground than might  otherwise
    be assumed.

10. The judge also noted that there had been recent violence and tension in
    Addis Ababa, caused in part by the return  of  some  exiled  previously
    banned politicians.  In this regard the judge referred  to  an  Amnesty
    International Report of September 2018.  There was  also  reporting  to
    the same general effect in the Guardian newspaper.  Overall, the  judge
    recorded the  appellant's  Counsel's  submissions  as  being  that  the
    evidence did not suggest  there  had  been  a  lasting  change  in  the
    situation in Ethiopia.

11. In paragraph 57, the judge explained why in essence he agreed with that
    conclusion.  At paragraph 60 the judge  noted  paragraph  339K  of  the
    Immigration Rules which provides as follows:-

         "The fact that a person has already been subject to persecution  or
         serious harm, or to direct threats  of  such  persecution  or  such
         harm, will be regarded as a serious indication of the person's well-
         founded fear of persecution or real risk of suffering serious harm,
         unless there are good reasons to consider that such persecution  or
         serious harm will not be repeated."

12. At paragraphs 62, 63 and 64 the judge said:-

         "62. I have found this appeal difficult to determine.  On  the  one
             hand, the new prime minister  has  clearly  taken  significant
             steps in seeking  to  reform  the  oppressive  and  repressive
             nature of the regime.  In particular, he removed Ginbot 7 from
             the terrorist list and welcomed back leading  members  of  the
             organisation  to  Ethiopia.   On  their  part,  Ginbot  7  has
             announced  that  they  have  suspended  its  armed  resistance
             against the government.  These factors all  suggest  that  the
             Appellant is unlikely to be harmed on his return to Ethiopia.

         63.  However, these changes have all occurred within  a  relatively
             short period and I do not know if they represent a  meaningful
             change in the authority's attitude  to  political  activities.
             Although it is probable  that  the  Ethiopian  authorities  no
             longer have an adverse interest in the  Appellant,  it  is  my
             view, I cannot exclude the possibility that they still have an
             adverse interest in him.  Especially as I have found that  his
             release from detention was secured by bribery.

         64.  On the totality of the  evidence,  I  am  satisfied  that  the
             Appellant has a well-founded fear of the Ethiopian authorities
             persecuting him and I allow the asylum appeal."

13. The Secretary of State's  grounds  of  application  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal  asserted  that
    the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  had  materially  erred  in  determining
    future risk.  Despite finding that the evidence is  not  indicative  of
    future risk, the judge was said to have allowed the  claimant's  appeal
    on the basis that his previous persecution  is  accepted  as  credible:
    "therefore the FtT Judge has erred in finding that past persecution  is
    determinative of the risk the claimant now  faces  rather  than  simply
    indicative of any future risks".  With respect to the  draft  of  those
    grounds, which is not by Mrs Pettersen, that is in my  view  a  serious
    mischaracterisation of the judge's decision.

14. The First-tier Tribunal granted permission to appeal on the basis  that
    the finding at paragraph 63 of the  judge's  decision  -  that  it  was
    probable the Ethiopian authorities no longer had an adverse interest in
    the claimant but that the possibility could not be excluded - does  not
    sit with earlier findings at paragraph 62 of  the  decision  where  the
    judge had referred to the steps that the Prime Minister was  taking  to
    reform the oppressive and repressive nature of the regime.  Being  with
    respect I disagree.  The judge in my view has plainly applied  the  law
    correctly.  The judge has concluded that  the  claimant  suffered  ill-
    treatment at the hands of the authorities recently.  He has  considered
    the changes that have occurred in Ethiopia but, although  finding  that
    those changes mean it is more likely than not that the  claimant  would
    not be persecuted on return, the judge does  not  consider  that  those
    changes have a sufficient degree of robustness to make it no more  than
    fanciful that the claimant would suffer harm.

15. That was an entirely permissible approach to take.  Regrettably, in  my
    view the First-tier Tribunal has been all too ready to grant permission
    to the Secretary of State on grounds which, on analysis, simply do  not
    cohere.

16.  For these reasons this appeal is dismissed.




                      Signed                     Date: 08 Aug. 2019






                      The Hon. Mr Justice Lane
                      President of the Upper Tribunal
                      Immigration and Asylum Chamber




Direction Regarding Anonymity - rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court  directs  otherwise,  the  claimant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the claimant and to the  Secretary  of  State.   Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

