
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10101/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 18th March 2020                            |On 20th April 2020            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                                    UBJJM
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Anzani of Counsel instructed by L & L Law
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant appeals against a decision of Judge Widdup (the judge) of
    the First-tier Tribunal (the FtT) promulgated on  27th  November  2019,
    who dismissed the Appellant's asylum and human rights appeal.

 2. The Appellant is a Sri Lankan citizen of Tamil ethnicity born in August
    1980.  The Appellant initially entered the UK as the dependant  of  his
    wife in February 2011.  The couple returned to  Sri  Lanka  in  October
    2012.  The Appellant returned to the UK as a student in 2014.  His wife
    gave birth to a child in the UK on 23rd March 2016.

 3. The Appellant returned to Sri Lanka in August 2016 because  his  mother
    was ill.  He came back to the UK on  5th  November  2016.   He  claimed
    asylum on 2nd February 2018.  He claimed that he had been detained  and
    ill-treated by the authorities in Sri Lanka on two occasions.  In  2013
    he was arrested and held for  approximately  24  hours  and  questioned
    about a  relationship  with  a  former  girlfriend  who  was  allegedly
    involved in the LTTE.  The second  arrest  and  detention  occurred  in
    August 2016.  He was detained for three days during which time  he  was
    continuously tortured and subjected to sexual abuse.  He  was  released
    after payment of a bribe and then returned to the UK.  His asylum claim
    was therefore based upon imputed political opinion.

 4. The asylum and human rights claim was refused on 11th June  2019.   The
    appeal was heard on 21st November 2019.

 5. The judge found the Appellant to be an incredible witness.   The  judge
    found at paragraph  77  that  the  Appellant's  "entire  account  is  a
    complete fabrication".

 6. The judge did not accept that the Appellant had been detained and  ill-
    treated.   The  judge  accepted  that  the  Appellant   suffered   from
    depression but  not  PTSD.   The  judge  treated  the  Appellant  as  a
    vulnerable witness at the hearing.

 7. The appeal was dismissed on all grounds.

The Application for Permission to Appeal

 8. Reliance was placed upon three grounds.

 9. Firstly, it  was  contended  the  judge  had  erred  in  considering  a
    psychiatric report produced on behalf of the Appellant, prepared by  Dr
    Dhumad and dated 11th November 2019.

10. It was noted that the judge  treated  the  Appellant  as  a  vulnerable
    witness at the  hearing  but  it  was  claimed  his  treatment  of  the
    psychiatric report was "peculiar".  This  was  because  the  judge  had
    acknowledged that the Appellant was a vulnerable witness and  proceeded
    with the case on that basis, but it was submitted that  the  judge  had
    exceeded his remit by rejecting the diagnosis of  PTSD,  and  rejecting
    the psychiatric opinion that the Appellant was unfit to  fly.   It  was
    submitted that the judge had  acted  irrationally  in  considering  the
    medical evidence.   This  had  caused  him  to  err  in  assessing  the
    credibility of the Appellant's claim.

11. Secondly, it was submitted  that  the  judge  had  erred  in  assessing
    medical notes prepared by Dr Ginige, who had seen the Appellant on four
    occasions after he returned to Sri  Lanka  on  18th  August  2016,  and
    before he came back to the UK on 5th November 2016.

12. It was submitted that the judge had erred by observing that  Dr  Ginige
    had seen the Appellant twice after he had allegedly been  detained  and
    tortured in Sri Lanka on 22nd September 2016.  It  was  submitted  that
    the judge had erred by making an adverse  credibility  finding  on  the
    basis that the Appellant had not disclosed to Dr Ginige the  fact  that
    he had been detained and continuously tortured for three days.

13. Thirdly, it was contended that the judge had materially erred in law by
    failing to consider the best interests of the Appellant's child.

The Grant of Permission to Appeal

14. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Bristow of  the  FtT  in  the
    following terms;

         "(2) The grounds assert that the judge erred (a) in his approach to
             Dr Dhumad's psychiatric report, (b) in  his  treatment  of  Dr
             Ginige's  medical  notes,  and  (c)  by  failing  to  consider
             adequately or at all a child's best interests.

         (3)  The judge  at  paragraph  [95]  writes,  'This  decision  does
             nothing  to  affect  the  arrangements  for  the   Appellant's
             daughter whose best interests  are  not  the  subject  of  any
             threatened interference'.  There does not  appear  to  be  any
             further  consideration  of  the  Appellant's  daughter's  best
             interests.  There is no finding as to what the best  interests
             of the child are.  There is no finding  as  to  whether  those
             best interests can be preserved if the Appellant  is  removed.
             It is arguable that the judge has failed  to  make  a  finding
             about the child's best interests and/or that he has failed  to
             give any  or  adequate  reasons  for  finding  that  her  best
             interests are not  threatened  and  that  this  amounts  to  a
             material error of law.

         (4)  The decision and reasons do contain an arguable material error
             of law.  Permission to appeal  is  granted  for  that  reason.
             Permission  is  granted  on  all  grounds  asserted   in   the
             application received on 11th December 2019".

15. Directions were issued that there should be an oral hearing before  the
    Upper Tribunal to ascertain whether the FtT decision contained an error
    of law such that it must be set aside.

My Analysis and Conclusions

16. At the oral hearing  Ms  Anzani  submitted  case  law  to  support  her
    submissions, AM v SSHD [2012] EWCA Civ 521 and Mibanga  v  SSHD  [2005]
    EWCA Civ 367.

17. Ms Anzani indicated that  she  had  no  oral  submissions  to  make  in
    relation to the third ground of appeal in relation to consideration  of
    the child's best interests.

18. With reference to the first ground it  was  submitted  that  the  judge
    should have taken into  account  the  opinion  of  Dr  Dhumad  who  had
    accepted  the  Appellant's  account  and  reliance  was   placed   upon
    paragraphs 17, 29-31 of AM.  It was submitted that paragraph 89 of  the
    judge's decision contains  an  error  of  law  because  the  judge  had
    considered credibility and found the  Appellant  to  be  an  incredible
    witness before considering Dr Dhumad's report.  This  was  contrary  to
    the guidance at paragraph 25 of Mibanga.

19. It was submitted that the judge had  adopted  an  unusual  approach  by
    accepting some of Dr Dhumad's report, in relation  to  depression,  but
    rejecting a diagnosis of PTSD.

20. With reference to the  second  ground  reliance  was  placed  upon  the
    written submissions upon which permission to appeal had  been  granted.
    It was submitted that the judge had speculated as to why the  Appellant
    had not disclosed to Dr Ginige, the fact that he had been detained  and
    tortured in Sri Lanka in September 2016.

21. On behalf of the Respondent Mr Tufan submitted that the decision of the
    FtT contained no material error of  law  and  relied  upon  a  rule  24
    response dated 5th February 2020 in which it  was  contended  that  the
    judge had not erred in law.

22. Mr Tufan submitted that the judge had dealt with the report prepared by
    Dr Dhumad in the light of guidance given  in  JL  (China)  [2013]  UKUT
    00145, although it was accepted that there was no specific reference to
    this decision.

23. Dealing with the first ground  upon  which  permission  to  appeal  was
    granted, it is apparent from paragraph 56  that  the  judge  agreed  to
    treat the Appellant as a vulnerable witness  for  the  purpose  of  the
    hearing in accordance with the Joint Presidential Guidance Note No 2 of
    2010.  This does not mean that the judge accepted in  its  entirety  Dr
    Dhumad's report.

24. At paragraph 57 the judge follows the correct  approach,  by  accepting
    that the Appellant's vulnerability is of relevance to  the  reliability
    of his recollection of events and his credibility generally.  The judge
    expressly states that in assessing credibility account has  been  taken
    of the possibility that any inconsistencies may be attributable to  the
    Appellant's mental health condition.

25. At paragraph 58 the judge accepts that the  Appellant  has  had  mental
    health problems since 2016, before he returned to Sri  Lanka  from  the
    UK.

26. At paragraph 63 the judge expressly accepts Dr  Dhumad's  diagnosis  of
    depression, noting that this is consistent with the  diagnosis  reached
    in Sri Lanka by Dr Ginige in 2016.  The judge finds that the  Appellant
    was seen by Dr Ginige in Sri Lanka on four occasions, 19th August 2016,
    1st September 2016, 3rd October 2016, and 1st November 2016.

27. I do not accept that paragraph 89 discloses a material  error  of  law.
    In this paragraph the judge explains that the diagnosis of PTSD  relies
    on the accuracy and reliability of the Appellant's own account that  he
    was tortured and that he had  flashbacks  and  nightmares.   The  judge
    points out that he has rejected that account, and that  Dr  Dhumad  was
    not provided with a true account of the Appellant's experiences in  Sri
    Lanka, which undermines the diagnosis of PTSD.

28. The assessment of credibility must be decided by the judge deciding the
    appeal.  It is  not  the  case  that  the  judge  has  disregarded  the
    psychiatric report prepared by Dr Dhumad, but in my view  has  analysed
    that report, and has not erred in law in finding that the account given
    to Dr Dhumad was not accurate, which therefore does undermine his  PTSD
    diagnosis.

29. Included in this ground of appeal is  the  contention  that  the  judge
    rejected the Appellant's credibility prior to considering  Dr  Dhumad's
    report.  If that was the case this would be an error of law.

30. I do not accept that the judge followed that approach.  At paragraph 52
    the judge specifically records that in  making  findings  of  fact  and
    conclusions he has considered the Appellant's witness  statements,  and
    his answers given in the screening and asylum interviews, together with
    his oral evidence and background evidence.  The judge records  that  he
    has also taken into account the report of Dr Dhumad and the submissions
    of both representatives "in order to reach a rounded assessment of  the
    Appellant's case".

31. At paragraph 59 the judge records again that he has taken into  account
    the report of Dr Dhumad, noting at paragraph 60 that in one respect the
    account given by the Appellant to Dr Dhumad was at odds with an account
    he later gave.  The judge at paragraph 61 attaches no  significance  to
    this inconsistency.  At this point the judge has not  commenced  making
    findings of fact on credibility.

32. At paragraphs 62-63 the  judge  considers  the  diagnosis  made  by  Dr
    Dhumad, accepting the diagnosis of depression.   At  paragraph  64  the
    judge indicates that in due course he will consider the PTSD  diagnosis
    and the claim that the Appellant is unfit to fly.  Again, at this point
    the judge has not set out any credibility findings.

33. It is therefore not the case that the judge  has  made  a  decision  on
    credibility before considering Dr Dhumad's report.

34. Turning to the second ground,  and  the  judge's  consideration  of  Dr
    Ginige's medical notes.  It is apparent that the Appellant returned  to
    Sri Lanka on 18th August 2016.  The medical notes indicate that he  was
    seen by Dr Ginige on 19th August 2016, 1st September 2016, 3rd  October
    2016 and 1st November 2016.  The Appellant claims that he was  detained
    and tortured continuously for three days on 22nd September 2016  before
    being released.  The judge sets out the Appellant's claim as to how  he
    was treated.  This includes being stripped naked, hung upside down, and
    beaten with wooden sticks and iron rods.  He was  subjected  to  sexual
    abuse.  He was continuously tortured and mistreated for two nights.

35. In my view  the  judge  did  not  err  in  law  in  making  an  adverse
    credibility finding as the Appellant had not mentioned  this  treatment
    to Dr Ginige when he saw him on 3rd October 2016 or 1st November  2016.
    The judge rejected the Appellant's explanation that  non-disclosure  of
    torture was because he had been told by his parents and  brother-in-law
    not to mention it.  The judge was entitled to note at paragraph 76 that
    Dr Ginige had seen the Appellant twice before the claimed torture,  and
    twice afterwards.  The judge was entitled to find it inconceivable that
    a consultant psychiatrist would not have observed  the  effect  on  the
    Appellant of his claimed detention and torture.

36. The judge also noted at paragraph 78 that there was  no  evidence  that
    the Appellant had recounted to his GP in the UK after  he  returned  on
    5th November 2016 that he had been tortured in Sri  Lanka.   The  judge
    noted a letter from the GP in the UK dated 4th  September  2018,  which
    made no reference to the alleged torture in Sri Lanka.

37. I find that the judge's consideration of Dr Ginige's medical notes does
    not disclose a material error of law.

38. With reference to the third ground I can be brief.  Ms Anzani  did  not
    withdraw this ground, but correctly did not pursue  it.   It  is  clear
    from consideration of the skeleton argument before the FtT,  that  this
    point was not pursued before the judge.  The child in  question  was  3
    years of age at the date of the FtT hearing.  The child was born in the
    UK but is not British and is not a qualifying  child,  not  having  had
    seven years' continuous residence.  The judge did not need to  say  any
    more than was recorded in paragraph 95.   The  best  interests  of  the
    child would be to remain with her parents.

39. In my view the judge has considered all the evidence in the round, made
    findings  on  that  evidence  and  given  adequate  reasons  for  those
    findings.  The decision of the FtT does not disclose a  material  error
    of law and therefore stands.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the FtT does not disclose a  material  error  of  law.   The
appeal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead  to  contempt  of  court  proceedings.   This
direction is made because the Appellant has made a claim  for  international
protection.


Signed                              Date         23rd March 2020
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal is dismissed.  There is no fee award.


Signed                              Date         23rd March 2020
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall
