

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/10562/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                          |Decision and Reasons          |
|                                           |Promulgated                   |
|On 26 April 2019                           |On 14 May 2019                |
|                                           |                              |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY


                                   Between

                                      D


                            (Anonymity DIRECTED)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:      Ms R Pickering (Counsel)
For the Respondent:     Mr M McVeety (Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer)









                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.    This is the claimant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal, brought with  the
permission of a Judge of the First-tier Tribunal in respect of some  of  the
grounds and with the permission of  a  Judge  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  with
respect  to  others,  from  a  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (the
tribunal) which it made on  4  December  2017  following  a  hearing  of  20
November 2017. The tribunal's decision was to dismiss the claimant's  appeal
against a decision of the Secretary of State of 6 October 2017 to refuse  to
grant her international protection.

2.    Shorn of all but essential detail, the  background  circumstances  are
as follows: The claimant is a female national of Nigeria. She  was  born  on
29 November 1980. She claims to be a Christian. She has a daughter  who  was
born to her in the United Kingdom (UK) on 11 May 2017. She was, on 17  March
2011, granted a visa permitting her to come to the UK as a  visitor.  It  is
said that she entered the UK on a date in May 2011 having travelled by  air.
Her leave as a visitor must have expired without further leave  being  given
because, on 10 November 2016, she was served with notice as  an  overstayer.
It is recorded that she claimed international protection on  7  April  2017.
As to the facts underpinning her claim for asylum,  she  asserted  that  her
parents had been murdered by followers of Islam because  of  antipathy  they
had towards the Christian religion,  that  she  had  been  detained  by  her
parents' assailants and those associated with them, that she had managed  to
escape from her captors, that she had subsequently  received  death  threats
from them and that she had, in consequence, decided she would have to  leave
Nigeria for her own safety. She also claimed that the authorities would  not
be able to protect her in Nigeria and that she would not have  available  to
her, upon return, an internal flight alternative.  The  Secretary  of  State
did not believe that the claimant had told the truth and, essentially,  that
is why her claim was refused.

3.    Given that the claimant had appealed to the tribunal, her case had  to
be allocated to a Hearing Centre. She has, at all  material  times,  resided
in Doncaster. The closest and most accessible Immigration Hearing Centre  to
Doncaster is located in Bradford. However, for reasons which are  not  clear
to me, her case was allocated  to  the  North  Shields  Immigration  Hearing
Centre. At the pre-hearing review stage, the claimant's  solicitors  made  a
written request for the  case  to  be  transferred  from  North  Shields  to
Bradford. By way of explanation, it was said that the claimant has  a  young
child who was five months old and that it would be very  difficult  for  her
to have to travel to North Shields. The clear implication (though  this  was
not actually stated in terms) was that the claimant intended to travel  with
her child rather than to leave her child in the care  of  someone  else.  It
may be that she did not have anyone she felt she could trust with  the  task
of caring for her child. Anyway, a Judge of the First-tier tribunal  refused
the request for a transfer. His handwritten note relevantly reads:

           "Transfer refused - no special circumstances. A would still need
           to travel from Doncaster to Bradford".

4.    The  claimant's  solicitors  then  renewed  the  transfer  request  by
letter, essentially  making  the  same  points  and  observing  "our  client
advises that it is very unlikely that  she  would  be  able  to  attend  the
hearing herself as it stands in  North  Shields.  She  is  really  concerned
about the travel time and the fact that she  would  have  to  set  off  very
early in the morning in order to ensure that she was at the  court  in  time
for her hearing". The letter asserted in light of that  "there  are  special
circumstances in this case". The application, however, was  refused  by  the
same Judge on the basis that the more recent request  did  not  contain  new
information. The case was, therefore, listed for  a  hearing  at  the  North
Shields Hearing Centre on 20 November 2017. The  claimant  did  not  attend.
Counsel for  her  did  attend  and  applied  for  an  adjournment  but  that
application was refused. So, the hearing proceeded  and  the  tribunal  made
its decision on the basis of the documentary  evidence  before  it  and  the
oral submissions made to it. The individual Judge  who  decided  the  appeal
was not the same Judge who had refused the request for a transfer.

5.    The tribunal having dismissed the appeal,  permission  to  appeal  was
sought and subsequently granted. There were four grounds  of  appeal  before
me. There was also what I decided amounted to an application  to  amend  the
grounds in order to incorporate a fifth ground of  appeal.  Mr  McVeety  did
not oppose  the  application  to  amend  the  grounds  and  I  granted  that
application and in doing so I  utilised  the  wide-ranging  case  management
powers conferred upon  me  at  rule  5  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008 and, in particular, rule 5(3)(c). So, in  summary,  the
grounds of appeal I was required to consider given  the  amendment  were  as
follows:

           "Ground 1 - The tribunal erred  through  failing  to  adequately
           consider background country material  regarding  the  claimant's
           assertion she would face persecution or serious ill-treatment as
           a Christian and/ or as a single female returnee.

           Ground 2 - The tribunal failed to adequately consider what would
           be in the best interests of the claimant's child.

           Ground 3 - The tribunal carried out an inadequate  consideration
           of the position with respect to Article 8 of the ECHR.

           Ground 4 - The tribunal failed to consider how  the  quality  of
           the claimant's written evidence might have been impacted by  the
           trauma which she claimed she had experienced.

           Ground 5 - The tribunal had unfairly required  the  claimant  to
           attend a hearing in North Shields and that had led  to  her  not
           being able to give oral evidence.

6.    Before me, Ms  Pickering  relied  upon  the  grounds  as  drafted  and
amended. The  claimant  had  effectively  been  prevented  from  giving  her
evidence. All she had been seeking was a transfer to a Centre closer to  her
home. That had been a reasonable request. The adjournment  application  made
by Counsel (not Ms Pickering) at the outset of  the  hearing  had  not  been
properly considered. As to Article 8, the tribunal had simply rehearsed  the
law and then stated a conclusion without any reasoning to link  the  two.  I
was urged to set aside the tribunal's decision and to remit for  a  complete
rehearing. Mr McVeety, for  the  Secretary  of  State,  said  he  had  "some
sympathy" with respect to the points made under Ground 5 but did not  accept
that that ground was made out. As to grounds 1 and 4,  he  argued  that  the
tribunal had made comprehensive and  cogent  credibility  findings.  It  had
specifically rejected the claimant's assertion that she would  be  returning
to Nigeria as a lone female. The  Article  8  consideration  had  been  very
brief but there had been no substantial evidence placed before the  tribunal
in support of the Article 8 contention so, that was permissible.

7.    I have decided that ground 1 is not made out. I  accept  Mr  McVeety's
submission  to  the  effect  that  the  tribunal  did  make  clear   adverse
credibility findings and that it was entitled to make those findings on  the
basis of the evidence before it although that evidence, of course,  did  not
include any oral evidence from the claimant. As  to  the  question  of  risk
upon return as a lone female I  accept  Mr  McVeety's  submission  that  the
tribunal did adequately deal with  that  at  paragraph  79  of  its  written
reasons. It said, therein,  that  there  was  reason  to  believe  that  the
claimant would have a male protector to return to. As to ground  4,  I  have
concluded that that is not made out either. That  is  because  the  tribunal
did not accept the claimant's account of  having  experienced  serious  ill-
treatment which would it is said have led to her suffering  from  trauma.  I
have hesitated over ground 5 but I have concluded that it is not  made  out.
It is possible (I put it no higher)  that  the  interlocutory  decisions  to
refuse a transfer involved the  importation  of  a  "special  reasons"  test
which (so far as I am aware) is not underpinned by anything  in  primary  or
secondary legislation nor any applicable Rules of Procedure. It seems to  me
on the basis of the arguments I heard that  the  proper  course  in  dealing
with transfer requests is to consider  them  in  light  of  the  "overriding
objective" as enshrined in the First-tier  Tribunal's  Rules  of  Procedure.
But, as Ms Pickering confirmed before me, the attack in the grounds was  not
in  relation  to  the  interlocutory  decisions  but  in  relation  to   the
tribunal's decision not to adjourn the hearing. The  tribunal,  in  deciding
not to adjourn, did not apply or seek to incorporate any  "special  reasons"
test but simply based its decision upon the overriding  objective  and  upon
the relevant case law  (see  paragraph  11  of  its  written  reasons).  The
evidence, as I understand it, was that if the claimant had had to  undertake
a journey to Bradford rather  than  North  Shields,  that  could  have  been
accomplished some 35 to 40 minutes earlier. Without wishing to lay down  any
general principle at all, it does seem to me on a  common-sense  view,  that
absent something unusual a claimant should be invited to attend the  Hearing
Centre situated closest to his/ her home and that, speaking generally,  when
that does not happen, transfer requests ought normally to  be  granted.  But
there was no persuasive evidence  before  the  tribunal  that  the  claimant
could not have attended  at  North  Shields  and  her  seemingly  unilateral
decision not to do so was, in the circumstances, most surprising.  It  seems
to me that faced with  her  non-attendance  the  tribunal  was  entitled  to
proceed in the claimant's absence.

8.    I have taken grounds 3  and  4  together.  They  both  relate  to  the
tribunal's treatment of the case  under  Article  8  of  the  ECHR.  I  have
concluded that the tribunal did, here, err in law.  I  accept  Mr  McVeety's
point that not very much had been said in witness statements  regarding  the
potential applicability of Article 8. But  nevertheless,  the  claimant  has
been in the UK since 2011. She has a child who was born here. There  was  an
indication in the paperwork that her child might  have  heart  problems  and
was being monitored. I  accept  Ms  Pickering's  submission  that  what  the
tribunal had to say at 128 and 129 of its written reasons  did  not  contain
meaningful reasoning. Rather, it amounted  to  a  statement  of  conclusions
without  an  explanation  for  them.  What  followed   in   the   paragraphs
immediately before was a detailed summary of Article 8 case law but  it  was
not explained how what had been decided in the important cases  referred  to
was relevant on the facts of this appeal. I appreciate it  might  well  have
been the case that, had the tribunal more fully  considered  Article  8,  it
would nevertheless have reached the same view. But I am not quite  persuaded
that this is a case where that  would  have  been  inevitable.  So,  I  have
concluded, that I must set aside the tribunal's decision.

9.    My having so concluded I must go on to consider disposal.  Mr  McVeety
urged me, if I were simply finding an error of law with respect  to  Article
8, to preserve everything else which had been  found  by  the  tribunal.  Ms
Pickering urged me to remit but in doing so to leave  the  tribunal  with  a
blank canvas. In the unusual circumstances of this case I  have  decided  to
take the latter course of action. I do take Mr McVeety's  point  that  there
is  much  to  be  said  for  preserving  the  findings   with   respect   to
international protection since I have not found error of  law  with  respect
to those findings. Ordinarily that is probably what  I  would  do.  But  the
circumstances in this case are unusual  and,  whatever  the  merits  of  the
decision to refuse to transfer and then to refuse to adjourn,  the  lack  of
oral evidence was unfortunate. I have decided, in these circumstances,  that
the appeal should be reheard completely afresh by a differently  constituted
First-tier Tribunal. So, I am  exercising  discretion  afforded  at  section
12(3) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 not to  circumscribe
the scope of the rehearing before the tribunal which will now follow.

10.     Finally, my having decided to  remit,  section  12(2)(b)(i)  of  the
same Act requires me to issue directions for the remaking of  the  decision.
Accordingly, I direct that the case be  considered  by  way  of  a  complete
rehearing of the appeal, that the appeal be  heard  at  the  Hearing  Centre
closest to the home of the claimant (currently Bradford though I  suppose  a
change of address which might alter that cannot be ruled out) and  that  the
tribunal which conducts the rehearing shall be  differently  constituted  to
that which heard the appeal on 20 November 2017. Any other directions  which
need to be made are best left to the  Judiciary  at  the  Centre  where  the
appeal will be reheard.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error of
law and is set aside. The case is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a
complete rehearing before a differently constituted tribunal.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal granted the claimant anonymity. I continue that
grant pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules
2008. Accordingly, no report of these proceedings shall name or otherwise
identify the claimant or any member of her family. This grant applies to
all parties to the proceedings. Failure to comply may lead to contempt of
court proceedings.



Signed:                                      Dated: 10 May 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway
