

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10829/2018
                                                               PA/10870/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House (MS Teams)           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|                                          |On 28 September 2021           |
|On 27 September 2021                      |                               |
|                                          |                               |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between

                          H O and KO (Afghanistan)
                           [ANONYMITY ORDER MADE]
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the appellants:    Mr Abu Sadat Islam, solicitor with Fountain
Solicitors
For the respondent:    Ms Alexandra Everett, a Senior Home Office
Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS
Anonymity order

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) The Tribunal has ORDERED that no one shall publish  or  reveal
the name or address of H O or K O who are the subject of  these  proceedings
or publish or reveal any information which would be likely to  lead  to  the
identification of either of them  or  of  any  member  of  their  family  in
connection with these proceedings.

Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise  to  contempt  of
court proceedings.

Decision and reasons

 1. The appellants are two brothers, born in 2000 and  2001.   They  appeal
    with permission from the decision of the First-tier Tribunal dismissing
    their appeals against the respondent's decision on 28  August  2018  to
    refuse them refugee status  under  the  1951  Convention,  humanitarian
    protection, or leave to remain in the United Kingdom  on  human  rights
    grounds. The appellants are citizens of Afghanistan.

 2. Vulnerable appellants. At the date of  decision  in  August  2018,  the
    second appellant was still a child and therefore a  vulnerable  person.
    The first appellant has mental health  problems,  for  which  he  takes
    fluoxetine.

 3. Vulnerable appellants are entitled  to  be  treated  appropriately,  in
    accordance with the Joint Presidential Guidance No 2 of  2010:   Child,
    Vulnerable Adult and Sensitive  Appellants  Guidance.   The  appellants
    make no complaint of their treatment in this respect in the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

 4. Mode of hearing.  The hearing today took place  remotely  by  Microsoft
    Teams.   There  were  no  technical  difficulties.   Neither  appellant
    attended the hearing, which was heard on submissions alone.

 5. I am satisfied that both representatives were in a  quiet  and  private
    place and that the hearing was completed fairly, with  the  cooperation
    of both representatives.

Background

 6. These appellants grew up in Laghman Province.  They have two  brothers,
    one of whom was already in the United Kingdom when they arrived,  as  a
    naturalised British citizen.  Their other brother was involved with the
    Taliban and the authorities were  aware  of  his  involvement:  he  has
    disappeared.

 7. The reason for the appellants' departure from Afghanistan in  2016  was
    twofold: first, that the Taliban had been suspicious of visits  to  the
    appellant's home by the former Afghan authorities,  and  had  pressured
    the appellants to work for them, as suicide bombers, and  second,  that
    the Afghan authorities were also a risk to them as they  suspected  the
    family of being involved with  the  Taliban.  The  appellants'  British
    citizen brother says that he also left Afghanistan because the  Taliban
    were trying to recruit him.

 8. The appellants' family relocated to Kabul, but were only  there  for  a
    month before the appellants'  father  was  shot  dead  in  an  isolated
    attack.  The appellants believe it was the Taliban who shot him: nobody
    else was targeted  during  the  incident.   Their  mother  returned  to
    Laghman Province, to live with family members, and has since died.

 9. Their maternal  uncle  helped  the  appellants  to  leave  Afghanistan,
    travelling clandestinely through  a  number  of  countries  until  they
    reached the United Kingdom in August 2016.  The first appellant claimed
    asylum on 17 October 2016; the second appellant claimed earlier, on  30
    August 2016.   Both appellants were then minors and they were  assisted
    by social services to make their applications.

10. In the United Kingdom, both  appellants  renewed  a  close  and  loving
    relationship with their British citizen brother, as well  as  attending
    college, making friends, and learning to speak English.

11. The first appellant still has mental health problems of depression, low
    mood, anxiety and stress, for which he takes  Fluoxetine  20  mg.   The
    second appellant has kidney problems, for which he had an operation and
    is now the subject of regular check-ups.  He also  gets  headaches  and
    has depression symptoms.

First-tier Tribunal decision

12. The First-tier Judge found the  appellants  to  be  credible  witnesses
    giving broadly consistent accounts, which  were  also  consistent  with
    country information before the Tribunal.  They were children when  they
    travelled and he did not hold against them that they  had  not  claimed
    asylum en route.

13. At [39]-[40], the First-tier Judge said this:

         "39. Having found that the appellants would be at risk  in  Laghman
         Province, I need to consider whether  they  could  seek  protection
         there. The  appellants'  account  of  events  is  that  the  Afghan
         authorities were visiting their home  in  Laghman  Province  in  an
         attempt to  obtain  information  from  [their  brother]  about  the
         Taliban.  [Their brother's]  disappearance  makes  it  likely  that
         efforts  by  the  Afghan  authorities  may  resume,  and  I  cannot
         realistically  find  that  the  appellants  could  be  sufficiently
         protected by the authorities, were  the  Taliban  to  resume  their
         efforts  to  recruit  the  appellants.  ...I  also  find  that  the
         authorities may be  less  willing  to  provide  protection  to  the
         appellants from the Taliban.

         40.  I consider whether the appellants could internally relocate to
         Kabul and live safely there.  The appellants are unlikely to be  at
         risk from the Taliban in Kabul, due to their low profile,  however,
         in accordance with AS, I must consider whether there are other risk
         factors specific  to  the  appellants.   Ms  Sepulveda  states  the
         appellants are at greater risk in Kabul, due to their  associations
         with the Afghan authorities.  I do not find this to be the case: it
         was their brother ...that  was  being  asked  questions  about  the
         Taliban.  There is no suggestion in the appellants'  evidence  that
         the  Afghan  authorities  had  any  interest  in  the  appellants."
                                           [Emphasis added]

14. The First-tier Judge dismissed the appeal.  The appellants appealed  to
    the Upper Tribunal.

Permission to appeal

15. On 16 February 2021, Upper Tribunal Judge Gill  granted  permission  to
    appeal on the following basis:

         "It is arguable that, in reaching her  finding  (at  paragraph  40)
         that 'the appellants themselves were not  targeted  by  the  Afghan
         authorities, it was their brother ...that was being asked questions
         about the Taliban...', Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Howorth may
         have  overlooked  the  appellants'  evidence   in   their   witness
         statements, i.e. paragraph 25  of  the  first  appellant's  witness
         statement and  paragraph  21  of  the  second  appellant's  witness
         statement, as contended at paragraph 1.4 of the grounds.

         2.   Although some of the remaining grounds  are  less  persuasive,
         for example, paragraph 1.1 of the renewed grounds, all the  grounds
         may be argued."

Rule 24 Reply

16. On 19 March 2021, the respondent filed a Rule 24  Reply  in  which  she
    opposed the appeal.  Mr Tufan argued  that  the  judge's  decision  was
    sustainable:

          "4. It is apparent that the judge considered the  evidence  relied
         upon and was not convinced that the appellants  would  be  at  risk
         from the authorities.  Considering the appellants'  age  when  they
         left Afghanistan and their previous involvement of  being  harassed
         by the Taliban in Laghman, there is clearly no  rationale  for  the
         authorities to have any interest in  them.   There  is  no  logical
         reason to conclude that the authorities would  conclude  that  they
         were in any way part of the Taliban apparatchik.  The judge clearly
         concedes at [40] by giving sufficient reasons that  the  appellants
         were not targeted by the authorities."

17. That is the basis on which this appeal came before the Upper Tribunal.

Upper Tribunal hearing

18. Ms Everett applied to adjourn the appeal.  She was instructed to do  so
    because the Secretary of State is considering all Afghan appeals with a
    view to avoiding fresh claims under paragraph 353  of  the  Immigration
    Rules HC 395 (as amended).  I am not minded to adjourn  these  appeals:
    the appellants have now waited 5 years since  arriving  in  the  United
    Kingdom as children, and this appeal falls to be decided on an ex  nunc
    basis.

19. Ms Everett acknowledged that at in several places  in  the  appellants'
    witness statements, they did explain that the then  Afghan  authorities
    were interested in them.  The First-tier Tribunal failed to  deal  with
    that evidence and accordingly, there  is  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    decision a material error of law.

20. Given my decision that it was not appropriate to adjourn the appeal, Ms
    Everett did not seek to suggest that it was inappropriate to allow  the
    appeals.

Analysis

21. The appellants' accepted evidence was that the Taliban had  tried  hard
    to recruit them and had threatened to kill their family members if they
    did not do so.  The Taliban also suspected the family of  collaborating
    with the then Afghan authorities.   The acceptance of a risk  from  the
    Taliban in the appellants' home area, but an assertion that they  could
    be safe in Kabul, relies on  a  factual  matrix  in  Afghanistan  which
    ceased to exist on 22 August 2021.

22. Following the departure of American and British forces from Afghanistan
    in early July 2021, on Sunday 22 August 2021, the Taliban retook  Kabul
    and is now in effective control of all  of  Afghanistan.   The  'Afghan
    authorities' in the refusal  letter  and  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    decision are no longer in power: the outgoing  President  Ashraf  Ghani
    abandoned  the  Presidential  palace  to  Taliban  fighters  and   fled
    Afghanistan on 22 August 2021.

23. The appellants' fear of the former Afghan authorities is  no  longer  a
    risk factor, but on the accepted evidence, there is no doubt in my mind
    that they have a well-founded fear of persecution or serious harm  from
    the Taliban.

24. The appellants' appeals were allowed at the hearing.

DECISION

25. For the foregoing reasons, my decision is as follows:


    The making of the previous decision involved the making of an error  on
    a point of law.


    I set aside the previous decision.  I remake the decision  by  allowing
    the appellants' appeals.


Signed   Judith AJC Gleeson                           Date:     27
September 2021
         Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson



