
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
PA/10169/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham Employment Centre    |Decision and Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 13th July 2017                        |On 08th August 2017                 |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS

                                   Between

                                  mr S K D
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Paul Draycott (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr David Mills (Senior HOPO)

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Butler, promulgated on 4th January 2017, following a  hearing  at
    Birmingham on 24th November 2016.  In  the  determination,  the  judge
    dismissed  the  appeal  of  the  Appellant,  whereupon  the   Appellant
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Afghanistan, who was born on 13th
    January 2001.  At the date of the hearing he is a minor aged 14  years.
    He appealed against the decision of the Respondent dated 22nd September
    2015 on the basis that his removal would not be contrary  to  the  UK's
    obligations under the  Refugee  Convention  and  he  would  not  suffer
    treatment contrary to Articles 2 and 3 of the Human Rights  Convention.



The Appellant's Claim

 3. The Appellant's claim is that he was born and raised in  Ramat  village
    in Ghazni province.  He lived there with his parents, his brother,  and
    his sister.  The children did not attend school.  His father was  asked
    to join the Taliban but refused to do so.  The family home  was  bombed
    and there were casualties.  He  was  taken  in  by  a  neighbour.   The
    neighbour arranged for an agent to take him out of  the  country.   The
    Appellant left  Afghanistan  in  September  2015,  travelling  for  six
    months, before arriving in the jungle in Calais before entering the  UK
    concealed in a lorry.

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge had evidence before  him  from  an  expert,  Mr  Tim  Foxley.
    However, he held that,

         "I attach little weight to it, particularly since he did not attend
         to give evidence and justify some of his comments.  I further  note
         that he did not meet the Appellant but has based his conclusions on
         statements by the Appellant to which he has then applied his expert
         knowledge" (paragraph 34).

 5. Second, the judge then had regard  to  the  Appellant's  own  evidence.
    Here, the judge held that  the  Appellant's  evidence  was  not  to  be
    believed that he was targeted with a bomb by the Taliban  because,  "he
    was not at home, did not see anything, no one else saw anything and  he
    only assumed it was the work of the Taliban" (paragraph 31).  Moreover,
    the Appellant's account of how he came to leave  Afghanistan  was  also
    not credible (paragraph 32).

 6. Third, the judge then considered the  possibility  of  the  Appellant's
    return to Ghazni.  He noted the expert's report,  that  of  Mr  Foxley,
    that the dangers of the Appellant travelling from Kabul to Ghazni, were
    such that he might be exposed to roadside attacks, tribal disputes, and
    other military activities.  However, the judge's conclusion  was  that,
    "the journey from Kabul to provinces is not as hazardous  as  he  makes
    out" (paragraph 37).

 7. Finally, in relation to Article 8,  no  exceptional  circumstances  had
    been shown and the Appellant could return  back  to  his  family  there
    because the account of his family being killed was not accepted by  the
    judge.



Grounds of Application

 8. The grounds of application state that the judge materially erred in law
    in the following respects.  First, his assessment of  the  evidence  of
    the Appellant was erroneous, given that he failed to properly recognise
    that the Appellant was a minor.  He left Afghanistan at the age of  14.
    He was even today aged only 16 and  still  a  minor.   Second,  he  had
    wrongly disregarded the findings of the expert report of Mr Tim Foxley.
     Thirdly, he had misdirected himself as to the risk  to  the  Appellant
    from the Taliban.  Fourth, in finding that the Appellant would have the
    benefit of support from his family on his return, the judge  failed  to
    acknowledge that  the  Respondent  had  accepted  that  there  were  no
    adequate reception facilities for the Appellant  to  return.   Finally,
    the manner in which the judge addressed the ability of the Appellant to
    travel from Kabul to Ghazni was also materially wrong.

 9. On 27th March 2017, permission to  appeal  was  granted  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

Submissions

10. At the hearing before me on 13th July 2017, Mr Draycott,  appearing  on
    behalf of the Appellant, made two fundamental submissions.

11. First, that the judge was wrong to reject outright the  evidence  of  a
    renowned expert, Mr Tim Foxley, on the basis that he had  not  attended
    the hearing to give evidence (bearing in mind that  legal  aid  funding
    for such an  exercise  was  scarce).   This  is  because  it  was  well
    established, as long ago as the case  of  Kilic  v  SSHD  [2002]  UKIAT
    02714, that,

         "It may be that experts who give oral evidence  should  carry  more
         weight than those who give only written evidence.  However,  be  it
         written, oral or both, their evidence is  entitled  to  be  treated
         with respect due to persons who possess  relevant  expertise"  (see
         paragraph 6).

12. Second, in relation to the evidence of the Appellant, a great  deal  of
    time was spent by the judge focusing on the fact that the Appellant,  a
    child of 14 at the  time,  was  unable  to  give  detailed  answers  in
    relation to the world around him.  Not only was this a  child  who  had
    not gone to school, as his other siblings had not,  but  it  overlooked
    the fact  that  it  had  been  well  established  in  the  case  of  AA
    (unattended children) Afghanistan CG [2012] UKUT 00016  (IAC)  that  an
    unattended  child  is  by  its  very  nature,  at  risk  of  return  to
    Afghanistan.  Related to this is  the  issue  as  to  where  the  judge
    thought the Appellant would return.  The  focus  of  the  judge  was  a
    return to Ghazni province.

13. However, the Home Office has long maintained the position that  returns
    are to Kabul.  It is here that Mr Tim Foxley's report becomes  relevant
    because he makes it clear that travel from Kabul to Ghazni  is  fraught
    with hazards, such as to be well-nigh impracticable.  It was wrong  for
    the judge to consider the Appellant's return to Ghazni,  which  is  not
    the design of the Secretary of State for the Home Department.

14. For his part, Mr Mills submitted that, although he would have to accept
    that there were errors in the manner in which the judge  had  made  her
    decision, nevertheless, it was not strictly correct  to  say  that  the
    expert report of Mr Tim Foxley had been  rejected  simply  because  the
    expert did not attend.  This is because after paragraph 34, there is  a
    detailed consideration of the report of Mr Foxley at paragraphs  35  to
    38, before the judge concludes that she can attach "little  weight"  to
    the report (paragraph 39).

15. Second, notwithstanding what the expert said, it  was  still  the  case
    that an Appellant child, even as a minor, had to discharge  the  burden
    of proof by putting forward a credible  claim.   This  principle  arose
    directly from the case of ZH (Afghanistan) [2009]  EWCA  Civ  470  (see
    paragraphs 9 to 10).  Here, the  Court  of  Appeal  had  said,  in  the
    judgment of Sullivan LJ, that,

         "The mere fact that a child applicant for asylum falls  within  the
         policy of the Secretary of State is not in my  judgment  of  itself
         sufficient to discharge  the  burden  on  the  child  applicant  to
         demonstrate that he  is  at  real  risk,  or  there  is  a  serious
         possibility that he would be  persecuted  if  returned"  (paragraph
         10).

16. In reply, Mr Draycott submitted that the case of ZH  (Afghanistan)  was
    not the operative and determinative legal authority for the purposes of
    a claim such as the present one.  That was a 2009 decision by the Court
    of Appeal, but since then everything had changed after the decision  in
    2012 of AA (unattended children) Afghanistan, and it was invidious  now
    to rely upon the 2009 decision, because the 2012 decision for the first
    time gave proper consideration to the plight of  "unattended  children"
    and subsequent to that, it had been accepted in AK (Afghanistan) [2012]
    UKUT that that country guidance remained good law.

17. Second, the judge had erred in law in not considering  the  feasibility
    of return to Kabul, because that is the place to  which  returnees  are
    sent.  It is not the case that a judge has to consider return to Ghazni
    province, because that is not in contention as far as the Secretary  of
    State's return policy is concerned.

18. Third, the Secretary of State  actually  conceded  that  there  are  no
    reception conditions of a satisfactory nature that can be provided, and
    yet there is nowhere in the judge's determination a reference  to  this
    important concession.

19. Finally, a rejection of a child's asylum appeal on the basis that he is
    unable to question answers in relation to bombing by the Taliban,  when
    he was not even there at the house, is simply wrong in itself.

Error of Law

20. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007) such that I should set aside the decision.   My  reasons  are  as
    follows.

21.  First,  even  though  the  judge  does  proceed   to   give   detailed
    consideration to the expert's report of Mr Tim Foxley (at paragraphs 35
    to 38), it nevertheless remains the case, that this is prefaced at  the
    outset, with the observation  that,  "I  have  considered  Mr  Foxley's
    report in detail.  I attach little weight to it, particularly since  he
    did not attend to give evidence ... ..." (paragraph 34).

22. Second, the judge does not consider the viability of return  to  Kabul,
    but  instead  considers  a  return  to  Ghazni   province,   in   rural
    Afghanistan, and this is a wrong focus, with respect to how  a  returns
    policy is put into effect by the United Kingdom government.

23. Finally, there is no consideration of the concession made with  respect
    to reception conditions.  The country guidance case of  AA  (unattended
    children) Afghanistan CG [2012] UKUT 0016 also needs to be given proper
    consideration.

Notice of Decision

24. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside the decision of
    the original judge.  I remake the decision as follows.  This appeal  is
    remitted back to a  judge  other  than  Judge  Butler,  under  practice
    statement 7.2(a) because the effect of the error has been to deprive  a
    party before the  First-tier  Tribunal  of  a  fair  hearing  or  other
    opportunity to put their case.  This appeal is allowed to that  extent.



25. I allow the appeal.

26. An anonymity direction is made.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Dated


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 8th August 2017


