
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/10532/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 13 March 2019                     |On 21 March 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

                                     AM
                          ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Brown, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless  the  Upper  Tribunal  or  a
Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  the  original
Appellant AM.




Introduction

      1. In this decision I remake the decision on  the  appellant's  appeal
         against a decision dated 6 October 2017 refusing his asylum  claim.
         In a decision dated 12 January 2019 I  found  that  the  First-tier
         Tribunal's ('FTT') decision dated 10 May 2018 to dismiss the appeal
         should be set aside.

      2. I have anonymised the appellant's name because this decision refers
         to matters likely to be regarded as sensitive in  relation  to  his
         international protection claim.

      3. The appellant, a citizen of Iran of Kurdish ethnic origin, who will
         be 22 in April 2019, claims that he  will  be  persecuted  in  Iran
         because of his perceived involvement with the Party of Free Life of
         Kurdistan ('PJAK').  The FTT rejected the appellant's evidence that
         he undertook  PJAK  activities  when  in  Iran  and  described  the
         appellant  as  "an  unimpressive  witness".    The  FTT   expressly
         rejected the appellant's claim that he distributed leaflets and was
         involved in other activities on behalf of PJAK whilst in Iran.  The
         FTT also rejected the appellant's claim that his  father  had  been
         arrested in Iran.  The FTT attached little weight to  the  evidence
         of a Mr Hawrami to the effect that the appellant's  family  have  a
         political background and the appellant undertook PJAK activities in
         Iran.

      4. The FTT accepted two significant aspects of the appellant's factual
         account:

          i) He left Iran illegally;

         ii) He attended 8-10 PJAK events in the UK, albeit he participated
             in these out of bad faith and merely  to  bolster  his  asylum
             claim, and there is no evidence these have come to the adverse
             attention of the Iranian authorities.

Hearing

      5. At the beginning of the hearing, Mr Diwnycz explained that  he  did
         not have a copy of my decision setting aside the FTT decision,  but
         that he was nonetheless ready  to  proceed  and  as  such  did  not
         require an adjournment.

      6. Both parties agreed that the two factual matters set out above  are
         preserved findings and that I must determine  prospective  risk  in
         light of these, any  updated  evidence  and  the  relevant  country
         guidance.  These preserved findings are important and distinct from
         the respondent's position in the decision letter that the appellant
         did not depart Iran unlawfully.

      7. The appellant gave brief evidence at the hearing.  He confirmed the
         contents  of  an  updated  witness  statement  that  described  his
         difficulties in attending PJAK events due to a lack of funding.  He
         also referred to two previous Facebook accounts having been  hacked
         and closed down.  He believed that this is because  these  included
         postings and photographs in support of PJAK, and  the  hacking  was
         therefore at the behest of the Iranian authorities.  The  appellant
         also described having recently attended an event organised by  PJAK
         near  his  home  in  Liverpool.   He  accepted  he  was  a  passive
         participant but that he posted photographs  of  his  attendance  at
         this event with the PJAK flag on a via a third Facebook account.

      8. Mr Diwnycz did not  cross-examine  the  appellant.   I  invited  Mr
         Diwnycz to explain why the appellant's appeal should not be allowed
         in the light of the most  recent  country  guidance,  even  on  the
         assumption that he was acting in bad faith in participating in  sur
         place PJAK activities.  Mr Diwnycz was unable to assist on this and
         made no further submissions.

      9. Mr Brown relied upon a detailed skeleton argument cross-referencing
         to the country guidance decisions.  At the end  of  the  hearing  I
         indicated that I would be allowing the appellant's asylum and I now
         provide my reasons for this.

Country guidance and background evidence

     10. It has not been disputed that as an illegal departee, the appellant
         would be questioned on return -  see  SSH  and  HR  (illegal  exit:
         failed asylum seeker) Iran CG [2016] UKUT 308.  In  SSH  the  Upper
         Tribunal found that if "particular concerns" arose, there would  be
         a period of further questioning, which carried with it a real  risk
         of detention and ill-treatment, and said this at [23]:

             "In our view the evidence does not  establish  that  a  failed
             asylum seeker who had left Iran illegally would  be  subjected
             on return to a period of detention or  questioning  such  that
             there is a real risk of Article 3 ill-treatment. The  evidence
             in our view shows no more than that they will  be  questioned,
             and that if there are any  particular  concerns  arising  from
             their previous activities either in  Iran  or  in  the  United
             Kingdom or whichever country  they  are  returned  from,  then
             there would be a risk of further  questioning,  detention  and
             potential ill-treatment. In this regard,  it  is  relevant  to
             return to Dr Kakhki's evidence in re-examination where he said
             that the treatment they would receive would  depend  on  their
             individual case. If they co-operated and  accepted  that  they
             left illegally and claimed asylum abroad then there  would  be
             no reason for ill-treatment, and questioning would  be  for  a
             fairly brief period. That seems to us to sum up  the  position
             well, and as a consequence we conclude that a person  with  no
             history other than that of being a failed  asylum  seeker  who
             had exited illegally and who could be  expected  to  tell  the
             truth when questioned would not  face  a  real  risk  of  ill-
             treatment during the period of questioning at the airport."

     11. The following matters germane to this case appear to flow from  the
         reasoning and guidance in SSH:

          i) As an illegal departee  from  Iran,  the  appellant  would  be
             questioned at the point of return to Iran.

         ii) The initial questioning would be for a "fairly  brief  period"
             (at [12]  of  SSH  the  Internal  Organisation  for  Migration
             considered  that  in  the  context  of  voluntary   returnees,
             questioning might take a few hours).

        iii) If "particular concerns" arose from previous activities either
             in Iran or in the United Kingdom, then there would be the risk
             of further questioning accompanied by ill-treatment.

         iv) The assessment of whether "particular concerns" are likely  to
             arise  turns  upon  all  the  individual  factors,  considered
             cumulatively.

          v) The appellant  would  be  expected  to  tell  the  truth  when
             questioned.

         vi) The evidence suggests no appetite  to  prosecute  for  illegal
             exit alone, but if there is another offence, illegal exit will
             be added on, the cases where illegal exitees  were  imprisoned
             show much more by way of  specific  activity,  as  opposed  to
             simple imputation - see [31] of SSH.

     12. The recent decision of HB (Kurds) Iran CG [2018] UKUT  00430  (IAC)
         confirms that SSH remains valid country guidance in  terms  of  the
         guidance offered in the headnote.  I note that headnote (b) of  SSH
         acknowledges that there will be questioning on return  to  Iran  in
         certain circumstances. The headnote of HB  provides  the  following
         additional guidance:

             "(2)      Kurds in  Iran  face  discrimination.  However,  the
             evidence   does   not   support   a   contention   that   such
             discrimination is, in general, at such a level as to amount to
             persecution or Article 3 ill-treatment.

             (3)  Since  2016   the   Iranian   authorities   have   become
             increasingly  suspicious  of,  and   sensitive   to,   Kurdish
             political  activity.  Those  of  Kurdish  ethnicity  are  thus
             regarded with even greater suspicion  than  hitherto  and  are
             reasonably likely to be subjected to  heightened  scrutiny  on
             return to Iran.

             (4) However, the mere fact of  being  a  returnee  of  Kurdish
             ethnicity with or  without  a  valid  passport,  and  even  if
             combined  with  illegal  exit,  does  not  create  a  risk  of
             persecution or Article 3 ill-treatment.

             (5) Kurdish ethnicity is nevertheless  a  risk  factor  which,
             when combined with other factors, may create a  real  risk  of
             persecution or Article 3 ill-treatment. Being a risk factor it
             means  that  Kurdish  ethnicity  is  a  factor  of  particular
             significance when assessing risk. Those "other  factors"  will
             include the matters identified in paragraphs (6)-(9) below.

             (6) A period of residence in the KRI by a Kurdish returnee  is
             reasonably likely to result in additional questioning  by  the
             authorities on return. However, this is a factor that will  be
             highly fact-specific and the  degree  of  interest  that  such
             residence  will  excite  will  depend,  non-exhaustively,   on
             matters such as the length of residence in the KRI,  what  the
             person concerned was doing there and why they left.

             (7) Kurds involved in Kurdish political groups or activity are
             at risk of arrest, prolonged detention and physical  abuse  by
             the  Iranian  authorities.  Even  Kurds  expressing   peaceful
             dissent or who speak out about Kurdish rights also face a real
             risk of persecution or Article 3 ill-treatment.

             (8) Activities that can be perceived to be  political  by  the
             Iranian authorities  include  social  welfare  and  charitable
             activities on behalf of Kurds. Indeed,  involvement  with  any
             organised activity on behalf of or in support of Kurds can  be
             perceived as political and thus  involve  a  risk  of  adverse
             attention by the Iranian authorities with the consequent  risk
             of persecution or Article 3 ill-treatment.

             (9) Even 'low-level' political activity, or activity  that  is
             perceived to be political, such as, by way  of  example  only,
             mere possession of leaflets espousing  or  supporting  Kurdish
             rights, if discovered, involves the same risk  of  persecution
             or Article 3 ill-treatment. Each case however, depends on  its
             own facts and an assessment will need to be  made  as  to  the
             nature of the material possessed and how it would be likely to
             be viewed by the Iranian authorities in  the  context  of  the
             foregoing guidance.

             (10)      The Iranian authorities demonstrate  what  could  be
             described as a 'hair-trigger' approach to those  suspected  of
             or perceived to be involved in Kurdish political activities or
             support for Kurdish rights. By 'hair-trigger'  it  means  that
             the threshold for suspicion is low and  the  reaction  of  the
             authorities is reasonably likely to be extreme."

     13. BA (Demonstrators in Britain - risk on return) Iran CG [2011]  UKUT
         36 (IAC) sets out the relevant factors to take  into  account  when
         assessing  prospective  risk  as   a   consequence   of   attending
         demonstrations  in  the  UK.   This  states  at  paragraph  65  (my
         emphasis):

             "As regards the relevance of  these  factors  to  the  instant
             case, of especial relevance is identification  risk.   We  are
             persuaded that the Iranian  authorities  attempt  to  identify
             persons participating in demonstrations  outside  the  Iranian
             Embassy in London.  The  practice  of  filming  demonstrations
             supports that.  The evidence suggests that there may well have
             been persons in the crowd to assist in the process.  There  is
             insufficient evidence to establish that the regime has  facial
             recognition technology in use in the UK, but  it  seems  clear
             that the Iranian security apparatus attempts to match names to
             faces of demonstrators from photographs. We believe  that  the
             information gathered here is available in Iran. While  it  may
             well be that an appellant's participation in demonstrations is
             opportunistic, the evidence suggests that this is  not  likely
             to be a major influence  on  the  perception  of  the  regime.
             Although, expressing dissent  itself  will  be  sufficient  to
             result in a  person  having  in  the  eyes  of  the  regime  a
             significant political profile, we consider that the nature  of
             the level of the sur place activity will clearly heighten  the
             determination of  the  Iranian  authorities  to  identify  the
             demonstrator while in Britain and to identify him  on  return.
             That, combined with the factors which  might  trigger  enquiry
             would lead to an increased likelihood of  questioning  and  of
             ill treatment on return."

     14. In addition, the Home Office Country Information and Guidance on
         Iran "Kurds and Kurdish political groups" version 2.0, July 2016
         ("CIG") contains the following:

             "3.1.1    Kurds in Iran face discrimination which affects
             their access to basic services. However, in general, this
             level of discrimination will not reach the level of being
             persecutory.

             3.1.2     Those involved in Kurdish political groups are
             however, at risk of arbitrary arrest, prolonged detention and
             physical abuse from the Iranian authorities.  Even those who
             express peaceful dissent or who speak out about Kurdish rights
             can be seen as a general threat and face a real risk of
             persecution.

             3.1.3     Family members of persons associated with a Kurdish
             political group are also harassed and detained and may be
             subject to inhumane treatment.

             3.1.4     Where a person can demonstrate to a reasonable
             degree of likelihood that they are known or likely to be made
             known to the Iranian authorities on the basis of their
             membership or perceived membership of a Kurdish political
             group they should be granted asylum."

Discussion - remaking the decision

     15. The  appellant  will  be  questioned  upon  return  to  Iran.   The
         significant matter to be  determined  is  whether  this  period  of
         questioning  will  reasonably  likely  give  rise  to   "particular
         concerns" such that further questioning  will  take  place,  during
         which time there is a reasonable degree of  likelihood  of  serious
         harm.  As set out in HB, since 2016 the  Iranian  authorities  have
         become  increasingly  suspicious  of,  and  sensitive  to,  Kurdish
         political activity. Those of Kurdish ethnicity  are  thus  regarded
         with even greater suspicion than hitherto and are reasonably likely
         to be subjected to heightened  scrutiny  on  return  to  Iran.   In
         addition, the  Iranian  authorities  demonstrate  a  'hair-trigger'
         approach to those suspected to be  involved  in  Kurdish  political
         activities i.e. the threshold for suspicion is low and  the  likely
         reaction extreme.   PJAK is considered a terrorist organisation  by
         the Iranian regime.

     16. I am satisfied that "particular concerns" would arise on  the  part
         of the Iranian authorities from the  following  matters  considered
         cumulatively.

           - The appellant and his family are Kurds.

           - The appellant left Iran illegally.

           - The appellant has participated in Kurdish political activities
             linked  to  PJAK  and  posted  about   these   together   with
             photographs linking him to the PJAK flag on Facebook accounts.

     17. Mr Brown did not invite me to revisit the FTT's  preserved  finding
         that the appellant's sur place activities  were  motivated  by  bad
         faith and not out of any genuine political commitment.  The country
         guidance makes it clear that the Iranian authorities attach  little
         weight  to  motivation  in  the  context   of   Kurdish   political
         activities.  I am satisfied that even though the  appellant  was  a
         mere low-level attendee at political meetings and demonstrations in
         support of PJAK, this is reasonably  likely  to  be  known  to  the
         Iranian authorities via their own surveillance  together  with  the
         Facebook  posts.   Mr  Diwnycz  did  not  dispute  the  appellant's
         evidence that his Facebook accounts were twice hacked and shut down
         but submitted it was unlikely to be at the  hands  of  the  Iranian
         authorities.  There is no  clear  evidence  either  way.   However,
         given the nature and extent of the authorities adverse interest  in
         Kurdish political activism in and out of Iran, and the surveillance
         it undertakes generally (see the country guidance  set  out  above)
         and of online postings (see AB  and  Others  (internet  activity  -
         state of evidence) Iran [2015] UKUT 257  (IAC))  it  is  reasonably
         likely that the Iranian authorities are at the very least aware  of
         the appellant's sur place  activities  and  will  have  "particular
         concerns" about these, such that in  accordance  with  the  country
         guidance, the appellant faces a well founded  fear  of  persecution
         for reasons relating to an imputed political opinion,  upon  return
         to Iran.  Mr Diwnycz did not attempt to argue the contrary  and  my
         reasons have therefore been set out succinctly.

Decision

     18. I remake the decision by allowing the appeal on asylum grounds.


Signed:

UTJ Plimmer
Ms M. Plimmer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date:
13 March 2019

