
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10086/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11th January 2017                 |On 25th January 2017                 |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES


                                   Between

                                     qmd
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Evans of Counsel instructed by Davjunnel
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008
The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 13  of  the  Tribunal
Procedure (First-tier  Tribunal)  (Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber)  Rules
2014. I continue that order.
Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


 1. The Appellant, a  national  of  Vietnam,  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal against the decision of  the  Secretary  of  State  dated  9th
    September 2016 to refuse his application for asylum in the UK.   First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Seelhoff dismissed  the  Appellant's  appeal.   The
    Appellant appeals with permission to this Tribunal.

 2. The Appellant's date of birth is 6th October 1999 was accepted  by  the
    Secretary of State for the purposes of the  Appellant's  asylum  claim.
    The Appellant is therefore a minor.

 3. The background to this appeal is that the Appellant claims that he  has
    been a Catholic since birth and  that  in  July  2012  the  authorities
    prevented people from attending his local Catholic Church.   He  claims
    that they raided the priest's house  and  destroyed  religious  statues
    inside the house.  He claims that several days later the priest printed
    leaflets highlighting the issue and asked the Appellant  to  distribute
    them and that while he was distributing the leaflets he  was  arrested,
    detained for one week, beaten and interrogated by the authorities.   He
    says that after his release he continued to live in the same house  and
    to  practise  his  religion  and  attend  church  and  the  authorities
    continued to come to his house once a month but  he  never  spoke  with
    them as he was scared and he would go outside to play to avoid speaking
    to them.  He says that his mother died  on  25th  June  2014  and  that
    thereafter he was orphaned with no one to  look  after  him.   He  left
    Vietnam in June or July of 2015 and travelled  via  China,  Russia  and
    France before travelling to the UK arriving on 15th December 2015  when
    he claimed asylum.

 4. In the reasons for refusal letter the Secretary of State accepted  that
    the Appellant was a national of Vietnam and that his date of birth  was
    as claimed.  The Secretary of State accepted that the  Appellant  is  a
    Catholic.  However the Appellant's  claim  that  he  was  arrested  and
    detained for a week was rejected because  the  priest  who  he  claimed
    printed the leaflets was not arrested and because  no  information  was
    found about the Appellant's claimed arrest. In addition, the  Secretary
    of State took into account the fact that the Appellant returned to  his
    home for a further three years before leaving Vietnam, was not arrested
    again and had no further problems with  the  authorities  demonstrating
    that the authorities had no interest in  the  Appellant  following  his
    release  in  2012  until  he  left  Vietnam  three  years  later.   The
    Respondent did not accept that the Appellant was at risk in Vietnam  on
    account of his religion.

 5. The First-tier Tribunal Judge did accept the Appellant's account  [25].
    The judge accepted that the Appellant was arrested in  2012  for  doing
    something illegal, that he was mistreated in detention and that he  was
    then released.  Although the judge appears to have  accepted  that  the
    authorities continued to come  to  the  Appellant's  house  monthly  he
    concluded that on the Appellant's account he avoided  the  authorities.
    The judge concluded that the authorities showed no real interest in him
    after his release in  2012  [27].   He  concluded  that,  even  if  the
    authorities continued to visit the family home, the Appellant continued
    to live in the house for about a year  after  his  mother's  death  and
    that, if they had had genuine interest in detaining  him,  there  would
    have been more than infrequent visits and the  authorities  would  have
    come at a time when the Appellant would have been likely to be at  home
    such as when he was sleeping at night or when he had friends stay.  The
    judge concluded that the Appellant has not described any  real  attempt
    by the authorities to locate him, just  a  level  of  monitoring  which
    could have been over something as  simple  as  concern  about  a  child
    living on their own or some other official duties [28].

 6. The judge considered the background evidence at paragraph 29  where  he
    notes that it is clear that Catholics as a whole are not persecuted  in
    Vietnam.  He noted that the background shows that most of  the  arrests
    of   Catholics   are   described   as   occurring   when   unauthorised
    demonstrations take  place  or  when  people  were  distributing  anti-
    government materials.  He noted that the Appellant has  never  attended
    any sort of  anti-government  demonstration  and  has  not  engaged  in
    anything  by  way  of  expression  of  his  faith  that  attracted  the
    government's attention in the three years prior to him leaving Vietnam.
     The judge concluded; "There is  simply  no  sensible  reason  why  the
    government  in  Vietnam  would  have  any  adverse  interest   in   the
    Appellant".  The judge went on to consider the appeal under  Article  8
    and concluded that there was no disproportionate  interference  in  the
    Appellant's limited private life in the UK.

 7. There are three Grounds of Appeal.  The Appellant contends in the first
    Ground of Appeal that the judge erred in his  approach  to  the  asylum
    claim in failing to take into account material matters. It is contended
    that, despite accepting his account of his arrest, the judge  concluded
    that the Appellant had never attended any anti-government demonstration
    and had not engaged in anything by way of expression of his faith  that
    attracted the government's attention in the three years  prior  to  him
    leaving  Vietnam.  However  it  is  contended  that  in  reaching  this
    conclusion the judge failed to consider the Appellant's  oral  evidence
    that he would be of interest to the authorities on return as  an  adult
    whereas he had been a child before his departure from Vietnam.   It  is
    contended that the  judge  also  failed  to  consider  the  Appellant's
    accepted profile as a Catholic  with  his  background  of  having  been
    detained and tortured and having been visited on a monthly basis by the
    authorities who were checking  on  his  religious  activities.   It  is
    contended that it was incumbent on the First-tier Tribunal to  consider
    the Appellant's claim that his adulthood  and  background  as  a  known
    Catholic would impact on  his  treatment  by  the  authorities  in  the
    context of the background evidence that the Vietnamese Government would
    monitor the activities of certain religious  groups  because  of  their
    political activism (Home Office Country  Information  and  Guidance  on
    Vietnam: Religious minority groups of December 2014).

 8. Ms Evans submitted that the judge  failed  to  take  into  account  the
    Appellant's witness statement where he said that he  believed  that  he
    would be at greater risk if he returned now  as  an  adult.   Ms  Evans
    submitted that the judge had failed to take into account the fact  that
    the Appellant was arrested for distributing  anti-government  material.
    She submitted that the judge's conclusion that the  Appellant  had  not
    taken part in anti-government activity  was  irrational  and  illogical
    based on the finding that he had been arrested and mistreated in  2012.
    On the other hand Mr Kotas submitted that the  judge  was  entitled  to
    conclude that the Appellant would not be  at  risk  upon  return.   The
    Appellant was caught up in the incident in 2012 but there was  no  real
    interest in him thereafter.

 9. It is contended in the  second  ground  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge's conclusion that the authorities showed no real interest in  the
    Appellant after 2012 was irrational.  The Appellant's account of  being
    monitored by the authorities for three years whilst still a  child  was
    material and it is submitted that it could not be said to indicate that
    the authorities had no continuing interest in him after 2012.   In  her
    submissions Ms Evans submitted that the Appellant  had  been  monitored
    since his release in July 2012 and the judge's finding at paragraph  28
    of the decision was an implausible finding not based on  the  evidence,
    in particular given that the Appellant was monitored whilst his  mother
    was alive as well.  She submitted that the First-tier  Tribunal  should
    have accepted this part of the Appellant's evidence.

10. The third ground contends that, in concluding that the Appellant  would
    not be at risk on return because the  background  evidence  shows  that
    Catholics as a whole are not persecuted in Vietnam, the judge failed to
    consider the detailed objective evidence before it which showed that in
    light of Decree 92 and the connection between  political  activism  and
    Catholicism, an individual with the Appellant's profile would be likely
    to be at risk from the authorities.

11. In her submissions Ms Evans accepted that the objective evidence  shows
    that Catholics as a whole are not persecuted but refers to the specific
    evidence relevant to the Appellant at page 31 of the Appellant's bundle
    which states that the authorities control  religious  groups  and  that
    those operating outside this authority are subject  to  monitoring  and
    close surveillance,  intimidation,  harassment  and  sometimes  violent
    enforcement (Home Office  Country  Information  and  Guidance  Vietnam:
    Religious minority groups December 2014, page 35). She pointed out that
    this same document also states that the Government continues to monitor
    the activities of certain religious groups because of  their  political
    activism.  She referred to 2.2.3 of the same document which states that
    the  Vietnamese  Government  continues  to  imprison  individuals   for
    religious activity or religious freedom advocacy and seeks to stop  the
    growth  of  ethnic   minority   Protestantism   and   Catholicism   via
    discrimination, violence and forced reunification of their faith.   She
    referred to paragraph 2.2.5 which states that in January 2013 the Prime
    Minister put Decree 92 into effect which extends controls on  religious
    groups and states that in 2013 targets included independent  Protestant
    and Catholic house churches in the central highlands or elsewhere.  She
    referred also to paragraph 2.5 of the Home Office  report  which  deals
    with Catholics  in  Vietnam.   That  report  states  that  "Catholicism
    continues to grow rapidly in Vietnam but the relationship  between  the
    Vietnamese Government, some members of the church's hierarchy, Catholic
    laity, and members of the Redemptorist Order continue to be tense".  It
    states that "over the past several years Catholics have  been  detained
    for participating in  peaceful  prayer  vigils  and  demonstrations  at
    properties formerly owned by the Catholic Church" and that  "government
    officials have  employed  contract  thugs  to  assault  and  intimidate
    Catholics  from  engaging  in  both  private  study  and   worship   at
    unregistered locations".  She relied on paragraph 2.5.2 of  the  report
    which describes the arrest and detention of young Catholic activists in
    Nghe An province for distributing  pro-democracy  leaflets.   Ms  Evans
    submitted that because the Appellant was arrested and was subjected  to
    monthly monitoring he was of interest to  the  authorities,  there  was
    clear  evidence  of  harassment  and  violent  crackdown  amounting  to
    persecution.  Ms Evans accepted that the monthly monitoring on the part
    of the authorities did not amount to persecution but she submitted that
    in this case if the Appellant returned  as  an  adult  the  authorities
    would take more interest in him.  She accepted that the  Appellant  had
    not said in his witness statement what his intentions would be upon his
    return but she submitted that he continued to practise his religion  in
    the UK and would continue to practise upon his return.   She  submitted
    that the Appellant was able to avoid the authorities because he  was  a
    child but that he could not do so as an adult.

Error of Law

12. The judge accepted the core of the Appellant's case.  However  the  key
    finding of the judge in this case  relates  to  the  period  after  the
    Appellant's release in 2012.  The judge appears to have  accepted  that
    the Appellant was subjected to a level of monitoring on a monthly basis
    from the authorities. However he clearly found that, if the authorities
    were truly interested in finding the Appellant, they  would  have  told
    his mother to bring him to them or would have  penalised  her  for  not
    doing so [27] and that after his mother's death there would  have  been
    more than infrequent visits and they would have come  at  a  time  when
    they were likely to have found the Appellant in the house [28].   I  am
    satisfied that these findings were open to the judge on  the  basis  of
    the evidence before him.

13. Having found that the  Appellant  was  not  subjected  to  any  further
    harassment or persecution in the three  years  after  July  2012  I  am
    satisfied that it was open to the judge  to  find  that  the  Appellant
    would be of no interest  to  the  authorities  upon  return.   This  is
    particularly so in circumstances where there is little evidence  as  to
    what the Appellant was actually doing during that period  in  terms  of
    the practice of his religion.  Significantly there is no evidence as to
    what the Appellant intends to do upon his return  to  Vietnam.   Whilst
    the Appellant claims that there would be a difference in his  treatment
    because he was a child before he left Vietnam but is now an adult there
    is no background evidence  to  indicate  any  difference  in  treatment
    between children and adults in relation to this matter.   In  fact  the
    fact that the Appellant was arrested and detained in 2012 when  he  was
    12 would indicate the contrary.

14. Ms Evans properly accepted on the evidence that  Catholics  in  general
    are not subjected to persecution in Vietnam.   The  Appellant  was  not
    subjected to any interest by the authorities after 2012.  There  is  no
    evidence to indicate that he would do anything different to what he had
    been doing prior to his departure in 2015 upon his  return.   In  these
    circumstances it was open to the judge to conclude that  the  Appellant
    is not at any risk upon return to Vietnam.  I therefore  conclude  that
    the findings made by the judge were open to him on the evidence  before
    him.

Notice of Decision

15. There is no material error of law in the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.


Signed                              Date: 25 January 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is payable and therefore there will be no fee award.


Signed                              Date: 25 January 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes
