

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/10510/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard in Liverpool                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 22 August 2017                      |On 25 August 2017                   |
|                                       |                                    |


                                   Before
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                                     M A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:           Ms C Warren, Counsel instructed by Duncan
                 Lewis & Co solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
Although an anonymity direction was not made by the First-tier Tribunal,  as
a protection claim, it is appropriate that a direction is made.  Unless  and
until a tribunal or  court  directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is  granted
anonymity. No report of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or  indirectly
identify him or any member of his family.  This  direction  applies  amongst
others to all parties. Failure to comply with this direction could  lead  to
contempt of court proceedings.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

    1. The Appellant appeals against  a  decision  of  First-Tier  Tribunal
       Judge Andrew Davies promulgated on 23 March  2017  ("the  Decision")
       dismissing the Appellant's appeal against the Secretary  of  State's
       decision dated 7 April 2016 refusing his protection and human rights
       claims.  The focus of the appeal to this Tribunal is the  protection
       claim.


    2. The Appellant is a national of Pakistan.   He arrived in the  UK  on
       11 February 2012 as a student.  When his leave  expired,  he  sought
       further leave to remain which application was rejected.  It was  not
       until he was encountered as an overstayer on 17  February  2016  and
       threatened with removal that he claimed asylum which was refused  by
       the Respondent's decision under appeal.


    3. The first part of the Appellant's protection claim is that he is  at
       risk from an individual, [T A], who  is  or  was  a  politician  and
       against whom he protested, he claims, in March and  April  2009.  He
       claims that he was the leader of a group of students  and  organised
       protests against this man and that  he  was  beaten  by  individuals
       associated with him as a result in May 2009.


    4. The second part of the claim is that, the Appellant having left  his
       home area in May 2009 for Lahore where he  studied  accountancy,  he
       came to the attention of another student who was sympathetic  to  an
       organisation called Lashkhar e Janghvi (LeJ).  The Appellant  claims
       that this was as a result of his participation in debates on  topics
       which would be seen by LeJ as contrary to their  views.   He  claims
       that the student concerned threatened him over a period of time  and
       that the last threat involved a gun.  He says that he filed a police
       report and that the police told him to move away from the area.   He
       did so, relocating to the Punjab, where he lived with an aunt before
       leaving Pakistan on a student visa in February 2012.


    5. In relation to the first part of the claim, the Judge accepted  that
       the Appellant might have been beaten  for  organising  the  protests
       against T A but not that this was done because  the  Appellant  held
       any particular political opinion.  The Judge found that the  beating
       was a one-off incident.   The  medical  evidence  produced  did  not
       assist the Appellant's claim,  in  particular  because  the  account
       given by the Appellant to the doctor differed from what he  said  in
       his asylum interview.  The injuries observed by the doctor also  did
       not match the Appellant's account of what happened  to  him.  Whilst
       accepting that the attack occurred in 2009, as  claimed,  the  Judge
       found that the Appellant would not remain at risk on this account in
       his home area.  The Judge did not  accept  the  Appellant's  account
       that his family had recently been targeted again after a  number  of
       years of insults against them.  The Judge did not  accept  that  the
       Appellant's profile was  such  that  [TA]'s  supporters  would  have
       continued to be interested in him many years after the  protests  he
       claimed to have organised. He also noted that whilst the  system  of
       protection  in  Pakistan  may  have  deficiencies  and  not  provide
       complete protection, it would be sufficient.  For those reasons, the
       Judge rejected the claim that the Appellant would be at risk in  his
       home area in relation to the first part of the claim.


    6. In relation to the second part of the claim, the Judge accepted that
       LeJ is a terrorist group and is to some  extent  tolerated  in  some
       areas by the authorities and can therefore act with  some  impunity.
       The Judge  accepted  that  there  would  not  be  a  sufficiency  of
       protection against a risk from LeJ if an individual were targeted by
       the group, and also accepted that the Appellant had been targeted by
       an individual who was a sympathiser with that group.  The Judge  did
       not accept however that this went beyond  threats  from  a  specific
       individual.  He noted that those involved in  the  debates  had  not
       been targeted by LeJ, he did  not  accept  that  the  Appellant  was
       targeted by the organisation generally and would not be at real risk
       on that account on return to Lahore.


    7. The Appellant's grounds are two-fold.  First, he says that the Judge
       has failed properly to consider the risk from LeJ.  Second, he  says
       that the Judge erred in failing to apply to his case, the  principle
       arising in SA (political activist - internal relocation) Iran [2011]
       UKUT 30 (IAC) ("SA") to his case. Ms Warren accepts that the  second
       ground stands or falls with the first.  In  relation  to  the  first
       part of the claim, the Appellant has been found not to be at risk in
       his home area on account of what happened to him there. That finding
       is not challenged.  As  the  Judge  himself  says  at  [36]  of  the
       Decision, internal relocation does not arise because the Judge finds
       that the Appellant is not at risk in his home  area  or  Lahore.  In
       fact, the Respondent says that this is  a  complete  answer  to  the
       challenge. It is not, however, because if it were accepted that  LeJ
       (as a group) continued to be interested in the Appellant,  there  is
       evidence that they may be able  to  track  down  an  individual  and
       internal relocation would then be relevant, it being  accepted  that
       there is no sufficiency of protection against this risk.


    8. Permission was granted by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Adio  in  the
       following terms so far as relevant:-


           "In view of  the  judge's  finding  at  paragraph  33  that  the
           appellant was targeted  by  a  terrorist  organisation  such  as
           Lashgar e Jhanghvi and that such organisation  depended  on  the
           profile of the person  concerned  reached  persons  outside  the
           areas where they are most active and  that  they  have  targeted
           ordinary Pakistanis including  students,  it  is  arguable  that
           there is an arguable error of law in concluding that there is no
           likelihood of risk of persecution to the appellant  due  to  the
           fact that he relocated to another city.  I note that  the  judge
           also did not take into account  evidence  from  another  student
           Muhammed Ashgar that he too was targeted  in  a  violent  attack
           because of his participation in student debates and had to  flee
           in Saudi Arabia.  His statement is at page 13 of the appellant's
           bundle.  This does not feature in the judge's  decision  and  is
           relevant.  It is arguable that the findings  of  the  judge  has
           under  estimated  the  overall  participation  of  an   ordinary
           Pakistani student against the organisation by finding  that  the
           prior  persecutory  threqat  had  abated.   I  find   that   the
           application for permission to appeal raises arguable  errors  of
           law and that all grounds are arguable."


    9.  The matter comes before me to decide whether the Decision  contains
       a material error of law and, if so, to re-make the decision or remit
       the appeal for rehearing to the First-Tier Tribunal.

      Decision and Reasons


   10. In short summary, the Appellant's case as put by Ms Warren  is  that
       the Judge's finding that the Appellant is not at risk from  LeJ  was
       not open to him based on his findings.  Those  findings  so  far  as
       relevant to the issue before me are as follows:-
            "[30]      The Appellant's  experience  in  Lahore  concerns  a
           different type of threat.  He  fears  Lashkar  e  Jhangvi.   The
           objective evidence about this group confirms  that  they  are  a
           significant terrorist group  with  links  with  other  terrorist
           organisations.  This is  confirmed  by  various  short  articles
           included  in  the  Appellant's  bundle  and  the  more  detailed
           documents.  There is some suggestion that it is tolerated by the
           Pakistan security establishment  and  allowed  to  operate  with
           impunity even in areas where state authority is well established
           such as the Punjab.  The Home  Office  Country  Information  and
           Guidance - 'Pakistan: Security and  humanitarian  situation'  of
           November 2015 deals with the threat from militant groups such as
           the Taliban and others in some detail.  I am satisfied  that  it
           would be applicable in respect of  the  threat  from  Lashkar  e
           Jhangvi.  The guidance indicates the areas where the Taliban and
           other militant groups are most active.  They are, however,  able
           to reach persons outside those areas "depending on their profile
           and the  area  in  which  the  person  resides".   The  guidance
           highlighted particular  targets  such  as  political  or  tribal
           leaders, journalists and aid workers.  It added:  "In  addition,
           ordinary Pakistanis, including students and those  perceived  to
           be opposing  the  Taliban  and  other  militant  groups  or  not
           following sharia law have also been targeted by  these  groups."
           If a person is at real risk it is likely to be for a  Convention
           reason, probably (imputed) political opinion.  If the  applicant
           is unable to acquire effective protection or relocate internally
           a grant of asylum would normally be appropriate.
            ....
            [32] The Appellant did report the incident to the  police.  The
           police advised him to be careful and  that  he  should  consider
           moving somewhere safer.  His evidence was not challenged on that
           point.  The Appellant did name his would-be  assailant,  [A  A].
           The police took no action.  The Appellant claimed that he  moved
           away to stay with a relative  in  another  part  of  Punjab.   I
           accept that the exception referred  to  in  A  W  is  reasonably
           likely to apply here and that if the Appellant is a target for a
           terrorist  group  then  he  would  be  unlikely  to   obtain   a
           sufficiency of protection from the Pakistan police, particularly
           in light of  some  of  the  objective  evidence  suggesting  the
           relative impunity enjoyed in some areas by Lashgar e Jhanvi.   I
           must consider however whether the Appellant is a likely  target.
           I remind myself of the low standard of proof.
            [33] It is clear that the Appellant is a person of low  profile
           in political terms but  nonetheless  the  Respondent's  guidance
           does suggest that ordinary Pakistanis, including  students,  can
           be targeted.  He is far less likely to be targeted than  someone
           in one of the target groups.  I  have  considered  the  evidence
           about his role in the debates  and  in  the  demonstration.   He
           confirmed  at  the  asylum  interview  that  he  was  merely   a
           participant in the demonstration at  which  400  to  500  people
           attended.  He did not do anything else of  a  political  nature.
           Nor did he organise the debates in his hostel.  In  response  to
           question 134 he stated that: "We started to contact those people
           in the hostel and we started debating within the students."  The
           debates were organised by a [M A].  The Appellant's role was  as
           a participant.  Everybody had to say something.   That  was  the
           extent of his involvement on that account.  He was not,  on  the
           basis of his own evidence, in a leadership  role.   However,  he
           subsequently indicated that he was  one  of  four  or  five  who
           organised the debates.  He was threatened by a student from  the
           nearby Punjab University.  The account of  the  threat  has  not
           been challenged.  I accept that it occurred.   However,  I  take
           note of  the  Appellant's  account  of  when  the  threat  first
           occurred.  At the asylum interview  he  indicated  that  he  was
           warned in the month of March 2011 for the  first  time.   Verbal
           threats  continued  until  October  when   the   other   student
           threatened him with a gun.  Nonetheless, [A A]  was  allowed  to
           continue attending debates and the threats occurred on a  weekly
           basis.  The Appellant was unconcerned about the verbal  threats.
           I accept it is entirely feasible that he would  have  been  very
           frightened by [A A] producing a gun.   I  am  satisfied  however
           that if the Appellant was targeted by a  terrorist  organisation
           such as Lashgar e Jhanvi that he would not  have  been  given  a
           long series of verbal warnings.  Such behaviour is  inconsistent
           with  what  the  objective   evidence   indicates   about   that
           organisation or other militant groups such as the Taliban.
            [34] I therefore accept that it is reasonably likely  that  the
           Appellant was verbally threatened over a  long  period  of  time
           culminating in the production of a gun.  It would be speculative
           to discuss  what  might  have  happened  if  the  Appellant  had
           remained  in  his  hostel  rather  than  relocating   elsewhere.
           However, on the basis of the behaviour of the Lashgar  e  Jhanvi
           sympathiser in giving the Appellant numerous weekly warnings and
           the fact that this terrorist organisation took no action against
           either the Appellant or indeed the organisers of the debates  or
           any of the student majority who expressed views against them and
           allied with the Appellant's lack  of  involvement  generally  in
           politics and the absence of any sort of profile, I am  satisfied
           that he has not shown even to the lower standard that  he  would
           be at real risk of persecution or  serious  harm  on  return  to
           Pakistan, including to Lahore."

   11. I can reject very shortly Ms Warren's opening  submission  that  the
       finding of no real risk was not open  to  the  Judge  based  on  his
       finding that the Appellant was targeted by LeJ.   That  is  not  the
       Judge's finding at all.  He finds very clearly that the threats were
       from [AA]  and  that  the  actions  of  that  individual  in  making
       continuing threats rather than taking any  action  are  inconsistent
       with the methods of the LeJ.  Further, he finds that  the  Appellant
       has no particular profile.  There was some discussion at the hearing
       whether the Judge accepted that  the  Appellant  was  one  of  those
       prominent in the debates.  It is noted at [33] of the Decision, that
       the  Appellant's  evidence  changed  between  interview  and   later
       evidence as to his role.  He began by claiming that he  was  only  a
       participant but later said that he was  one  of  four  or  five  who
       organised the debates.  Whilst Ms Warren is right to say there is no
       express finding whether that was indeed his  role  or  whether  that
       evidence was rejected for inconsistency, it is implicit in  what  is
       said at [34] of the Decision that the Judge did not accept that  the
       Appellant  had  gained  any  particular  profile  arising  from  the
       debates.


   12. If the challenge to the  appeal  had  turned  only  on  the  Judge's
       assessment of risk from LeJ based on his findings, I would have  had
       no difficulty at all with rejecting it.  It is abundantly clear that
       the Judge's finding is that the threats emanated from an  individual
       albeit a LeJ sympathiser and  that  the  Appellant  is  not  of  any
       interest to the group as a whole.  Taking account of the  fact  that
       the Appellant successfully relocated  to  another  area  (being  one
       where on the background  evidence  the  LeJ  is  able  to  act  with
       impunity [30]) and was not threatened or targeted again for a number
       of months, coupled with the fact that he delayed in claiming  asylum
       on arrival (as noted at [35] of the Decision), the Judge's  findings
       and conclusion were undoubtedly open to him.


   13. The only difficulty with the Decision arises from the failure of the
       Judge to take account of the evidence of [M A] who  is  said  to  be
       another of the students who was involved in the debates.   In  fact,
       this person has the same name as the person who the  Appellant  said
       at interview  was  the  organiser  of  the  debates  but  Ms  Warren
       suggested that this may be just coincidence.  I do not know as I  do
       not have evidence on that point.


   14. The content of the letter from [M A] which appears at [AB/13] can be
       summarised thus.  [M A] says that he and the  Appellant  and  others
       created a group  the  purpose  of  which  was  to  rise  up  against
       terrorism and fanaticism.  He says that the Appellant was "the  most
       prominent member of our group".  He says that  banned  organisations
       such as LeJ gave them threats.  He does not say  how  many  threats,
       with what regularity, from what source and when  those  took  place.
       He mentions only the  threats  by  [A  A]  and  the  attack  on  the
       Appellant which was avoided because the Appellant was  in  a  public
       place.  [M A] says that he moved to Faisalabad  after  the  incident
       but was himself targeted in December 2013,  abducted,  tortured  and
       interrogated in relation to the whereabouts  of  the  Appellant  and
       others.  He was then released.  He then fled to Saudi Arabia.


   15. As I note, [M A] is resident in Saudi Arabia.  As such, as Mr  Bates
       observed, his evidence would not be capable  of  testing  by  cross-
       examination which would reduce the weight which it could  be  given.
       The evidence contained in that letter would have to be  assessed  in
       the context of the Appellant's own evidence which  would  bear  more
       weight because  it  had  been/could  be  tested.   As  such,  whilst
       accepting that the Judge did not deal with the  letter  and  had  in
       fact noted at [34] of the Decision that none of  those  involved  in
       the debates including the organisers had  been  targeted,  Mr  Bates
       said that any error was not material.


   16. As Ms Warren pointed out, Mr Bates' submission appeared  to  proceed
       on the basis that the Judge  had  found  the  Appellant  not  to  be
       credible.  His credibility has in fact been accepted  for  the  most
       part, certainly  in  relation  to  what  occurred  in  Lahore.   She
       submitted that the evidence contained in this letter is crucial  and
       may well lead to a finding of a real risk based on the fact that one
       other member of the group of students in Lahore  has  been  targeted
       since the attack by [AA].


   17. There are a number of difficulties with the content  of  the  letter
       which I explored in discussion at the hearing.  The  first  is  that
       the Appellant said in interview that the organiser  of  the  debates
       was [M A] and that he (the  Appellant)  was  merely  a  participant.
       Even if Ms Warren is right to say that the writer of the letter  and
       [M A] as referred to at  interview  are  not  necessarily  the  same
       person, the Appellant's answer at interview casts doubt on  what  is
       said in the letter about the Appellant  being  "the  most  prominent
       member of our group".  I note also in passing that the assertion  in
       the letter  that  the  Appellant  and  others  set  up  a  group  is
       inconsistent with the Appellant's answer at Q136 that the group  was
       not an organised one.


   18. The letter does of course confirm the threats  which  the  Appellant
       received from [A A] including the final threat with a gun.  But,  as
       Ms Warren points out, the Judge accepted that the  threats  occurred
       so  that  part  of  the  letter  does  not  impact  on  the  Judge's
       conclusions.


   19. The only part of the letter which could even  potentially  make  any
       difference is the attack which [M A] says occurred in December  2013
       when he says that he was abducted and ill-treated and  which  caused
       him to flee Pakistan for Saudi Arabia.  To assess whether this could
       make any difference to the Appellant's case, I set out that  passage
       of the letter:-
           "On 19th December 2013, I finished my work and left the  office.
           Some people came and put a cloth on my mouth and took  me  away.
           And they subjected me to  physical  and  mental  torture.   They
           tortured me and interrogated me several times.  They  asked  the
           whereabouts of [the Appellant] and other people.  They  kept  me
           for 29 days and took about 35 lac from me and then released  me,
           and warned me that if I did something like this again, they will
           kill me straightaway.  I came to Saudi  Arabia  to  escape  from
           further troubles.  I am scared to go back again.
           In my opinion, [the Appellant] will also have to face this, or a
           worse situation that this because  this  organisation  has  many
           links."


   20. There are a number of very obvious difficulties with this  evidence,
       leaving aside the weight which could be  given  to  it  as  evidence
       which cannot be tested by cross-examination.   First,  the  lack  of
       detail about the attack is striking.  The Appellant does not say how
       many people abducted him.  He does not say that they were members of
       LeJ although the implication may be there from the earlier  part  of
       the letter but even so, he does not say how he knew that  they  were
       from that organisation.  He does not say how he was  tortured,  what
       his abductors said about their reasons for abducting him, how he was
       taken away, where he was taken or provide any detail  at  all  about
       the attack and abduction. Even taking the letter at its highest,  [M
       A]'s evidence it is that a number of people kidnapped [M A] and knew
       the Appellant as well as [M A].  It is not explained why  the  group
       would threaten [M A] not to "do something like this again"  when  on
       [M A]'s own account he had left  Lahore  after  the  attack  on  the
       Appellant in late 2011 and this attack  occurred  two  years  later.
       Most importantly, as  the  Judge  observed  when  dealing  with  the
       Appellant's case, the background evidence is that if a group such as
       LeJ considers an individual worth targeting (particularly on [M A]'s
       case more than two years after the offending events took place) they
       would not trouble with making idle threats.   They  would  not  have
       released [M A].  It is also notable that, although [M A]  says  that
       he fled Pakistan as a result of this attack  and  has  relocated  to
       Saudi Arabia, there is nothing to suggest that he has there  claimed
       asylum or been recognised as a refugee.


   21. If anything, this letter may cast doubt  on  the  Appellant's  case.
       There are some inconsistencies  as  I  have  already  observed.   Ms
       Warren submitted that there  is  not  necessarily  an  inconsistency
       between [M A] being said to be the organiser and the Appellant being
       a prominent member particularly since he said he was one of four  or
       five who organised the debates (albeit I  have  already  noted  that
       this was not his initial claim).  Whilst it  might  be  possible  to
       read the two as consistent if [M A]  had  said  that  either  he  or
       someone of the same name was the organiser and the Appellant  was  a
       prominent member, [M A]'s letter says that the  Appellant  was  "the
       most prominent member" (my emphasis).  That is not  the  Appellant's
       case and is inconsistent with it.


   22. Further, for the reasons I have already given, I am quite unable  to
       accept that the evidence which this letter contains about the  later
       abduction and interrogation/torture is capable  of  undermining  the
       Judge's findings.  Even though the Judge does refer to  there  being
       no evidence that others involved in the debates were targeted,  this
       evidence  is  far  too  vague  to  be  capable  of  supporting   the
       Appellant's case, particularly when measured in the context  of  the
       Appellant's own evidence of his relocation following [A A]'s threats
       and the fact  of  the  late  claim  for  asylum.   Moreover,  it  is
       inconsistent with the  background  evidence  about  the  methods  of
       operation of groups like LeJ if they are involved in such targeting.




   23. A Judge is not required  to  deal  with  each  individual  piece  of
       evidence.  Even if the Judge's failure to refer to this  letter  did
       amount to an error, I do  not  set  aside  the  Decision.   For  the
       foregoing reasons, the error is not material.  It  is  inconceivable
       that the  evidence  contained  in  the  letter  could  lead  to  any
       different result in relation to the Appellant's claim.


      DECISION
    I am satisfied that the Decision does not contain a material  error  of
    law. I uphold the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Andrew  Davies
    promulgated on 23 March 2017 with the consequence that the  Appellant's
    appeal stands dismissed
      Signed           [pic]      Dated: 25 August 2017


      Upper Tribunal Judge Smith
