
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10845/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham CJC              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 16th May 2019                     |On 29th May 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                     RKH
                         (ANONYMITY direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Sanjay Toora (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Ms H Aboni (Senior HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  a  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    James, promulgated on  12th  December  2018,  following  a  hearing  at
    Birmingham on 13th November 2018.  In the decision, the judge dismissed
    the appeal of  the  Appellant,  whereupon  the  Appellant  subsequently
    applied for, and  was  granted,  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.





The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Iraq, and was born on  29th  June
    1995.  He appealed against the decision of the  Respondent  dated  28th
    August 2018,  refusing  his  claim  for  asylum  and  for  humanitarian
    protection, pursuant to paragraph 339C of HC 395.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The essence of the  Appellant's  claim  is  twofold.   First,  that  he
    pursued a relationship with a 'Berivan Hassan'  without  permission  of
    her parents.  Second, that he had a well-founded  fear  of  persecution
    because he had reported a group of drug  dealers  to  the  authorities.
    With respect to the former, the Respondent noted that the Appellant had
    not mentioned the relationship with Berivan Hassan during his screening
    interview, although he had mentioned it during  his  asylum  interview,
    but had then added that it was not the main reason  for  leaving  Iraq.
    With  respect  to  the  latter,  the  Respondent  observed   that   the
    Appellant's narrative regarding an  encounter  with  drug  dealers  has
    several inconsistencies as to date, as to whether the group  wanted  to
    buy or sell drugs, as to whether he had been shown drugs in the group's
    vehicle, as to whether he knew the names of individuals, as to  whether
    he had taken the vehicle registration, and as to the number  of  people
    who had been arrested.  The Respondent had, for these reasons, rejected
    the claim.

The Judge's Finding

 4. The judge dismissed the Appellant's appeal for the  following  reasons.
    First, he was not satisfied that the Appellant faced any risk from Miss
    Hassan's family on return to Iraq.  The only threat identified  by  the
    Appellant was from her brother on three occasions that he had seen them
    together.  The last of these threats was on  15  September  2017.   The
    Appellant did not see Miss Hassan after that date, and despite  staying
    in Iraq for the next three months, he  received  no  threats  from  her
    family.  In any event, the Appellant would safely relocate  to  another
    part of Iraq to  avoid  any  threats  or  action  by  her  family  (see
    paragraph 26).

 5. Second, with respect to the Appellant's claim of an incident  involving
    the drug dealers, the judge observed how the Appellant  had  sought  to
    clarify the inconsistencies that the Respondent had  identified,  in  a
    subsequent  statement  from  paragraphs  14  to  25,  producing   three
    photographs,  that  he  claims  were  from  the  Assayish  files.   The
    photographs, the Appellant claimed, showed the  contents  of  the  drug
    dealers car on the night in question.  The Appellant  claimed  that  he
    was shown large quantities of drugs in the  car.   However,  the  judge
    observed that the photographs only showed very small quantities.

 6. Moreover, the Appellant was unable to explain this beyond  saying  that
    these are photographs provided by the Assayish (see paragraph 29).  The
    judge also went on to state that the Appellant had continued to  remain
    in his normal place of work working at the pharmacy and  had  not  been
    subject to any threats.  Therefore, there was no well-founded  fear  of
    persecution.

 7. The appeal was dismissed.

Grounds of Application

 8. The grounds of application state  that  the  judge  had  engaged  in  a
    fundamental mistake as to error of fact.   The  Appellant  had  clearly
    stated that he had left Chwarqurna, where he worked in the pharmacy, on
    5 December 2017, and he had then moved to Sulaymaniyah, where he stayed
    until he left Iraq.  However,  the  judge  stated  that  the  Appellant
    worked at the pharmacy until he left Iraq on 22 December 2017, and  had
    not received any threats at that place of  work,  which  was  factually
    incorrect, given that he  had  left  Chwarqurna  two  months  prior  to
    eventually leaving Iraq.

 9. On 22 January 2019, permission to appeal was granted by the Tribunal.

10. On 8 April 2019, a Rule 24 response was added to the  effect  that  the
    judge had given adequate reasons for rejecting the Appellant's  account
    of an incident with drug dealers, finding his account inconsistent, and
    not supported by any evidence. The judge also gave adequate reasons for
    finding  the  photographs  of  little  value   in   corroborating   the
    Appellant's account.

Submissions

11. At the hearing before me, Mr Toora, appearing as Counsel on  behalf  of
    the Appellant, submitted that  the  error  with  respect  to  when  the
    Appellant had left the pharmacy was a material error of law.  This  was
    because the judge's eventual conclusion was that the Appellant had  not
    received any threats at his normal place of work.  This could  only  be
    correct, submitted Mr Toora, if the Appellant had left his normal place
    of work on 22 December 2017.  However, the reality  was  the  Appellant
    had already left two months earlier the pharmacy on 5 October 2017, and
    had then relocated to Sulaymaniyah, before leaving to come to the UK on
    22 December 2017.  Therefore, the Appellant was bound not to have  seen
    any threats at his normal place of work because he was not there  after
    5th  October  2017.   Second,  the  judge  had  failed  to  deal   with
    sufficiency of protection.

12. For her part, Ms Aboni submitted that whilst there was a factual  error
    in the judge stating (at paragraph 30) that  "I  have  noted  that  the
    Appellant continued to work at his normal place of work at the pharmacy
    until he left Iraq on 22 December 2017", the fact was that this was not
    a material error, because the judge had already rejected  the  entirety
    of the Appellant's  account  for  lacking  in  credibility  because  of
    inconsistencies in their account.  The judge had  simply  not  believed
    that the Appellant had any dealings with the drug dealers.   Therefore,
    this could not be a material error.

No Error of Law

13. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law, such that it falls to
    be set aside (see paragraph 12(1) of TCEA 2007).   My  reasons  are  as
    follows.

14. First, the judge had rejected the Appellant's account of being involved
    with drug dealers in its entirety.  When the judge first considered the
    matter, he was clear that:-

         "The Appellant has been unclear about whether he was asked  to  buy
         drugs from the dealers or sell drugs to them.  He has been  unclear
         about how many of them were arrested.  He has claimed all  of  them
         were arrested and also that  only  the  driver  was  arrested  ..."
         (paragraph 28).

15. The Appellant had then gone on to claim that he had been threatened and
    that the first of the tests came on 1st October  2017,  but  that  "The
    Appellant has been unable to provide  any  evidence  of  these  threats
    despite having  access  to  his  social  media  accounts".   The  judge
    observed how it was that "He has provided a Facebook page from a person
    called Kura Jwanaka from whom he claims to have  received  threats  but
    has produced no documentary evidence of them" (see paragraph 30).

16. The judge went on to consider the photographs that  had  been  provided
    but observed that these:-

         "could be of any police incident and they  do  not  show  what  the
         Appellant claims was in the drug dealers car both as to  amount  of
         drugs and  types.   I  reject  his  narrative  and  find  that  the
         Appellant would not be at risk from any drug dealers on  return  to
         Iraq" (paragraph 31).

17.  Finally,  the  judge  had  considered  the  possibility  of   internal
    relocation at the end of the decision (at paragraph 32), observing that
    the Appellant could seek relocation in Sulaymaniyah, a place  to  which
    he had fled because he was of Kurdish ethnicity and "has a CSID in  the
    hands of his parents in Iraq" (paragraph 32).

18. Accordingly, the  judge  had  provided  a  detailed  and  comprehensive
    decision that was open to him to make.

19. An anonymity direction is made.

20. This appeal is dismissed.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 24th May 2019

