
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10230/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House (remotely)      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On: 24 May 2021                      |On 16 June 2021                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA


                                   Between

                                     TLT
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms L Barton, counsel instructed by Lei Dat & Baig
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Raikes, promulgated on  4  December  2019.  Permission  to  appeal  was
    granted by on First-tier Tribunal Judge Keane on 27 January 2020



Anonymity

 2. No direction has been made previously, however given the nature of  the
    appellant's protection claim which is based on her  sexuality  and  her
    fear of the authorities of her country for that reason as well as owing
    to political opinion, such a direction is now made.

Background

 3. The appellant entered the United Kingdom in January 2011 with leave  to
    enter as a Tier 4 migrant, which was valid until 23 January  2015.  The
    appellant returned to Cameroon in 2014. She was  issued  with  a  visit
    visa on 11 December 2018 and arrived in the United Kingdom on  6  March
    2019. The appellant applied for asylum on 27 April 2019.

 4. The respondent refused that claim by way of a letter  dated  8  October
    2019 and it is this decision which is the subject of  this  appeal.  In
    refusing the  appellant's  claim  for  international  protection  as  a
    supporter  of  the  Southern  Cameroon  National  Council  (SCNC),  the
    respondent referred to a failure by the appellant to raise  this  issue
    in her screening interview, the appellant's lack of  knowledge  of  the
    organisation or the  role  of  her  relatives  within  it  and  unclear
    responses. Accordingly, it was not accepted that  she  was  politically
    active or of adverse interest to the Cameroonian authorities. While  it
    was accepted that the appellant had  some  problems  with  her  husband
    owing to her relationships with women, it was not  accepted  that  this
    amounted to persecution.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 5. Prior to the hearing before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  the  appellant
    sought to add a "new matter," that of  her  sexuality.  The  respondent
    consented to this being raised at the  appeal  hearing.  The  appellant
    gave evidence along with two witnesses, AB and EE.  The  latter  was  a
    representative of the Southern Cameroons Community UK.  The  judge  did
    not find the appellant's claim to be credible and rejected  her  entire
    account. In particular, the judge stated that the appellant had neither
    mentioned nor alluded to her bisexuality during her  asylum  interview.
    Her sur place activities were found not to put her at risk, in view  of
    the guidance in MF (Cameroon) [2004] UKIAT 00341.

The grounds of appeal

 6. The grounds raised issues with the judge's credibility findings  and  a
    failure to assess all the evidence relied upon.

 7. While permission  to  appeal  was  not  limited,  the  judge  made  the
    following remarks:

         "the judge arguably accorded weight to an irrelevant  consideration
         in findings at paragraph 70 of the decision that the omission of  a
         witness with whom the appellant was previously party to a  bisexual
         relationship to attend the hearing, "casts doubt on the veracity of
         the appellant's claim to be bisexual." The  judge  arguably  should
         have treated the omission of the witness to attend the hearing as a
         neutral factor. The judge's consideration of the appellant's  claim
         to be a bisexual (sic) arguably received limited  consideration  by
         the judge. The judge's consideration was to be found at  paragraphs
         69 or 70 of the decision and aside from the judge's concern at  the
         omission of the supporting witness to attend the hearing  the  only
         other concern expressed by the judge was as to the appellant's late
         disclosure of her sexual orientation. The judge's treatment of  the
         issue of the omission of  the  supporting  witness  to  attend  the
         hearing was not suggested as a ground on which the application  for
         permission might  be  based  but  was  just  arguably  a  "Robinson
         obvious" point."

 8. The respondent did not file a Rule 24 response.

 9. This matter was not listed  for  an  error  of  law  hearing  promptly.
    Permission to appeal was granted on 27 January  2020  and  it  was  not
    until the appellant emailed the Upper Tribunal on 2 March 2021,  making
    reference to her poor mental health, that a hearing date was provided.

The hearing

10. At the outset, Ms Everett indicated that her focus would simply be that
    the judge was entitled to attach little weight to the  evidence  of  an
    absent witness.

11. Ms Barton was content to proceed to make submissions in the absence  of
    the appellant, whom she had expected to join the hearing.  In  essence,
    she argued that the First-tier  Tribunal  had  attached  weight  to  an
    irrelevant  consideration,  in  that  doubt  had  been  cast   on   the
    appellant's claim to be bisexual owing to the absence of a witness with
    whom she had been in a  relationship.  Ms  Barton  submitted  that  the
    appellant  was  treated  unfairly  in  this  regard.  Furthermore,  the
    consideration   of   the   appellant's   sexuality   received   limited
    determination and without these errors  the  outcome  might  have  been
    different.

12. I drew the parties' attention to the judge's findings at [69], where he
    found that the appellant had never  raised  the  issue  of  bisexuality
    until shortly before the hearing.  Having  considered  the  appellant's
    substantive interview record in advance of the hearing, it is the  case
    that at questions 21-30 the appellant volunteered that she  was  having
    marital issues because of her "girlfriends," that  she  was  forced  to
    marry her husband and that she had  "interest  from  friends  that  are
    girls." While the interviewing officer explored whether  the  appellant
    was at risk from her husband  owing  to  these  issues,  there  was  no
    attempt to explore what she meant by  her  responses  or  why  she  was
    afraid of the Cameroon government rather than her husband (Q30).

13. Ms Everett indicated that owing to the  appellant's  reference  to  her
    sexuality during the  interview  she  would  not  seek  to  defend  the
    decision in this case.

14. In relation to the remaining grounds, regarding  which  permission  was
    not explicitly refused, Ms Barton took issue with the judge's  decision
    to proceed without  medical  evidence.  That  evidence  was  now  being
    available, along with an expert opinion.

15. At the end of the hearing, I announced that the decision of the  First-
    tier Tribunal would be  set  aside  in  its  entirety  and  the  appeal
    remitted for a de novo hearing.

Decision on error of law

16. The judge's consideration of the  evidence  regarding  the  appellant's
    claim to be bisexual was materially flawed. Firstly, the  judge  failed
    to consider the clear indication on the face of the  interview  record,
    over several questions, that the appellant was relying on her sexuality
    and owing to this failure the judge was mistaken in  stating  that  the
    appellant only raised her sexuality shortly before the hearing.  It  is
    also, regretfully, the case that the Home Office  interviewing  officer
    failed to adequately explore the appellant's responses  on  this  topic
    and that her own representatives classed her sexuality as a new matter.



17. In addition, as argued in paragraph 7 of the grounds, the judge  failed
    to  assess  the  evidence  of   the   appellant's   previous   same-sex
    relationship which was provided in the form  of  photographs  and  text
    messages. As for the lack of attendance by the appellant's witness, the
    judge decided that this alone "cast  doubt  on  the  veracity"  of  the
    appellant's claim to be bisexual despite  an  explanation  having  been
    provided for the witness's unwillingness to attend. While the judge was
    entitled to attach little weight to the statement of  the  witness  who
    did not attend, it was step too far to use her non-attendance  to  find
    that the appellant was dishonest about her sexuality.

18. I have carefully considered whether the  judge's  findings  as  to  the
    remainder  of  the  appellant's  claim,  based  on  imputed  or  actual
    political opinion, can be preserved. I find that they  cannot  for  the
    following reasons. The judge places weight on the answers  provided  by
    the appellant when she was interviewed at [42] onwards and  uses  those
    answers to conclude that she has not given a credible  account  of  her
    circumstances in Cameroon. The difficulty with that  approach  is  that
    the interview record raises a number of serious concerns. Firstly, when
    asked if she was well enough to be interviewed,  the  appellant  states
    that she is not because she was in pain. She also raised mental  health
    concerns throughout the interview and was sufficiently upset  for  this
    to be noted on several occasions. At the  end  of  the  interview,  the
    appellant reiterated that she was not fit and well and still  in  pain.
    This was an interview which lasted from 1330 until 1740 hours, with one
    6-minute break after 3  hours.  At  the  time  of  the  interview,  the
    appellant was not registered with a GP and  was  struggling  to  access
    medical help. There is also an obvious lack  of  understanding  of  the
    issues which the appellant was trying to articulate on  behalf  of  the
    interviewing officer who was struggling to accurately spell  the  towns
    or cities named as well as the political organisations. Nowhere, in the
    decision and reasons is there any assessment of the appropriate  weight
    to be attached to this interview record.

19. At the time of the appeal hearing, three months after  her  substantive
    asylum interview, the appellant was distressed and mentioned  that  she
    had  contemplated  taking  her  life.  This  was  consistent  with  her
    presentation during her interview. Nonetheless the appeal proceeded  as
    the appellant still had no medical evidence to  submit.   According  to
    the appellant's account, she has suffered a miscarriage shortly  before
    her screening interview and her parents and children are either dead or
    missing.  She also refers to her mental health suffering while she  was
    awaiting the outcome of her appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

20. Given the foregoing, it is imperative that  the  appellant  receives  a
    proper psychiatric assessment as well as any  treatment  she  may  need
    before the re-hearing of this appeal.

21. While mindful  of  statement  7  of  the  Senior  President's  Practice
    Statements of 10 February 2010, it is the case that the  appellant  has
    yet to have an adequate consideration of her asylum appeal at the First-
    tier  Tribunal  and  it  would  be  unfair  to  deprive  her  of   such
    consideration.



Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error of on a point of law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

The appeal is remitted, de novo, to the First-tier Tribunal  to  be  reheard
at Manchester IAC, with a time estimate of  4  hours  by  any  judge  except
First-tier Tribunal Judge Raikes.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed:                                 Date 25 May 2021

Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara
