
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10704/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 26 November 2018                    |On 04 January 2019                   |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG


                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    ms P
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A De Ruano, Legal Representative, Goodfellows
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal but for  ease  of  reference  I
    shall throughout this decision refer to the Secretary of State who  was
    the original respondent as "the Secretary of State" and to Ms P who was
    the original appellant as "the claimant".

 2. This appeal first came  before  me  on  6  April  2018  when  following
    submissions made on behalf of both parties I found that the decision of
    the First-tier Tribunal had contained a material  error  of  law,  such
    that it had to be remade.  Much of what I wrote in that  decision  will
    be repeated in this decision.

 3. The claimant is a national of India who was born in  March  1985.   She
    entered the country as a student in  August  2008  and  her  leave  was
    subsequently extended to July 2016.  Just before her then current leave
    expired, on 21 April 2016 she applied unsuccessfully  for  a  residence
    card as the primary carer of a British citizen.  She  then  overstayed.
    She  claimed  asylum  after  having  been  served  with  notice  as  an
    overstayer, on 19 April 2017.   A decision to refuse  that  application
    was made on 12 October 2017 and it was in respect of that refusal  that
    the claimant appealed.

 4. This appeal was successful before First-tier Tribunal Judge  Trevaskis,
    who gave his decision in a  Decision  and  Reasons  promulgated  on  27
    November 2017 following a hearing at Newport six  days  earlier  on  21
    November 2017.  It is against this decision that the Secretary of State
    has appealed, leave having been granted by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Scott-Baker on 15 December 2017.

 5. The relevant background is as follows.  The claimant's case is that she
    had  previously  been  sexually  abused  and  otherwise  suffered  ill-
    treatment at the hands of her in-laws and her family and that by reason
    of past persecutory treatment she would, if returned to  India,  suffer
    further ill treatment from these family members.  She also  claimed  to
    be at risk from her own  family.   As  I  noted  in  my  error  of  law
    decision, in his findings of fact Judge Trevaskis had  found  that  the
    claimant would be at risk from the family of her in-laws, if she "comes
    within their power",  but  that  with  regard  to  the  claim  to  fear
    persecution by her own family her evidence was "less convincing".   The
    judge found as a fact at paragraph 41 of his decision that the claimant
    had not been disowned by her  family  and  would  not  be  at  risk  of
    persecution by them.  It was also the case that she has an 11 year  old
    daughter who is currently being supported by a cousin within India, and
    that fact was not at this time disputed.

 6. The Secretary of State made it clear at the error of law  hearing  that
    he did not seek to challenge the judge's finding that  so  far  as  the
    family of her in-laws is concerned, were she to be returned to India in
    circumstances where she came within their power she would be at risk of
    persecution.  Where however it was said that the judge was in error was
    that he failed to give adequate reasons as to why in  the  first  place
    there would be insufficiency of protection available  from  the  Indian
    authorities within her home area, and secondly, why in  any  event  she
    could not relocate internally within India.

 7. I set out in my  error  of  law  decision  what  the  judge  stated  at
    paragraph 44 of his decision with regard to the issue of sufficiency of
    protection, as follows:

         "Sufficiency of protection

         44.  The background information states that, although laws exist to
             protect women against  domestic  violence,  rape  and  similar
             offences,  effective  implementation  is   lacking   in   many
             instances.   I  have  taken   particular   account   of   past
             persecution  and  the  attempts  by  the  appellant  to   seek
             protection; she stated that she informed a police  officer  of
             her persecution by her in-laws, and was advised not to make  a
             formal report; I find this evidence credible, when  considered
             against the background evidence, and it leads me  to  conclude
             that I am not satisfied to  the  required  standard  that  the
             appellant  will  be  able  to  avail  herself  of   sufficient
             protection from such persecution by the authorities in India".

 8. The Secretary of State has submitted that the  reasons  given  for  the
    finding that there would be insufficiency  of  protection  were  wholly
    inadequate.  The fact  that  an  individual  police  officer  may  have
    advised the claimant against making a formal report was insufficient to
    found a conclusion that there was a lack of sufficiency of  protection.
    In my judgement, as I stated within the  error  of  law  decision,  the
    Secretary of  State's  submission  in  this  regard  was  well-founded.
    Whether or not there would be a sufficiency of protection would  depend
    upon whether the claimant, having made proper attempts to  secure  such
    protection, would  still  not  receive  it.   The  fact  that  she  had
    apparently been advised by one officer not to make a formal report fell
    short of the reasons necessary for justifying such  a  finding.   As  I
    noted, that was not to say necessarily that  other  reasons  might  not
    have been open to the judge; however, the  reasons  given  did  not  in
    themselves justify the findings which the judge had made.

 9. I also set  out  within  the  error  of  law  decision  how  the  judge
    approached the issue  of  internal  relocation,  at  paragraph  42,  as
    follows:

         "Internal Relocation

         42.  The proposed return of the appellant is  based  entirely  upon
             the respondent's rejection of her claim, and the  belief  that
             she will be able to return to her family.  I am  satisfied  to
             the required standard that that is a false premise because, if
             she returns to her own family,  her  whereabouts  will  become
             known to her in-laws.  If she is returned, therefore, it  will
             be  as  a  lone  female  without  family  support,  presumably
             accompanied by her child  and  she  will  be  likely  to  face
             destitution".

10. I considered that there  were  a  number  of  assumptions  within  this
    paragraph which were not adequately reasoned.  In the first  place,  it
    did not necessarily follow from the finding that if she were to  return
    to her own family her whereabouts would become known  to  her  in-laws,
    that if she internally relocated, her in-laws would  still  know  where
    she was.  The judge specifically  did  not  make  a  finding  that,  as
    claimed by  the  claimant,  her  in-laws  are  influential  politically
    (stating at paragraph 40 that, "Whether or  not  they  are  politically
    influential ..." when considering that she would be at risk if she came
    within their power) and as already noted  the  judge  at  paragraph  41
    specifically rejected the claimant's  assertion  that  her  own  family
    would no longer support her.  In these circumstances, I considered that
    even if the judge was of the view that if the claimant returned to live
    with her family this would become known to her in-laws, that was not an
    adequate basis for  finding  that  if  she  was  living  elsewhere  her
    whereabouts would become known to her in-laws.

11. I also considered that the judge was not  justified  by  any  reasoning
    within his decision in asserting that the claimant would return  "as  a
    lone female without  family  support".   Given  that  in  the  previous
    paragraph the claimant's assertion that she had been  disowned  by  her
    family was rejected by the judge, and in that paragraph the  judge  had
    referred to evidence that her application for a student visa  had  been
    supported by her parents "at a  time  when  she  claims  that  she  had
    already been disowned by them", I considered it to be at least arguable
    that the claimant would still have the support of her family.   At  the
    very least this was something which ought to have  been  considered  by
    the judge.  Also, as there was no dispute but that  the  claimant's  11
    year old daughter was then being looked after by her cousin, the  judge
    needed to consider that fact also in the context of what family support
    will be available to the claimant on return.  He also  needed  to  have
    this fact in mind before continuing that  she  would  "presumably  [be]
    accompanied by her child".  As her  child  is  currently  being  looked
    after in India by a cousin, it may well be  that  that  position  could
    continue on return.  This judge simply did not consider this aspect  of
    the case at all.

12. Further, with regard to the judge's finding that "she will be likely to
    face  destitution",  again  this  was  not  adequately  reasoned.   The
    evidence in this case indicated that this claimant is someone who has a
    history of working and she is  clearly  very  well-educated.   How  the
    judge came to find that it followed from the fact that she  had  an  11
    year old daughter that she would be likely to face destitution  is  not
    clear from the decision.  There  are  undoubtedly  many  people  within
    India, as indeed in other countries who are  single  mothers,  with  or
    without some family support, who are  able  to  survive  on  their  own
    earnings.  This may or may not be the case here, but these were matters
    which needed  to  be  considered  by  the  judge  before  reaching  the
    conclusion that he did in such a short paragraph  that  the  option  of
    internal relocation would not be available in this case.

13. For these reasons I found that there were material errors of law within
    Judge Trevaskis's decision, such that further findings would have to be
    made as to sufficiency of protection and internal relocation.   I  then
    gave   directions   which   were   discussed   with   the    claimant's
    representative.  I decided that it would be appropriate to retain  this
    appeal in the Upper Tribunal because the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's
    findings of fact would be retained.  That meant that this appeal  would
    proceed on the basis that it had been found first the claimant to be at
    risk were she to come within the power of the family  of  her  in-laws,
    but secondly that she would not be at risk of persecution from her  own
    family and nor had she been disowned by them.

14. Accordingly, I directed that the appeal was to  be  adjourned  to  come
    before me on the first available date after Monday,  4  June  2018  and
    that the hearing would determine first whether or not there would be  a
    sufficiency of protection available to the claimant were she to  return
    to her home area, and secondly whether  in  any  event  the  option  of
    internal relocation would be available to her.  I also gave  permission
    to the claimant to adduce further evidence provided such  evidence  was
    served on the Secretary of State and filed  with  the  Tribunal  by  no
    later than Friday, 25 May 2018.  I directed also that if  the  claimant
    wished to give further evidence she  may  do  so,  but  that  she  must
    include within the evidence to be submitted on  her  behalf  a  witness
    statement capable  of  standing  as  evidence-in-chief.   I  also  gave
    permission to the Secretary  of  State  to  adduce  further  background
    evidence relating both to sufficiency of protection and  also  internal
    relocation, but this evidence also should be served on the claimant and
    filed with the Tribunal by no later than 25 May 2018.

15. The appeal was then listed before me for hearing on 26 June  2018  when
    the claimant was represented  by  Mr  Joseph,  Counsel,  instructed  by
    Goodfellows Solicitors, which is the firm  which  has  been  instructed
    throughout by the claimant.  At this hearing, which was intended to  be
    the resumed hearing at which I would hear evidence from  the  claimant,
    no request had been made for an interpreter to be  provided.   However,
    at the hearing Mr Joseph made such a request and candidly accepted that
    such a request should have been made earlier.  It proved impossible  to
    book an interpreter at such short  notice  and  the  earliest  that  an
    interpreter could be present was not until 3.30 p.m. and there  was  no
    guarantee that an interpreter would necessarily be here even then.   In
    those circumstances the representatives of both the  claimant  and  the
    Secretary of State invited the Tribunal to adjourn that hearing because
    it would not be practical to start a hearing which was listed  for  two
    hours and involved the taking of evidence that late in  the  afternoon.
    Very reluctantly I agreed that it would not  be  in  the  interests  of
    justice to conduct the hearing without an interpreter and nor would  it
    be in the interests of justice to start such a hearing so late  in  the
    afternoon, even assuming that by then an interpreter was available.

16. In those circumstances I gave further directions as to the rehearing of
    the appeal which included a direction (which in the event proved to  be
    unnecessary) that if this would result in an earlier hearing this was a
    case which could be listed in front of another Judge and  need  not  be
    specifically reserved to myself.  I provided  within  those  directions
    that a Gurjarati interpreter must be provided at the  resumed  hearing,
    and also that the other directions with regard  to  the  issues  to  be
    determined would remain in place.

17. The appeal was then again listed before me on 10 August this year  when
    I heard evidence from the claimant.  The claimant at this  hearing  was
    again represented by Mr Joseph, but during the course  of  the  hearing
    the claimant gave evidence that one of the reasons why she would be  at
    risk on return anywhere in India was that her husband's family had huge
    influence within the BJP, one of the largest political  parties  within
    India, such that wherever the claimant was within India  her  husband's
    family would be able  to  find  her,  and  also  that  because  of  his
    influence she would be unable to avail  herself  of  police  protection
    which might otherwise be available to an ordinary citizen.

18. It is a fact, as I noted during the hearing, that there was  absolutely
    no evidence at all within the papers  as  to  any  influence  that  any
    member of the claimant's husband's family might have politically.  This
    was a factor on which the Secretary  of  State  placed  some  reliance.
    However, in the course of her evidence, during cross-examination,  when
    it was put to the claimant that no evidence had been adduced as to  the
    political profile of her  father-in-law  or  anybody  else  within  the
    claimant's husband's family, the claimant said in terms that this could
    be found easily by carrying out a search on "Google or social media".

19. Because this is a protection claim, the consequences to the claimant if
    her claim is true are potentially severe,  and  so  I  considered  that
    greater latitude should be allowed than might otherwise  be  the  case.
    The potential consequence if the Tribunal made a  decision  adverse  to
    the claimant by reason of a failure to  provide  evidence  which  might
    have been available are such that I considered it appropriate  to  give
    the claimant, with the assistance of her legal advisers, including  her
    Counsel, a further opportunity to  provide  this  evidence  (which  the
    claimant had said was readily available) to the Tribunal.  The Tribunal
    invited submissions on behalf of the Secretary of State on  this  issue
    and Mr Clarke, who represented the Secretary of State on that  occasion
    as well as on this occasion, did not attempt to persuade the court  not
    to allow the claimant this opportunity.   I  accordingly  made  further
    directions and recorded the decision to allow an adjournment in a  Note
    of Hearing which was given  orally  together  with  further  directions
    immediately following the hearing.  I noted within this Note of Hearing
    (at paragraph 5) as follows:

         "I have in mind that because this is  a  protection  claim  greater
         latitude must be allowed; the consequences if the Tribunal makes  a
         decision by reason of a failure to  produce  evidence  which  might
         have been available are potentially so severe  that  this  Tribunal
         considers (having discussed this issue with the representatives  of
         both the Secretary of State and the  claimant)  that  it  would  be
         appropriate if, as the claimant now says, such evidence is  readily
         available to give the claimant with the  assistance  of  her  legal
         advisers, including her Counsel, a further opportunity  to  provide
         this evidence to the Tribunal.  Of course, if,  having  been  given
         this opportunity, such evidence is not provided there may  well  be
         an adverse inference drawn by the Tribunal but that is a matter  on
         which argument may have to be heard in due course".

20. Accordingly, I adjourned the hearing part-heard and  directed  that  it
    was to be relisted before me on 26 November 2018 (that is today).  This
    date was arranged at the time, it having been  established  first  that
    both Mr Clarke and Mr Joseph would  be  available  to  attend  at  this
    hearing, as obviously, this appeal being part-heard, it  was  important
    that  the  parties  continued   to   be   represented   by   the   same
    representatives as had been present throughout the hearing.

21. I gave the claimant  permission  to  adduce  further  evidence  in  the
    following terms:

         "The claimant is given permission to adduce further  evidence  with
         regard to any influence which it is said that her husband's  family
         may have within India relevant to this appeal,  but  such  evidence
         must be lodged with the Tribunal and served on the respondent by no
         later than Friday, 2 November 2018".

22. I invited Mr Clarke on behalf of the Secretary of State  to  provide  a
    skeleton argument or written submissions which I  considered  would  be
    helpful.  I am grateful to Mr Clarke for providing such submissions.

23. I also directed that "To the extent that further evidence is  provided,
    the Secretary of State will be given a further  opportunity  to  cross-
    examine the claimant or any other witness upon whom reliance is now  to
    be placed, with regard to this evidence".

24. The hearing was then relisted again before me part-heard.

25. For reasons which have never  been  explained  to  this  Tribunal,  the
    claimant has not been represented at this hearing by Mr Joseph, who had
    represented her at the original hearing.  She was represented by Mr  De
    Ruano, Legal Representative (a non-practising barrister)  and  to  make
    matters worse, Mr De Ruano was also listed in another court at the same
    time.  I do not attach blame  personally  to  Mr  De  Ruano  for  this,
    because he informed the Tribunal and I  accept  that  he  was  told  by
    Goodfellows (for whom  he  was  also  representing  another  client  in
    another court) that they either had or would  request  that  the  other
    hearing be listed in the same court or  at  the  very  least  that  the
    Tribunal would be asked if  it  was  acceptable  for  Mr  De  Ruano  to
    represent two clients in cases listed in different courts at  the  same
    time.  Regrettably, so far as this Tribunal is concerned, I am  unaware
    of any such request being made and if any such request was made it  was
    made far too late for it to be communicated to me before the hearing.

26. Further, although apparently Mr De Ruano had an outline  note  of  what
    had occurred during the hearing, it was clear  that  he  had  not  been
    provided with a full note of the cross-examination which had  occurred,
    and so the reality is that his submissions, such as they were,  had  to
    be made in ignorance of at least some of the evidence  which  had  been
    given.

27. No application was made on behalf of the claimant for  an  adjournment,
    but nonetheless I had to consider whether it was in  the  interests  of
    justice to continue with the hearing in the absence of  Mr  Joseph.   I
    concluded that it was, not only because no application  had  been  made
    for an adjournment, but also because the claimant had been given  every
    opportunity to provide further evidence if it  was  available  and  the
    issues had all been well-canvassed before the  Tribunal.   Any  further
    adjournment would, on the facts of this case, have done  no  more  than
    delay what, for the reasons I will give below, I  consider  to  be  the
    inevitable result of this hearing.

28. Notwithstanding the directions I had given, which were noted down by Mr
    Joseph at the time, that any further evidence  should  be  filed  by  2
    November 2018, no evidence at all was filed by that date and  all  that
    has been filed was apparently a twelve page fax which was sent  to  the
    Tribunal some two or three days  before  the  hearing  and  which  this
    Tribunal did not see until today.  It is fair  to  say  that  there  is
    nothing of any relevance to the issues  which  have  to  be  considered
    within this bundle.  There are some photographs purporting to be of the
    claimant's husband with what is said to be  "BJP  Party  members",  but
    they are not in English and have not been translated and this  Tribunal
    has absolutely no idea of who is in these photographs.  There are  some
    other unidentified photographs  purporting  to  show  injuries  to  the
    claimant, but they obviously do not address the issue at  all  of  what
    influence  her  husband's  family  have  within  India.   There  is   a
    certificate of marriage and a document purporting to  be  an  agreement
    for a  divorce,  but  again  neither  of  these  touch  on  the  issues
    concerning which the claimant had said that she  could  easily  provide
    evidence.  There is also a page from Wikipedia of one "Dilip Patel" who
    is apparently an Indian politician and Member  of  Parliament  who  was
    born in April 1955 but there is no evidence either as to what  he  does
    or what influence he has, but more importantly as to  any  relationship
    he may or may not have with any member of the claimant's family.  Mr De
    Ruano very fairly when making such submissions as he could on behalf of
    the claimant accepted that there were, as he put  it,  "limits  in  the
    evidence" that had been produced on  behalf  of  the  claimant.   There
    remains in reality absolutely no evidence at all that any member of the
    claimant's husband's family have any significant influence within India
    at all.

29. I now approach this appeal having accepted the findings of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal that were the claimant now to come within  the  power  of
    the family of her in-laws she would be at risk, but that  much  of  the
    claimant's evidence could not be taken at face value.  I have also  had
    the benefit of hearing the claimant give her evidence and it is fair to
    say that on  a  number  of  important  points  there  were  significant
    inconsistencies between the evidence which she gave to the Tribunal  in
    cross-examination and what she had said within her  witness  statements
    or interviews.  I do not propose to set these out  in  full,  but  will
    deal with just some examples.  The claimant's essential case  is  that,
    "even though none of this was mentioned until a very  long  time  after
    she had arrived in the UK", the claimant had left India because she had
    been under threat from her husband's family.  In her witness  statement
    at paragraph 19 she had stated that her husband had threatened to  kill
    her in 2014.  She said there that "This was  the  fourth  last  time  I
    spoke to my husband", apparently after he had obtained  the  claimant's
    phone number from her aunt.  In her witness statement  she  had  stated
    when the other three times were that she had spoken, or been in contact
    with her husband.  The first time was after she  had  arrived  in  this
    country and she wanted him to know apparently that she had escaped from
    the "abusive relationship" and that she and her daughter were about  to
    start their new lives in the UK.  The second time was  apparently  when
    she was making a visa application.  The third time was when  she  spoke
    to him regarding a divorce.

30. It is quite extraordinary that apparently she made a  visa  application
    on behalf of the husband from  whom  and  from  whose  family  she  was
    escaping.  Moreover, this evidence is completely inconsistent with  the
    evidence the claimant gave when cross-examined which was that she spoke
    to her husband twice a month after she entered this  country  in  2008.
    There is another very odd feature of this evidence which is  this:  one
    of the matters put to the claimant in cross-examination was that it was
    very hard to understand how if her husband's family was so  influential
    in India they had somehow kept away from her daughter who was in  India
    and that they had apparently not even  been  able  to  find  her,  even
    though they lived only about 70 kms away.  The  claimant's  explanation
    for this was that they all believed that she  had  taken  her  daughter
    with her to the UK (which was at least consistent with her statement in
    which she had claimed that she had told her husband over the phone that
    she and her daughter were about to start their new  lives  in  the  UK.
    Not unreasonably Mr Clarke asked her then about the regular phone calls
    that she now said she had had from her husband (which as already  noted
    was inconsistent with her account in her witness  statement)  and  what
    she had replied within these phone conversations when her  husband  had
    asked to speak to his daughter, to which  she  responded  that  he  had
    never asked to speak to his daughter at all.

31. This is really quite  extraordinary,  and  in  the  judgement  of  this
    Tribunal, it is even more extraordinary that she was apparently seeking
    to assist this man who (on her case) so totally lacked interest in  his
    child to obtain a visa to come to the UK.  It is also odd, to  say  the
    least, that while applying for a visa for her husband to come to the UK
    there was no mention within the  application  of  her  daughter.   With
    regard to this part of the claimant's evidence, I do  not  believe  she
    was telling (or even attempting to tell) the truth.

32. I do not need for the purposes of this decision  to  make  any  further
    findings with regard to precisely what level of violence  was  suffered
    by this claimant at the hands of her in-laws, because the finding  that
    she would be at risk if she came within  the  power  of  her  husband's
    family has been retained.  However, so too was  the  finding  that  the
    claimant would not be at risk from her own family who had supported her
    financially  when  she  had  obtained  her  visa  to  come  to  the  UK
    originally.

33.  The  background  evidence  on  India  is  that  in  general  there  is
    sufficiency of protection and will  certainly  be  so  in  many  places
    within India to which this claimant could relocate.  As  already  noted
    above, this claimant is a well-educated lady.  She  has  a  diploma  in
    Mechanical Engineering and an ACCA, and she has a history  of  working.
    Her family in India were previously supporting her financially  and  it
    is clear that her cousin has been looking after her daughter  for  some
    nine  years  now  (and  the  claimant  has  not  suggested  that   this
    arrangement would not continue at least for some  further  period  were
    she to win this appeal).   For these reasons I find that she would  not
    be returning as a lone woman with no means of support.

34. The claimant has been given every opportunity to provide  evidence,  if
    there was any, as to the influence which her husband's family  is  said
    to have within India, such that the usual  presumption  that  there  is
    sufficiency of protection should be displaced.   As  already  indicated
    above, she has  produced  absolutely  nothing  at  all,  and  when  one
    combines  this  with  the  adverse  credibility  factors  which  in  my
    judgement are compelling, there is no even arguable basis upon which  I
    could properly find, even to the lower  standard  of  proof,  that  she
    would be at risk if she relocated internally.  It is not  unduly  harsh
    to require her to do so and there is no evidence before  this  Tribunal
    to support her case that if she did so she would be at any risk at all.

35. It follows that the claimant's appeal must be dismissed, and I so find.





Decision

I  set  aside  the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Trevaskis  as
containing a material error of law, and remake the decision, dismissing  the
claimant's appeal on all grounds.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed:
                 [pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Craig Date: 27 December 2018

