
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10235/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 22 February 2018                    |On 17 April 2018                    |
|                                             |

                                   Before

                      THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE NICKLIN
                 (SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL)
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                                     SXU
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms M Ghermane, Counsel instructed by Virgo
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Clark, Home Office Presenting Officer
                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 we make an order prohibiting the disclosure or publication of  any
    matter likely to lead members of the public to identify the  appellant.
    Breach of this order can be punished as a contempt of  court.  We  make
    this order because this is a protection case and there is invariably  a
    risk in cases of this kind that publicity will itself create a risk.

 2. This is an application by the applicant challenging the decision of the
    First-tier Tribunal promulgated on 27 November  2017.   Permission  was
    granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Foudy on 28  December  2017.   The
    grounds upon which permission was granted were that the judge had erred
    in assessment of the risk on return to Ethiopia and the appellant's sur
    place political activities and  in  the  decision  the  judge  made  no
    findings on  the  effect  in  Ethiopia,  if  any,  of  the  appellant's
    political activity in the UK.  It is  arguable  that  those  activities
    might place the appellant at risk on return even if  the  rest  of  his
    account is incredible.

 3. The brief background to the matter is that  the  appellant  claimed  to
    have left Ethiopia  in  September  2006  and  travelled  by  Sudan  and
    ultimately through France to Calais and arrived in the United  Kingdom,
    clandestinely, on 27 March 2017.  He lodged his claim for asylum  on  7
    April 2017.  The basis of his  claim  for  asylum  was  that  he  faced
    persecution in Ethiopia due to his political opinion as a result of his
    support for Ginbot 7 (herein referred to as G7).  It is contended  that
    the appellant's brother was extrajudicially killed by  the  authorities
    for being a supporter of G7.  Ultimately the decision of the  Secretary
    of State made, on 3 October 2017, was  to  refuse  his  application  on
    asylum, humanitarian protection and human rights grounds on  the  basis
    that she did not accept that the appellant was a supporter or member of
    G7 as claimed and she relied then on the inconsistencies identified  in
    the appellant's  evidence.   The  judge  below  did  place  substantial
    reliance on the fact that the appellant's  evidence  was  inconsistent.
    He made a series of detailed findings in that respect.  For example, in
    paragraph 14(c) he said this:

         "In cross-examination the appellant said that he had  been  a  cell
         member and was asked to explain the difference  between  that  role
         and that of a supporter.  He said that a supported can be a  member
         of a cell and that he was a supporter but not a member."

    The judge then found there was no credible evidence to  show  that  the
    appellant was ever a cell member or supporter and he referred  to  some
    photographs that were provided.

 4. On behalf of the Secretary of State, Mr Clarke says  that  that  was  a
    finding that  the  judge  was  entitled  to  make.  On  behalf  of  the
    Appellant, however, it is submitted that there are no  clear  findings,
    in light of the evidence that was before the judge,  of  his  level  of
    support or his perceived  support  for  G7.   The  importance  of  that
    emerges from the country specific information which was Ethiopia  dated
    2017, paragraph 9 of the determination states:

         "Anyone who is a member or perceived to be a  member  of  an  armed
         opposition group  designated  as  terrorist  organisations  may  be
         subject to surveillance, harassment, arrest and imprisonment  where
         they are at a risk of incommunicado detention,  torture  and  other
         abuses, or even extrajudicial killings.  This may  also  extend  to
         supporters of these  organisations  of  those  who  the  government
         suspects of being supporters."

 5. The argument that is put forward is, firstly, that when  assessing  the
    appellant's evidence and his credibility the judge below has failed  to
    direct himself as to the important fact that the appellant was a minor,
    aged 17. As such, he should have given specific  consideration  to  the
    UNHCR Guidelines on protection and care and the more  liberal  approach
    and the benefit of doubt that  should  be  applied  to  minors  in  the
    context of immigration cases:

         "The  problem  of  proof  is  great   in   every   refugee   status
         determination.  It is compounded in the case of children.  For this
         reason the decision on a child refugee status calls for  a  liberal
         application of the principle of the benefit of doubt.   This  means
         that there should be some hesitation regarding the  credibility  of
         the child's story.  The burden is  not  on  the  child  to  provide
         proof, that the child should be given the benefit of the doubt."

 6. The first ground that is advanced is that the judge  failed  to  direct
    himself as to the importance of that  principle.   It  was,  given  the
    lower burden in an asylum case, a matter that would have to be assessed
    with some care. However, it is right that the judge did not acknowledge
    this principle and I find that ground has force and  that  would  be  a
    basis on which the appeal should be allowed.

 7. A second ground  has  been  advanced.  It  is  submitted  that  it  was
    incumbent upon the judge to make clear findings on  the  basis  of  the
    evidence, even if he rejected elements of the appellant's  account,  as
    to his involvement or perceived involvement with G7. The nature of  the
    country specific information meant that perception was relevant in this
    case.  In those circumstances, I accept the submission that  the  judge
    did not make clear findings as to  the  level  of  involvement  of  the
    appellant, or his perceived involvement. In  consequence,  it  follows,
    that Judge Foudy made no findings  as  to  the  likely  impact  on  the
    Appellant or the consequences he might face if he were to  be  returned
    to Ethiopia.

 8. For both of those reasons we consider that the appeal should be allowed
    and that we should remit the matter for redetermination in  the  First-
    tier Tribunal with no fact findings being remitted back.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed.

We set aside the decision of the Firs-tier  Tribunal  and  direct  that  the
appeal be heard again in the First-tier Tribunal.

Signed: [pic]          Date: 22 February 2018

Mr Justice Nicklin


