
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10025/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 16 November 2017                          |On 23 February 2018           |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN


                                   Between

                                    [I B]
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Nizani, Counsel, instructed by Davjunnel
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal by the appellant, [IB], against the decision  of  the
    Secretary of State on 7 September 2016.  There was another  refusal  on
    10 January 2017 refusing his application for international protection.

2.   I do not think that I need to go into a great deal of detail  in  light
    of Mr Bramble's very helpful and wise submissions in  relation  to  the
    judge's decision.  There is the Rule 24 response.  Mr Bramble makes the
    point though that that is an example of where there are  flaws  of  the
    kind which have already been helpfully identified by Ms Nizani mirrored
    the point at paragraph 4 about detention of family members  for  a  few
    hours but that was in the context of leafleting.

3.   In no particular order, I would say that the errors of  law  that  have
    been identified in this case go to, substantively I think, a failure to
    consider the relevant country guidance  in  light  of  the  appellant's
    history, which was accepted by the judge, of being in a rather  unusual
    situation of being an Iranian citizen who has never lived in Iran since
    his family fled to Iraq on account of his father's  fear  of  execution
    because of smuggling and  other  activities  and  the  appellant  would
    therefore, if he can obtain documentation to  be  returned,  return  as
    somebody with an adverse family history, as it might  be  described,  a
    Kurd and somebody with no experience of living in Iran  and  those  are
    relevant issues both to risk on return and also to a  paragraph  276ADE
    issue.

4.   So I am satisfied that there are material errors of law in the  judge's
    decision and Mr Bramble says  it  simply  deals  too  quickly  and  too
    cursorily with issues and there are specific matters  relating  to  the
    appellant's profile and the  kind  I  have  just  described  which  are
    clearly relevant to a proper evaluation of risk and  the  existence  or
    otherwise of very significant obstacles to return.

5.   Ms Nizani argued that it would be best for  this  to  go  back  to  the
    First-tier and Mr Bramble, I think, in the end was of the view that the
    whole matter really had to be redone in the First-tier but I think,  as
    I said in the course of argument, that Ms Nizani is entitled  to  ring-
    fence the positive credibility  findings  as  I  find  them  to  be  at
    paragraph 9 of the judge's decision, "I accept his history as set out".

6.   I understand Mr Bramble's point about that, given some  of  the  flaws,
    as it were, in the judge's reasoning and his approach to  the  evidence
    along the way, that might be said to be questionable  but  it  has  not
    been formally challenged and I  think  it  is  sufficiently  clearly  a
    finding, as I say, of accepting the credibility  of  the  claim  but  I
    think it is nevertheless a matter that perhaps is best dealt with going
    back to the First-tier with that finding protected because there  is  a
    good deal of decision-making to be made in relation to this case on the
    basis of those bare facts.

7.   It may be that there can be clarification  about  the  issue  of  other
    family members given the judge's assumption, in that regard, or perhaps
    it was more than that, the judge's remark that he must still have  some
    relatives in the family area and there will need to be clarification of
    that and I think, given the amount of rethinking, admittedly though  in
    the context of the positive credibility findings, I think  that  it  is
    appropriate  for  this  matter  to  go  back  to  the  First-tier   for
    consideration and otherwise, as I say, the appeal  is  allowed  to  the
    extent of it being remitted on that basis.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

[pic]

Signed                                  Date 28 November 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Allen

