
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/10988/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 12 February 2018                   |On 06 March 2018                      |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON


                                   Between

                                    [m r]
                       (aNONYMITY DIRECTIOn NOT made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Otchie, Counsel instructed by MQ Hassan
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh  born  on  [  ]  1988  and  he
    appealed against the decision of the  Secretary  of  State  dated  17th
    October 2017 to refuse his claim for  asylum,  humanitarian  protection
    and human rights grounds.  The appellant claimed that in 2007 he joined
    the student wing of the BNP and was an active campaigner for  the  BNP.
    A local gangster who was a member of the Awami  League  was  trying  to
    extort money from his family which was building  a  new  home.   Having
    joined the BNP in 2007 in 2008 he went to a political seminar in  Dhaka
    where he was attacked by the police and members of  the  Awami  League.
    He was beaten unconscious.  In December 2009 he travelled to the UK  to
    study and in 2013 he returned to Bangladesh for approximately one and a
    half months  and  was  again  attacked  by  the  Awami  League  and  he
    subsequently returned to the United Kingdom.  On his return  he  feared
    his Awami League political rivals would kill him  because  of  his  BNP
    activity.

 2. First-tier Tribunal Judge Housego considered the matter  and  dismissed
    the appellant's appeal on 29th November 2017.  I will refer to his  key
    findings later in my decision.

 3. An application for permission to appeal to the Tribunal was made on the
    following grounds:

      i) At paragraph 44 the Immigration Judge stated that the appellant had
         a wife and children at home in Bangladesh that was incorrect.   His
         immediate family in Bangladesh were his parents.

     ii) The judge at paragraphs 45 and 46  failed  to  fully  consider  the
         Bangladesh approach to the BNP Party activists.  The appellant  was
         an active member of the BNP since 2007 and had suffered persecution
         and had been attacked several times.  The appellant claimed he  was
         a known figure for the BNP and was at risk from the Awami League.

    iii) The judge at paragraph 55 identified the appellant had  delayed  in
         claiming asylum but the appellant claimed that he had had leave  in
         the UK and therefore did not feel it was necessary to claim asylum.

     iv) The appellant was now suffering from medical problems at the threat
         of return to Bangladesh his mental state  was  very  weak  and  the
         judge failed to consider the appellant's case  as  complicated  and
         the judge had not considered the  real  risk  of  being  killed  or
         executed on return or indeed his Article 8 rights.  The appellant's
         political opinion would mark him  out  for  ill-treatment  and  his
         mental health had not been given due  consideration.   He  suffered
         from panic attacks.  He had  an  appointment  with  the  consultant
         inside the detention facility but had not been given any medicine.

      v) The judge had failed to consider at paragraph 54 that the appellant
         explained he was trying to collect evidence and felt depressed.

     vi) The judge at paragraph 59 failed to  take  into  consideration  the
         appellant's Article  8  claims.   The  judge  had  failed  to  give
         adequate consideration to a private life claim.  The appellant  had
         lived in  the  UK  for  eight  years  and  it  was  submitted  that
         permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal  should  be  granted  to
         consider a private life claim.

    vii) The judge erred as he dismissed the appellant's  asylum  Article  3
         claim principally because he did  not  believe  the  appellant  but
         failed to give  anxious  scrutiny  whilst  rejecting  almost  every
         assertion.  It was submitted that the judge did  not  evaluate  the
         evidence  with  care  and  gave  undue  weight  to   the   apparent
         inconsistencies in the  evidence.   The  judge  should  have  given
         anxious  scrutiny.   The  appellant  was  entitled  to  a  detailed
         explanation of why his appeal failed  and  should  have  in  effect
         identified what evidence he accepted, what was rejected and whether
         evidence is irrelevant.  The strictures were not  followed  by  the
         judge.

 4. Permission to appeal was granted by Designated Judge Shaerf  noting  at
    paragraph 44 that the appellant  referred  to  the  wife  and  children
    although there was no evidence to that effect and  secondly  the  judge
    erred arguably in not giving sufficient reasons to support his  finding
    at paragraph 46 that the appellant had never  been  at  risk  from  the
    Awami League.

 5. The grant of permission refused to grant permission in relation to  the
    documentary and medical evidence and therefore the grounds in  relation
    to paragraphs 57 and 58 did not disclose any arguable error of law.

 6. Further there was no error of law in relation to paragraphs 51  and  52
    whereby the judge applied the Section 8 of the Asylum  and  Immigration
    (Treatment of Claimants, etc.) Act 2004.

 7. The 'grant' also  refused  to  grant  permission  in  relation  to  the
    appellant's claim based on his private  life  which  did  not  identify
    anything other than the appellant had been in the United Kingdom for  a
    number of years.  Further the judge's treatment of the Article 3  claim
    may  have  been  brief  but  given  the  lack  of  evidence   and   the
    jurisprudence in Agyarko & Ors v  SSHD  [2017]  UKSC  11  the  decision
    disclosed no arguable error of law.

 8. In sum permission to appeal was granted in respect of the challenge  to
    paragraphs 44 to 46 of the judge's decision that  is  Grounds  (i)  and
    (ii) but not further or otherwise.

 9. At the appeal before Mr Otchie confirmed that contrary to  the  judge's
    finding at paragraph 44, there was no wife and child in Bangladesh  and
    he referred to the recent country background evidence which showed that
    the political situation was fluid in Bangladesh and it was  a  fact  of
    political life that there were difficulties and attacks.  In effect the
    reasoning was insufficient to justify conclusion that the appellant was
    not at risk from the Awami League.  The appellant did  not  know  about
    claiming asylum and further there was medical evidence in the form of a
    Rule 35 Report although that was  the  only  evidence.   There  was  no
    anxious scrutiny to the case.  The appellant  had  given  comprehensive
    evidence and answers in his account and the judge did not grapple  with
    his evidence.  The appellant may not be of high standing with  the  BNP
    but that did not mean that he was not at risk.

10. Mr Tufan made submissions to the effect that paragraph 44 was wrong but
    that was a slip.  The judge was referring to his  parents  and  sister.
    That could not undermine the remainder of the decision.  The judge  did
    not have to give reasons for every single piece of evidence as long  as
    it was clear why the appellant had lost.  It was simply not accepted by
    the judge that the appellant who was a student would not  be  aware  of
    asylum and formerly had used a proxy in an ETS test.  The judge clearly
    considered the Rule 35 Report.  Simply the appellant was  not  targeted
    as an individual.  The judge did not  accept  the  credibility  of  the
    appellant and found that it was damaged and that was open to  him  with
    respect to Section 8.  There was no evidence that he had  been  to  any
    demonstrations or any evidence from the BNP either in the  UK  or  from
    Bangladesh.  The judge makes  clear  what  documents  he  requested  at
    paragraph 53 and makes  clear  at  paragraph  54  that  if  there  were
    documents they could reasonably have been produced but were  not.   The
    judge also made the observation at paragraph 56 that the appellant  had
    passed through the airport using his own passport.  Save for  that  one
    slip the judge had given sustainable reasons  for  refusing  to  accept
    that the appellant was at risk on return because of his  membership  of
    the BNP which comprised 30% of the support in Bangladesh.

11. Mr Otchie rejoined that anxious scrutiny  was  required  and  he  would
    expect to see a reference to the country background material.

Conclusions

12. With regard ground (i), I noted Mr Tufan conceded that  the  judge  had
    referred, at paragraph 44 to the appellant having a wife  and  children
    back home in Bangladesh and they lived in  the  family  home  that  was
    built in 2006.  I do consider that to be a slip but  not  to  undermine
    the key findings of the  judge  in  relation  to  this  appellant.   At
    paragraph 56 the judge stated

         "a subsidiary (an academic) findings even if his account is  wholly
         true (and it is not reasonably likely to be so), the fact  that  he
         is not of interest to  the  authorities  means  that  there  is  no
         difficulty in him going to some  other  part  of  Bangladesh.   The
         authorities are able to protect his parents and  family  (who  have
         come to no harm since 2006), finishing and then living in the house
         they built and there would be sufficiency of protection also".

13. The judge was clearly aware of the evidence and that, in fact,  it  was
    the parents and family, rather than wife and child, who  lived  in  the
    house and his comments at paragraph 44 were corrected by his finding at
    paragraph 56. His findings do not, on an overall reading, reveal a lack
    of scrutiny. At paragraph 3.1  the  judge  recorded  that  it  was  the
    appellant's 'family' (with reference to his father) who  were  building
    the new home from  2006  onwards  and  they  managed  to  complete  the
    project. Essentially those who  were  said  to  be  interested  in  the
    appellant and the  person  whom  the  appellant  claimed  targeted  his
    immediate family,  when  building  the  home,  had  known  it  was  the
    appellant's own family and yet the family had continued  to  build  and
    live in their house and home area  since  2006  without  being  harmed.
    This also underlined that the  appellant  was  not  at  risk  from  the
    authorities per se.

14. It is quite clear that the grant of permission did not  extend  to  the
    submissions that Mr Otchie made reference to, not least in relation  to
    the medical evidence and the application of Section 8 of the Asylum and
    Immigration (Treatment of Claimants etc) Act 2004 which I  note  below.
    The judge specifically addressed the Rule 35 Report and permission  was
    not granted in evidence of that.   The  judge  rejected  that  evidence
    noting that the Rule 35 Report was informed by  the  appellant  himself
    and the doctor did not offer any conclusion,  however  tentative,  save
    that the case needed to be investigated.  The  judge  directed  himself
    appropriately in terms of the medical reports including in line with JL
    (medical reports-credibility) China [2013] UKUT 00145 and once again no
    permission was granted in that respect  of  the  medical  evidence  and
    there was no attempt (sensibly in my view) to seek to renew the grounds
    of appeal.   I agree those grounds were not,  as  Judge  Shaerf  found,
    arguable.

15. With reference to ground (ii), the judge  gave  sufficient  reasons  to
    support his finding at paragraph 46 that the appellant had  never  been
    at risk from the Awami League. The judge was fully aware of the claimed
    previous attacks and set out in detail the history of said attacks  and
    specifically noted at paragraph 30.5 that the  appellant  claimed  that
    the family had been targeted in 2006 when the  Awami  League  tried  to
    stop them from building their home.  As I have referred  to  above  the
    appellant's family were able to live and remain  in  the  family  house
    since 2006 albeit that the appellant claimed  that  he  was  an  active
    member of the BNP from 2007 and received  attacks  from  2008  onwards.
    That significantly undermines the appellant's claim.

16. The reference at paragraph 49 in fact refers to the appellant's account
    of his last claimed attack immediately before his last entry  into  the
    United Kingdom in 2013 having returned to  Bangladesh  after  the  said
    previous. This reference does not ignore the other attacks (which  were
    recorded in the decision) but in view of the immigration history it was
    open to the judge to focus on  this  attack  The  judge  rejected  this
    account, partly because the appellant described being attacked in  2013
    by a knife through the left arm but "without giving any  indication  of
    how he was located, who attacked him, where it happened, how he escaped
    and so-on".  The conclusion at paragraph 50 is not  just  a  rhetorical
    question but implicitly expresses that it was simply not credible  that
    the Awami League would attack him immediately on his  return  in  2013,
    when he had been away for four years and not been  politically  active,
    but, when they had had ample opportunity  prior  to  his  departure  in
    December 2009, some eighteen months after the supposed attack in summer
    2008 and yet had done nothing to him.  The judge clearly did  not  find
    that credible.  He was entitled to make those findings.

17. What  significantly  undermines  this  claim,  (including  the  claimed
    attacks) and on which no permission was granted to argue any  challenge
    was the  application  of  Section  8  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration
    (Treatment of Claimants etc) Act 2004.

18. The appellant's immigration history was as follows.  Having entered the
    United Kingdom in 2009 as a student he applied to extend his  leave  on
    17th February 2011 and this was granted but  curtailed  on  14th  April
    2012.  On 13th June 2012 he applied for leave  to  remain  outside  the
    immigration rules.  On 17th October 2012 he made a further  application
    to remain as a student. The former application was treated as  void  on
    5th March 2013 but his application to remain as a student  was  granted
    on the same date and the leave granted was valid to 28th February 2015.
     On 22nd September 2013 the appellant returned to  the  United  Kingdom
    from a visit in Bangladesh and was detained at Heathrow Airport pending
    examination.  He was interviewed by Immigration Officers and maintained
    he was a returning student.  He was admitted on his existing leave.  On
    27th February 2015, one day before his leave was due to expire, he made
    a further application for leave to remain outside the Rules  which  was
    refused on 5th October 2015.  Since that date in 2015  he  has  had  no
    leave to remain. On 23rd December 2016  his  application  for  judicial
    review was struck out. On 16th August 2017 he was  arrested  during  an
    enforcement operation and on 17th August 2017 he claimed asylum.

19. From paragraph 51 onwards the judge made clear  he  was  aware  in  the
    light of JT (Cameroon) v Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
    [2008] EWCA Civ 878 that he needed to  take  a  holistic  approach  but
    reasoned that the  appellant  had  already  made  several  applications
    including judicial review and in none of them  had  he  claimed  asylum
    even though he had the benefit of legal advice. Only when  all  avenues
    were  exhausted  on  5th  February  2016  when  his   judicial   review
    application was struck out and he was encountered and detained  did  he
    claim  asylum.   Simply  the  appellant's  answer  that  he  had  leave
    therefore he did not need to concern himself with  claiming  asylum  is
    clearly untenable. I refer to the immigration history which  the  judge
    also set out in full at paragraph 10 onwards and  to  which  the  judge
    referred in his conclusions.

20. I would stress that contrary to the grounds for permission  to  appeal,
    it is obvious the appellant has not 'always had leave to remain in  the
    UK and therefore did not feel it necessary to claim or  understand  the
    procedure of Asylum'.  That is incorrect.

21. The grounds asserted that the judge failed to consider the evidence but
    there was a remarked sparsity of  evidence.  Indeed  it  was  also  the
    judge's reasoning that the appellant had given, despite  his  claim  to
    have supported the BNP, no evidence from Bangladesh or indeed from  the
    UK on his activities in the UK.  As the judge stated at paragraph 53

         "The  evidence  of  the  appellant  has  no  particularity  in  its
         important elements.  It is assertional, but gives no detail.  There
         is no evidence from the BNP either in Bangladesh or in the UK.  The
         appellant gives no instance of any meeting he attended in  the  UK.
         He brings no evidence from anyone who might be able to say  he  was
         at meetings in the UK (a TK (Burundi) v SSHD  [2009]  EWCA  Civ  40
         (Burundi) point).  He has still not said what documents he has  not
         been able to  produce,  and  the  reason  given  for  vagueness  in
         interview was that he was not sure what  was  needed.  He  has  not
         provided the hospital report he told the  Rule  35  doctor  he  had
         available to him'.

22. As stated the judge confirmed the appellant had received  legal  advice
    but he had still provided no documents despite having  stated  that  he
    was going to produce them and yet he had complained of no difficulty in
    getting hold of the documents. As reasoned at paragraph 53

         "He is in contact with his family in Bangladesh, and  he  complains
         of no difficulty in getting hold of documents.   He  said  (witness
         statement paragraph 19)  that  he  returned  to  Bangladesh  as  he
         'needed to deal with some urgent matters' in Bangladesh but did not
         say what they were.  He said in his  witness  statement  (paragraph
         170 that he was 'attacked by' the Awami League,  and  that  'I  was
         targeted by the Awami League  and  they  are  and  were  intent  on
         pursing and killing me' but does not say exactly what this was, nor
         why, if so, they had not succeeded in 2013'.

23.  As such, it was open to  the  judge  to  find  that  he  was  although
    claiming to be attacked by the Awami League and targeted by  the  Awami
    League to be killed, the appellant had not explained why they  had  not
    been successful prior to his entry to the UK (on either occasion).  The
    judge also found at paragraph 55 that the appellant was of no  interest
    to the authorities.  He entered and left Bangladesh in 2013 on his  own
    passport without bribery or subterfuge and without difficulty.

24. Further to Shizad (sufficiency of reasons: set aside) [2013] UKUT 00085
    (IAC), the judge gave cogent and brief but adequate  reasoning  on  the
    key elements of the claim.  I am satisfied that reading  this  decision
    as a whole, the judge set out the  evidence  in  detail,  appropriately
    directed himself and did apply anxious scrutiny.   The  grounds  are  a
    disagreement with the findings of the judge which  were  pertinent  and
    succinct.
    The judge found the appellant, at best, a low level supporter, and  not
    an active supporter (paragraph 45).  Reading the decision  as  a  whole
    the judge clearly reasoned that finding.  Further and  crucially,  even
    as a low level supporter, from the assessment of the  appellant's  case
    he was  not  at  risk  on  return.   His  immigration  history  starkly
    contradicted that claim.  It is an inescapable fact that the claim  was
    substantially undermined by the appellant's delay  in  claiming  asylum
    and that was adequately  explored  by  the  judge  and  which  was  not
    explained by the appellant.   Even  the  grounds  for  appeal  did  not
    address that point. The appellant claimed to have been at risk of being
    killed from 2006 onwards yet remained in Bangladesh until 2009 and then
    returned in 2013.  Any mistaken reference to  a  wife  and  child  was,
    notwithstanding my findings above, were, in this  particular  instance,
    not material.

25. The appellant can be in no doubt as to the reason his appeal failed.  I
    find no error of law and the decision shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed      Helen Rimington                        Date 3rd March 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington



