
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10970/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House                            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On : 15 December 2020                            |On: 6 January 2021            |
|                                                 |                              |

                                   Before


                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                                     RG
                         (Anonymity Direction made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Azmi, instructed by Bond Adams LLP Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This has been a remote hearing to which there has  been  no  objection
      from the parties. The form of remote hearing was skype for business. A
      face to face hearing was not held because it was not practicable,  and
      all issues could be determined in a remote hearing.

   2. The appellant is a citizen of Albania born on 28 March 1997.  She  has
      been given permission to appeal against  the  decision  of  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Perry dismissing her appeal  against  the  respondent's
      decision to refuse her asylum and human rights claim.

   3. The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on 27  November  2016  and
      claimed asylum on 8 December 2016. Her claim was refused on 16 January
      2017 and certified as clearly unfounded under  section  94(1)  of  the
      Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, so that there was no in-
      country right of appeal. The appellant did not depart from the UK  but
      made further submissions on 3 September 2019 which were treated by the
      respondent as a fresh claim. That claim was refused on 24 October 2019
      and the appellant's appal against that decision  gave  rise  to  these
      proceedings.

   4. The appellant's earlier claim for asylum, made on 8 December 2016, was
      on the basis of a fear of being forced into an arranged marriage  with
      her cousin or of being killed by her father if she refused, given  the
      threats he made when she refused to enter into the marriage  prior  to
      leaving Albania. The respondent, in refusing  the  appellant's  claim,
      accepted that she had demonstrated a genuine subjective fear on return
      to Albania but concluded that her fear was not well-founded given  the
      availability  of  a  sufficiency  of  protection  from  the   Albanian
      authorities or the possibility of relocating to another  part  of  the
      country. As such, it was not accepted that the appellant would  be  at
      risk on return to Albania and  it  was  considered  further  that  her
      removal from the UK would not breach her human rights under Article  3
      or 8.

   5. The basis of the more recent asylum claim, set out in the  submissions
      lodged on 3 September 2019, was that the appellant was at further risk
      from her father for having violated the honour of her family by having
      a child outside of marriage. It was claimed  that  the  appellant  had
      established a relationship with  a  man  in  the  UK  and  had  fallen
      pregnant and given birth to a daughter on 28 August 2018. Her  partner
      had disappeared and she had not seen him since May 2018, as he did not
      want to take responsibility for the child. A friend of hers in Albania
      had provided a letter explaining that her father had become  aware  of
      her situation and no longer accepted her as his  daughter.  She  would
      find it difficult returning to Albania as a single woman with a  child
      and relocating to another part of the country to avoid her father  and
      would be destitute.

   6. The respondent refused the further claim in a decision of  24  October
      2019, in which it was concluded again that the appellant  was  not  at
      risk on return to Albania and that her removal from the UK  would  not
      breach her human rights.

   7. The appellant appealed against that decision and her appeal was  heard
      on 23  January  2020  before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Perry.  The
      appellant gave oral evidence before  the  judge.  The  judge  accorded
      little weight to the letter from the appellant's friend which referred
      to her family being aware of her  situation  and  the  risk  from  her
      father and noted inconsistencies  in  the  appellant's  account  which
      damaged her credibility. The judge found in any event that there was a
      sufficiency of protection available to  the  appellant  and  that  she
      could also relocate to another part of Albania. As for Article 8,  the
      judge found that there were  no  very  significant  obstacles  to  the
      appellant's integration in Albania and that  her  removal  to  Albania
      would not be disproportionate. He accordingly dismissed the appeal  on
      all grounds.

   8. Permission was sought by the appellant to appeal to the Upper Tribunal
      on the grounds that the judge had erred by failing to have  regard  to
      her  individual  circumstances  when  concluding  that  there  was   a
      sufficiency of protection available to her in  Albania  and  that  the
      judge had erred by according little weight  to  the  letter  from  her
      friend.

   9. Permission to appeal was granted in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  on  19
      March 2020, albeit on a  different  basis  to  that  set  out  in  the
      grounds,  namely  that  the  judge  had  erred  by  going  behind  the
      respondent's concession in relation to credibility.

  10. Both parties made submissions on the error of law issue.

  11. Mr Azmi submitted that the presenting officer at the hearing  had  not
      departed  from  the  respondent's  concession  in  the  first  refusal
      decision and that the only issues  before  the  judge  were  therefore
      sufficiency of protection and internal  relocation,  with  credibility
      not being an issue. The judge had therefore erred in law by  rejecting
      core elements of the appellant's  claim.  He  also  erred  by  raising
      matters not previously raised, namely the first safe country issue  at
      [19] which was in any event wrong as Albanians were allowed to  travel
      through Schengen countries. As for  the  findings  on  sufficiency  of
      protection and internal relocation, the  judge  gave  only  a  general
      consideration to the matters and did not consider the appellant's  own
      circumstances.

  12.  Mrs Aboni submitted that  the  concession  had  only  been  that  the
      appellant had a subjective fear of her father at  the  time  she  left
      Albania in relation to her refusal to undergo a forced  marriage.  The
      judge was entitled to assess the credibility of the appellant's  claim
      thereafter and to make  the  adverse  findings  that  he  did  and  to
      conclude that that fear did not  persist.  In  any  event,  given  the
      findings the judge made on  sufficiency  of  protection  and  internal
      relocation, the credibility findings were immaterial.

  13. Mr Azmi responded by reiterating the points previously made in  regard
      to protection and internal relocation.

Discussion

  14. It is relevant to note that the basis of the grant of  permission  was
      not a matter challenged in the grounds. The  grounds  themselves  were
      not particularly clear and paragraph 2 is difficult to understand.

  15. In any event I find no merit in either the grounds  or  the  challenge
      raised in  the  grant  of  permission.  The  concession  made  by  the
      respondent as to the appellant's subjective fear of persecution was in
      relation to her initial claim about being threatened by her father for
      rejecting an arranged marriage to her cousin. That appears at [22]  of
      the decision of 16 January 2017. Although the respondent accepted that
      the appellant had a genuine subjective fear, credibility  issues  were
      nevertheless raised in relation  to  the  appellant's  evidence  about
      family support in Albania and at [39] the respondent  considered  that
      the appellant had  given  conflicting  accounts  in  that  regard,  in
      relation to sufficiency of protection and internal relocation.

  16. In any event, that was not the  decision  under  appeal  before  Judge
      Perry. The relevant  decision  for  the  current  proceedings  is  the
      decision of 24 October  2019,  which  was  made  on  the  basis  of  a
      different claim and which noted at [8] that there had been credibility
      issues arising in the  previous  refusal  decision,  and  went  on  to
      include further  credibility  concerns  arising  out  of  the  current
      account. At [14] the respondent referred to the  appellant's  father's
      "alleged" threats and to the limited weight given to  the  appellant's
      claim. At [26] the respondent turned to sufficiency of protection  and
      internal relocation in the alternative, taking the  appellant's  claim
      at its highest. There was no concession made in that  decision  as  to
      the  appellant  credibility  and  her  subjective  fear  and,  on  the
      contrary,  it  is  clear  that  the  respondent  did  not  accept  the
      appellant's account. In so far as the judge, at  [14],  recorded  that
      there was a concession, he was mistaken, and it  is  clear  from  [14]
      that the presenting officer did not accept that such a concession  had
      been made.

  17. There is, furthermore, no merit in the suggestion that the  judge  was
      not entitled to make adverse credibility findings about a claim  which
      was different to that assessed in the earlier  refusal  decision.  The
      judge gave cogent reasons for making the adverse credibility  findings
      that he did. Whether or not he was wrong about the appellant's  father
      being able to travel through Europe on an Albanian passport, the judge
      was  perfectly  entitled  to  draw  adverse   conclusions   from   her
      inconsistent evidence about her relationship with her  claimed  former
      partner, as set out at [20] to [24], and her evidence about the  risks
      she faced from her family, as set out at [27]. As for the  weight  the
      judge gave to  the  letter  from  the  appellant's  friend,  that  was
      entirely a matter for him.  He  gave  cogent  reasons,  at  [26],  for
      finding that the letter was  of  limited  weight  and  was  fully  and
      properly entitled to conclude as such.

  18. In any event, as Mrs Aboni submitted, none of that is  material  given
      that the judge made findings in the alternative, on  the  availability
      of a sufficiency of protection for the appellant and  the  possibility
      of internal relocation to another part of Albania.  The  challenge  in
      the first paragraph of the appellant's grounds of appeal was  made  on
      the basis that the judge failed to  have  regard  to  the  appellant's
      individual circumstances when considering  sufficiency  of  protection
      and the option of internally relocating. However that is  clearly  not
      the case. At [29], the judge relied on  the  country  guidance  in  DM
      (Sufficiency of Protection, PSG, Women, Domestic Violence) Albania  CG
      [2004] UKIAT 00059, and the updated  country  information,  which  was
      relevant to the appellant's particular circumstances, and then at [30]
      and [33] referred to the appellant's individual circumstances.   There
      has been no challenge to the  findings  made  by  the  judge  in  that
      regard, only to the (erroneously) asserted absence of findings and the
      grounds fail to identify any error on the part of the judge.

  19. For all of these reasons I consider that the grounds of appeal do  not
      disclose any errors of law requiring the judge's decision  to  be  set
      aside. The judge clearly had  regard  to  all  the  evidence  and  was
      entitled to make the adverse findings that he  did,  for  the  reasons
      fully and cogently given. He was perfectly entitled to  conclude  that
      the appellant had failed to show that she would be at risk  on  return
      to Albania and that her removal to that country would breach her human
      rights.


DECISION

  20. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not  involve
      an error on a point of law. I do  not  set  aside  the  decision.  The
      decision to dismiss the appeal stands.

     Anonymity

   The anonymity direction made by the First-tier Tribunal is maintained.


Signed:  S Kebede
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede                           Dated:  15 December
2020
