
`
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10477/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reason Promulgated|
|On 8 December 2020                            |                             |
|                                              |On 16 December 2020          |
|                                              |                             |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between

                                 A E (Iran)
                           [ANONYMITY ORDER MADE]

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation
For the appellant:         In person, with the assistance of a Farsi
interpreter
For the respondent:        Ms Rhona Petterson, Senior Home Office
Presenting Officer

                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

Anonymity order

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) The Tribunal has ORDERED that no one shall publish  or  reveal
the name or address of A E who  is  the  subject  of  these  proceedings  or
publish or reveal any information which would  be  likely  to  lead  to  the
identification of him or of any member of  his  family  in  connection  with
these proceedings.

Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise  to  contempt  of
court proceedings.

Decision and directions

1. The appellant appeals with permission against the decision of the  First-
   tier Tribunal dismissing his appeal against the respondent's decision  to
   refuse  him  refugee  status  under  the  1951  Convention,  humanitarian
   protection, or leave to remain in the  United  Kingdom  on  human  rights
   grounds.

2. The appellant is an Iranian citizen, of Kurdish ethnicity.  His claim  is
   based on a risk generated by the Iranian authorities'  knowledge  of  his
   leafleting activities for the KDPI.  The same claim was advanced  by  his
   brother,  whose  appeal  was  dismissed  by   the   First-tier   Tribunal
   (PA/06072/2019) on 20 August 2019.

3. When granting permission to appeal, First-tier Judge  Keane  stated  that
   the appellant's self-drafted grounds  of  appeal  were  no  more  than  a
   disagreement with  the  outcome  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision.
   However, as the appellant had been unrepresented  before  the  First-tier
   Tribunal, she considered for herself  whether  there  were  any  Robinson
   obvious errors which might be properly arguable.

4. The Judge identified the following arguable errors of law in  the  First-
   tier Judge's decision:

   1)   That the First-tier Judge's decision as to the  reliability  of  the
      arrest warrant produced by the appellant  to  support  his  claim  was
      unsound, given that the appellant had failed to produce in evidence  a
      document verification report which he had obtained;



   2) That the judge, having accepted that  the  appellant  had  experienced
      difficulty in finding legal advisers, 'introduced too high a burden of
      diligence' on him as an unrepresented appellant;



   3) That it was not open to the First-tier Judge to find the appellant  to
      be evasive and his account to lack credibility, given that he had  not
      put to the appellant the respondent's credibility concerns as set  out
      in the refusal letter, but had nevertheless  relied  on  them  in  his
      decision; and that



   4) Overall, the judge's assessment was 'redolent of  a  distinct  air  of
      incredulity' and his factual findings were perverse  and  contrary  to
      the evidence before him.

5. To this I add that the judge failed to direct  himself  properly  and  to
   treat the  brother's  First-tier  Tribunal  decision  as  the  Devaseelan
   starting point when assessing the appellant's parallel account.

6. There is arguable merit in grounds (1),  (3)  and  (4).   Ground  (2)  is
   weaker but at  least  arguable.   At  the  hearing  today,  Ms  Petterson
   accepted that the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  was  inadequately
   reasoned, arguably perverse, and could not stand.

7. The appeal is therefore remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal  (Nottingham
   hearing centre if possible) for remaking afresh, with no findings of fact
   or credibility preserved.


DECISION

8. For the foregoing reasons, my decision is as follows:


   The making of the previous decision involved the making of an error on  a
   point of law.
   I set aside the previous decision.  The decision in this appeal  will  be
   remade in the First-tier Tribunal on a date to be fixed.


Signed   Judith AJC Gleeson                      Date:      8 December 2020
         Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson
