
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10286/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields             |Decision Promulgated               |
|On 10th November 2017              |14th December 2017                 |
|                                   |                                   |

                                   Before

                 DEPUTY JUDGE FARRELLY OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

                                  MR.F.E.G
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                              Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs L Brakaj of Iris Law Firm.
For the Respondent:    Mrs Pettersen, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

    1. The appellant is a national of Libya who claimed protection. He  said
       he worked in Tripoli as an  accountant  for  the  former  regime  and
       continued in this  employment  afterwards.  The  leader  of  a  local
       militia pressurised him into manipulating information. He refused and
       because of this was detained and abused. When released  he  left  his
       home country. He claims that if returned he would  be  at  risk  from
       this militia  and  for  having  an  imputed  political  opinion.  The
       respondent rejected his claim on credibility grounds.


    2. His appeal before Judge the First tier Tribunal Thorne was dismissed.
       The judge found his account to be plausible and consistent  with  the
       country information. The judge accepted he worked in  Tripoli  as  an
       accountant under the former regime and  thereafter.  The  judge  also
       accepted that he was approached by militia and  when  he  refused  to
       cooperate he was detained and tortured. The identity of the person he
       named as being the leader of the militia was confirmed by an Internet
       search. A letter from this individual was accepted as being reliable.
       The respondent had rejected his claim of imprisonment as the  country
       information indicated  the  facility  had  been  abandoned.  However,
       further information produced led the judge to conclude  it  had  been
       reinstated. In summary, the judge accepted the appellant's underlying
       claim.


    3. The judge went on to suggest that because he  was  released  and  was
       able to leave Tripoli he was no longer of interest  to  the  militia.
       Consequently, the judge did not see a risk on return.  Regarding  the
       general risk from the country situation the judge  stated  they  were
       bound by AT and others (article 15(c) risk categories) CG [2014] UKUT
       31880 and others. No other basis was seen for allowing the appeal.


    4.  The  application  for  permission  to  appeal  was  based  upon  the
       subsequent country guidance on the 15(c) risk provided by FA  (Libya:
       art 15(c)) Libya CG [2016] UKUT 00413.  A  further  ground  was  that
       given the positive credibility findings the  appellant's  association
       with the formerly leader, the late Pres Gaddafi, meant he  was  in  a
       particular risk category.

Consideration.

    5. FA (Libya: art 15(c)) Libya CG [2016] UKUT 00413 at para 11  referred
       to  numerous  changes  in  Libya  which  were  sufficient  to  render
       unreliable the guidance on art 15(c) given in AT. The Upper  Tribunal
       advised that the risk should be determined on  a  case-by-case  basis
       until general up-to-date  guidance  was  again  published.  This  was
       promulgated on 7 September 2016 six months before  the  decision  was
       promulgated in this appellant's case.  The  Upper  Tribunal  has  now
       given general country guidance in ZMM (article 15(c)) Libya CG [2017]
       UKUT 263. The conclusion was that the  violence in Libya has  reached
       such a high level that substantial grounds are  shown  for  believing
       that a returning civilian would, solely on account of his presence on
       the territory of that country or region, face a real  risk  of  being
       subject to a threat to his life or person.


    6. First-tier Judge Thorne. Materially erred in law in stating that they
       were bound by AT instead of considering the  individual  features  of
       the appellant's situation. Consequently, the decision  cannot  stand.
       There is no need for a further hearing because the  decision  can  be
       remade and allowed on the 15(c) risk in light of on the basis of  ZMM
       (article 15(c)) Libya.


    7. Mrs Brakaj in pursuing her client's best interests also  argued  that
       he should be entitled to the protection of  the  Refugee  Convention.
       The application for leave in this regard refers  to  FA  which  deals
       with 15 (c). I believe this was cited in  error  on  this  point  and
       should have read AT and Others (Article 15c; risk  categories)  Libya
       CG [2014] UKUT 00318 (IAC) .Para 5 of the head note of that  decision
       makes the point the majority of the population of Libya either worked
       for or had some association with the former regime.  Such  employment
       or association alone was  not  sufficient  to  establish  a  risk  of
       persecution or Article 3 ill-treatment on return.


    8. The appellant had been abroad studying when the regime fell  and  was
       able to return and continue in his employment.  The  difficulties  he
       experience from the militia arose in 2015. At paragraph 79 the  judge
       said he did not fall into one of the risk  categories.  This  was  in
       assessment open to the judge  on  the  evidence.  Consequently,  that
       aspect of the decision shall stand.

Decision.

The decision of First tier Judge Thorne  dismissing  the  appeal  materially
errs in law and is set aside. I remake the decision and allow the appeal  on
the basis of article 15(c).


Deputy Judge Farrelly of the Upper Tribunal
10th November 2017

