
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10855/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4th April 2019                             |On 15th April 2019            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                              mr joynal abedin
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Khan, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Miss Holmes, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh born on  25th  December  1979.
    The Appellant had applied for asylum in the United Kingdom and asked to
    be recognised as a refugee.  He claimed to have been a supporter of the
    Bangladesh National Party since the  year  2000  and  claimed  that  on
    return to Bangladesh he would be unjustly  imprisoned  for  life  as  a
    result of false allegations which had been filed against him.  He  also
    feared that he would be killed by members of  the  Awami  League  as  a
    result of his political affiliation.  His application  was  refused  by
    Notice of Refusal dated 29th August 2018.

 2. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Abebrese sitting at Taylor House on 9th October 2018.  In
    a  Decision  and  Reasons  promulgated  on  26th  November   2018   the
    Appellant's appeal was dismissed on all grounds.

 3. The Appellant lodged Grounds of Appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal  on  4th
    December 2018.

 4. On 1st March 2019 First-tier Tribunal Judge Ford granted permission  to
    appeal.  Judge Ford noted that it was  argued  that  the  Tribunal  had
    erred in:-

         "giving 'no consideration on the Appellant's Article 8  rights  and
         private life and asylum claim' and in particular

           a. failed to consider the FIR

           b. jumped to the conclusion  that  the  Appellant  had  provided
                false documents and fabricated evidence without there  being
                any evidence of this from the Respondent

           c. breached rules of fairness and natural justice".

    It is relevant to consider the findings made thereafter by Judge  Ford.
    He noted that the Grounds were very  badly  drafted,  vague  and  "just
    about arguable".  Having read the decision  however  he  could  see  no
    detailed consideration  of  the  copious  documents  submitted  by  the
    Appellant including the FIR, court judgments  and  warrant  of  arrest,
    apart from the limited consideration at paragraph 20 of  the  decision.
    In the absence of such consideration he considered it was arguable that
    the Tribunal may have erred  in  making  adverse  credibility  findings
    based on internal inconsistencies in limited aspects of the Appellant's
    evidence.   He  consequently  concluded  that  there  was  an  arguable
    material error of law.

 5. No Rule 24 response has been served  and  filed  by  the  Secretary  of
    State.  It is on  that  basis  that  the  appeal  comes  before  me  to
    determine whether or not there is  a  material  error  of  law  in  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge.  The  Appellant  appears  by
    his instructed solicitor Mr Khan.  The Secretary of  State  appears  by
    her Home Office Presenting Officer Miss Holmes.

Submissions/Discussions

 6. Mr Khan relies on three grounds.  He takes me firstly  to  the  judge's
    reasonings at paragraphs 19 to  23  of  his  decision.   He  emphasises
    therein where reference is  made  to  concerns  about  the  Appellant's
    credibility, particularly  with  regard  to  the  contention  that  the
    Appellant had two jobs, that the judge was wrong in his  assessment  in
    that the Appellant did have two jobs.  He set up in business but at the
    same time when his business was not working out he went back to his job
    as a driver and that this has been addressed fully at  question  46  of
    his asylum interview.  He states that the Appellant's evidence  therein
    was consistent and that there was nothing impossible about the way  the
    Appellant conducted  his  business  affairs.   He  notes  and  contends
    therefore that paragraph 19 of the First-tier Tribunal Judge's decision
    does not in his view stand up to anxious scrutiny.  He  also  considers
    that there is a breach of fairness in the manner  in  which  the  judge
    reached his finding.

 7. Secondly, he contends that the judge failed to consider highly material
    evidence.  He submits that the only consideration made of documents  is
    to be found at paragraph 21 of the decision  and  that  the  judge  has
    misunderstood the Appellant's case with regard to the charges that were
    brought against him and he cross-referenced and refers back to question
    142 of the Appellant's asylum interview which he submits is  consistent
    with the documentary evidence  that  is  produced  in  the  Appellant's
    bundle.  He further refers me to an extract  which  I  have  considered
    from the Respondent's bundle and takes me back to paragraph  4  of  the
    Appellant's witness statement submitting that if he had considered  all
    the documents the Appellant's evidence would  have  been  found  to  be
    consistent.  He submits that the case does  not  stand  up  to  anxious
    scrutiny.  Further, he submits that where the judge has made a  finding
    of provision of  false  documents  that  this  was  never  put  to  the
    Appellant and that the conclusion  in  paragraph  23  is  made  without
    foundation.

 8. Finally Mr Khan challenges the finding on Article 8  at  paragraph  25.
    He does however acknowledge that if evidence relating to Article 8  had
    not been before the judge, it does become more difficult to pursue this
    particular aspect of the appeal.

 9. In response Miss Holmes submits that the  findings  were  open  to  the
    judge.  So far as the reference to the two jobs  is  concerned  (to  be
    found at paragraph 19), she contends that relying on this to any extent
    is effectively "a red herring" and that the main  point  was  that  the
    judge had real doubts about the lateness in which evidence was provided
    and similarly, at paragraph 20, that  the  judge  considered  confusing
    evidence had been provided by the Appellant.  She points out  that  the
    judge had found and made findings at paragraph 22 that the evidence was
    not consistent and that there had been dishonesty with  regard  to  the
    production of photographs.  She asked  me  to  find  that  the  judge's
    reasons are well-made  and  sustainable  and  that  the  arguments  put
    forward by the Appellant's legal representatives amount to little  more
    than disagreement.

The Law

10.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

11. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings

12. This is a judge  who  has  made  substantial  and  adverse  credibility
    findings.  The judge's approach to credibility is such  that  he  finds
    that the Appellant is not credible regarding the core of his claim.   A
    proper approach to credibility requires an assessment of the claim  and
    the evidence.   Relevant  factors  include  the  internal  consistency,
    inherent plausibility and external factors of the sort typically  found
    in country guidance.  The judge has noted that the Appellant was  vague
    with regard to  his  evidence  and  that  at  paragraph  20  has  given
    confusing evidence.  He further has made findings  that  the  Appellant
    was not credible regarding the charges he claims had been filed against
    him and maintained during the course of the hearing that  it  was  only
    one charge, but then changed it two charges, and that his evidence  was
    confused.  Mr Khan had suggested to the First-tier  Tribunal  that  the
    inconsistency was due to lack of education, but that was refuted.

13. I agree with the submissions made by Miss Holmes that the findings were
    open to the judge.  I do not consider that the judge has misinterpreted
    in any manner the fact that the Appellant held two jobs, and whilst the
    explanation given by Mr Khan is a perfectly reasonable one,  the  whole
    of the findings set out between paragraphs 19 and 23 have to be  looked
    at  as  a  whole.   This  is  a  judge  who  has  given  very  thorough
    consideration  to  the  evidence  and  has  made  adverse  findings  on
    credibility.  Those were conclusions based  on  the  evidence  that  he
    heard that he was entitled to make, and despite the efforts of Mr  Khan
    I find that the judge has given full consideration to the evidence that
    was before him and that the judge was entitled to make the findings  he
    did with regard to the documents.  Judge Abebrese heard  the  case  and
    considered all the evidence that was before him.  In such circumstances
    I find that there is  no  material  error  of  law  disclosed  and  the
    submissions made by Mr Khan amount to  little  more  than  disagreement
    with the findings made by the judge.

14. So far as  the  issue  relating  to  Article  8  is  concerned,  it  is
    completely inadequate merely to rely on the fact that the judge did not
    consider the issues, bearing in mind that the Appellant did  not  raise
    any  issues,  nor  provide  any  evidence.   The  judge's  approach  is
    perfectly correct and satisfactory.  For  all  the  above  reasons  the
    decision discloses no material error of law and the Appellant's  appeal
    is dismissed and the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  is
    maintained.

Notice of Decision

15. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  discloses  no  material
    error of law and the appeal is dismissed and the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal Judge is maintained.

16. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date: 11th April 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.


Signed                              Date: 11th April 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris

