
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10178/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 8 March 2019                               |On 15 April 2019              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

                                     R D
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Fazli, Counsel instructed by Sohaib Fatimi,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules
       2008 I make an order prohibiting the disclosure  or  publication  of
       any matter likely to lead members of  the  public  to  identify  the
       Appellant. Breach of this order can be punished  as  a  contempt  of
       court. I make this order because the Appellant  seeks  international
       protection. Generally people  seeking  protection  are  entitled  to
       privacy and because publicity could create a risk to his safety.

    2. This is an appeal against the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
       dismissing the  appellant's  appeal  against  the  decision  of  the
       Secretary of State, refusing him  leave  to  remain  as  a  refugee,
       humanitarian protection and leave on human rights grounds.

    3. The appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan.  He was born in May  2003
       and so is still only 15 years old.  He has a brother  who  has  been
       recognised as a refugee and a main part  of  the  criticism  of  the
       First-tier Tribunal's decision in this appeal is that it is said  to
       have misdirected itself when considering the  evidence  relating  to
       the appellant's brother.

    4. This is a decision that can only be understood and criticised  after
       a detailed examination of the First-tier Tribunal's decision.

    5. The First-tier Tribunal noted that the appellant said that  he  left
       Kabul in about 2016 and made his way through Iran and then  European
       countries that he could not name  to  France  and  then  the  United
       Kingdom.  The basis of his claim is "that he is at  risk  on  return
       from the Taliban because his family owned a butcher's shop and  they
       supply meat to foreign forces including the Americans".

    6. The First-tier Tribunal Judge heard evidence from the appellant  and
       his brother who I identify simply  as  "HD"  and  his  uncle  who  I
       identify as NN.

    7. The appellant said that he was born and brought up in Kabul where he
       lived with his mother and father and four brothers and two  sisters.
       His father worked as a manager in a family owned butcher's shop  and
       supplied meat through  "Oasis  Company"  to  American,  Turkish  and
       French military camps in Afghanistan.  The appellant said  that  his
       father and two elder brothers, H and N  (not  N  N)  worked  in  the
       business supplying meat to the Americans but stopped that in 2014 in
       response to threatening letters sent to the shop  where  the  family
       worked.   The  appellant  said  that  his  elder  brother   H   left
       Afghanistan to seek asylum in the United Kingdom.  His brother N was
       abducted by the Taliban.  As a  consequence  of  N's  abduction  the
       appellant and his younger brother were moved to his uncle's home  in
       a different part of Kabul  where  they  remained  for  approximately
       twelve months.  He was not aware of any problems  with  the  Taliban
       during that time but arrangements were made for him to leave when he
       travelled to the United Kingdom.  He said one of the reasons that he
       did not have any problems in this twelve month  period  is  that  he
       lived discretely remaining indoors for much of the time.

    8. The appellant's elder brother H has been recognised as a refugee but
       he has been recognised as a refugee because he is gay and  has  made
       enemies in Afghanistan, not least amongst the relatives of his  wife
       who has been abandoned.

    9. The judge noted that the Secretary of  State  did  not  believe  the
       appellant but decided that even if there were truth in the story the
       appellant's father may be of low-level interest to the  Taliban  and
       the appellant could be safe by internal relocation  possibly  within
       Kabul  or  possibly  to  another  major  city.   The  judge   noted,
       correctly, that the main issue  in  the  case  was  the  appellant's
       credibility.  The judge noted that the  appellant's  brother  H  had
       claimed asylum because of a fear of the Taliban and  because  he  is
       gay and because he was escaping  from  an  enforced  marriage.   The
       First-tier Tribunal  Judge  disbelieved  the  appellant's  brother's
       claim to risk ill  treatment  by  the  Taliban  because  his  family
       supplied meat to the US Forces but accepted  that  he  was  gay  and
       would be at risk as a  consequence.   That  is  the  basis  for  his
       brother being recognised as a refugee.  The judge said at  paragraph
       32:

  "By virtue of the principles in Devaseelan,  my  starting  point  is  the
  judgment of FTT Judge  Oxlade.   The  material  paragraphs  dealing  with
  alleged risk on return from the Taliban are paragraphs 41 to  46  of  his
  decision  dated  19  November  2014,  which  should  be  taken  as  being
  specifically traversed and incorporated into this decision."

   10. The First-tier Tribunal Judge then set out in full paragraphs 42  to
       46 of Judge Oxlade's decision.  The paragraphs explain in some  care
       Judge Oxlade's reasons for disbelieving brother H's claim about  the
       risk from the Taliban.

   11. The judge then made findings from paragraph 34 in  his  decision  in
       which he said that the appellant, his uncle and his brother  H  gave
       evidence that was  "conflicting  and  inconsistent  in  relation  to
       material particulars" so that it undermined the credibility  of  the
       appellant's claim.

   12. By way of illustration the judge noted that the appellant  had  said
       in his oral evidence that his father was still supplying meat to the
       American Forces in 2015/2016 whereas his brother H had said  in  the
       hearing before Judge Oxlade that they had stopped supplying meat  to
       the  American  Forces  in  April  2012  after  receiving  the  first
       threatening letter from the Taliban.  This finding is referenced  at
       paragraph 42 of Judge Oxlade's decision where that is recorded.  The
       judge noted that before him H said in his  oral  evidence  that  his
       father had continued to supply meat to the Americans  and  that  his
       father had not stopped supplying meat  to  the  Americans  in  April
       2012.  However, this point was not made  in  the  witness  statement
       supporting the evidence and the judge found that the explanation was
       false.  The judge noted that it was the  appellant's  evidence  that
       his father continue to supply meat to the Americans "in secret"  and
       this continued to be the situation after H had left but he  did  not
       explain how meat could be supplied in secret or  how  H  would  have
       known what was happening as he had left.  The judge did not  believe
       that the appellant's family continued to supply meat to the American
       Forces.

   13. The judge also considered carefully the evidence of the  appellant's
       uncle, N.  He is a  British  citizen  having  lived  in  the  United
       Kingdom since 1991.  He said that he  went  to  Kabul  almost  every
       year, most recently in 2016.  He said when  he  was  last  in  Kabul
       (2016) he was told by a number of friends that the family moved "two
       years ago" which he explained was four years before the occasion  he
       gave  evidence.   The  judge  noted  that  oral  evidence  was   the
       appellant's family left their home in 2014 but  the  appellant  said
       that he was still living in the family home in Kabul in 2015 when he
       was required to remove to a maternal uncle's home.  The judge  found
       this was an inconsistency that undermined  the  credibility  of  the
       account.

   14. Additionally, N had said in  oral  evidence  that  he  was  told  by
       friends that the appellant's family had moved to Pakistan.  However,
       although he claimed to speak to  the  appellant's  elder  brother  H
       every week, when H gave evidence he said that he was unaware of  any
       suggestion the family had moved to Pakistan.   It  seems  that  this
       point was investigated in cross-examination because N said  that  he
       had paraphrased his evidence and said that he had assumed  that  the
       family  had  gone  to  Pakistan.   The  judge  regarded  this  as  a
       contradiction.  An assumption is not  the  same  as  being  told  by
       mutual  friends.   He  found  the   inconsistency   undermined   the
       credibility of the account.

   15. The judge also  found  it  unsatisfactory  that  N  claimed  in  his
       evidence that he had not  made  efforts  to  trace  the  appellant's
       father using links in the Afghani community in the United Kingdom or
       in Afghanistan contenting himself to say that he  "lost  touch  with
       them four years ago" but had also described the  appellant's  father
       as his dearest friend.  The judge felt that these did not  sit  well
       together.

   16.  The  judge  noticed  that  the  witness  H  had  said,  in   direct
       contradiction to the evidence of Mr N,  that  they  were  trying  to
       trace  their  family  through  the  Afghan  community.   The   judge
       expressed the view that if the family were genuinely "lost" then:

  "there is no rhyme or reason as  to  why  N  would  not  have  sought  to
  discover their whereabouts, especially because he returns to Kabul almost
  every day.  I conclude from N's inaction that in  reality  the  appellant
  and H have not lost contact with his family.  Indeed,  if  this  was  the
  case and the appellant and H no longer had a telephone number  for  uncle
  S, (see below), they would have asked Mr N to attend at the home of uncle
  S, during one of his yearly return trips to  Kabul;  on  the  appellant's
  account uncle S lives merely an hour away  from  their  home  in  Khushal
  Khan.  There is no doubt in evidence they have asked Mr  N  to  undertake
  this journey to see uncle S who runs an estate agency business  with  his
  sons and thus should  not  be  difficult  to  locate.   Thus,  I  am  not
  satisfied even to the low standard of proof required, that the  appellant
  has lost contact with his family.  I conclude  such  testimony  has  been
  fabricated in support of a false asylum claim."

   17. The judge also found it significant that N said that he knew that  H
       had a wife but he did not attend the wedding.  He  was  asked  about
       whether he was invited and he said he  was  in  the  United  Kingdom
       implying that he could not attend the wedding.  The judge found this
       "plainly false" because it was H's case that he  never  married  but
       was only engaged and refused to enter into the marriage  because  he
       is gay.

   18. Mr N did state though that even though there was no marriage calling
       off the wedding, it would be shameful for the "girl's family".

   19. The judge did not accept there was a family feud.

   20. The judge found it revealing that contrary to the appellant's  claim
       that his father had reported the kidnapping to the police H  claimed
       not to be aware of such a report.  The judge  found  that  H  should
       have known if  his  father  had  made  a  report.   Credibility  was
       damaged.

   21. The judge also found it  impossible  to  reconcile  the  appellant's
       claim that he had no contact with  his  parents  during  the  twelve
       months that he lived with his paternal  uncle  S  when  it  was  his
       account that the family home and his home with uncle S were about an
       hour's travel away and that "everyone" in uncle S's home and  mobile
       phones including the six sons.  The  judge  could  not  accept  that
       there was no working mobile phone to make contact during that  time.
       The judge also found the appellant's claim to be unable  to  contact
       his uncle S after he was taken into the care of an  agent  with  the
       fact that the agent had a phone number to use to contact the  uncle.
       The judge could not see why the appellant would not have his uncle's
       phone number if the agent had it and he found that he had been  told
       lies.

   22. The judge then directed himself that, cumulatively,  the  effect  of
       the difficulties in the evidence was to make the claim  unbelievable
       and he dismissed the claim.

   23. At paragraph 53 the judge said:

  "53.   The cumulatively effect of all above serious causes  for  concern,
  is such as to cause me to conclude  that  the  Appellant  has  failed  to
  submit any satisfactory evidence to establish, even to the standard of  a
  reasonable degree of probability, that his factual account is  true.   In
  particular I am not satisfied that there  is  any  reliable  evidence  to
  suggest that the findings of fact made by  Judge  Oxlade  should  not  be
  relied upon.  While I accept the Appellant's, family were involved in the
  running of a butcher's shop, the findings of fact made by  Judge  Oxlade,
  remain unaltered; H's case was, as accepted by Judge  Oxlade,  that  they
  stopped supplying meat in April 2012.  Thus, the risk passed.  The  judge
  also found, for the reasons set out in detail in his Decision, he did not
  accept the Appellant's elder brother H was targeted by  the  Taliban,  by
  phone or letters.  The Appellant before me, seeks to  rely  on  the  same
  alleged targeting by the Taliban.

  54.         I remind  myself  of  the  UT  guidance  in  Devaseelan.   My
  starting point is the decision of FT Judge Oxlade.   I  can  only  depart
  from his finding and decision if credible new evidence is provided  which
  casts doubt on his findings.  The only "new evidence" relied upon by  the
  appellant amounts to little more than assertions by himself and H to  the
  effect that after H left the family home, the appellant's father  carried
  on selling meat to the Americans.  For the reasons set out above  I  find
  such assertions to lack credibility."

   24. The judge then found that he was not satisfied that the  appellant's
       brother N had been kidnapped or that there was any  family  feud  or
       that there was for any reason a reasonable likelihood of persecution
       on return.

   25. The grounds supporting the application for permission extend to some
       twelve paragraphs but I find they  are  well  summarised  by  Deputy
       Upper Tribunal Judge Roberts when she  gave  permission.   She  said
       that she gave permission because:

  "Ground 2 has merit.  It  is  arguable  that  the  FTTJ  has  misdirected
  himself on the Devaseelan principle by  treating  findings  made  in  the
  appellant's  brother's  appeal  as  determinative  of   the   appellant's
  credibility and it is arguable that the FTTJ  has  adopted  an  incorrect
  approach to the evidence before him by focusing more  on  the  weight  of
  evidence of the appellant's brother and uncle rather than  directing  his
  attention to the evidence of the appellant himself".

   26. I have considered the case of AS and AA (Effect of  previous  linked
       determination) Somalia [2006] UKAIT 00052.  There is a full judicial
       headnote which I set out below.

  "The Rule that his judicial determination stands as the determination  of
  the issue between the parties does not govern  later  litigation  between
  different  parties.   Accordingly,  when  it  is  said  that  a  previous
  determination of the claim or appeal of another claimant is of  relevance
  in assessing a later claim  by  a  different  person:  (1)  the  previous
  determination has no evidential value as such,  but;  (2)  its  narrative
  content is to be taken as evidence of what was said and done  leading  up
  to that determination; (3) the Tribunal determining  the  later  case  is
  required to make its own decision on the evidence before it; (4) no  rule
  of general law or practice supports the argument that the decision in  an
  earlier claim should bind or be regarded as part of the  evidence  in  an
  appeal by a different person and therefore; (5) the later Tribunal should
  not regard itself as bound to follow a previous decision  in  respect  of
  another claimant or make a  decision  consistent  with  such  a  previous
  decision; (6) on  the  other  hand,  principles  of  good  administration
  require the decision should not be  needlessly  divergent,  so;  (7)  the
  earlier decision should be treated as a  starting  point,  but;  (8)  the
  Tribunal will not hesitate to depart from that starting  point  in  every
  case where the evidence requires it."

   27. It worried me when I first considered the papers that the First-tier
       Tribunal may have erred by considering itself bound  by  a  decision
       not involving the appellant but involving  one  of  the  appellant's
       witnesses.  If that is what the  judge  had  done  the  judge  would
       almost certainly have erred materially.  I am satisfied that that is
       clearly not what the judge did.  What the judge did was consider the
       evidence before him and tested it against things that had been  said
       earlier in the case of the brother H  by  that  brother.   When  the
       judge  put  everything  together  he  found  the  evidence  entirely
       unpersuasive.  I find the judge has in fact followed the requirement
       set out in AS and AA.  They took as a starting point a decision  but
       the judge did not did not make his own decision just because of that
       decision.  Rather he looked at the reasons  for  that  decision  and
       things that were said in it before concluding for himself  that  the
       appellant's evidence was not believable.

   28. There is a point that I find needs  to  be  addressed  specifically.
       The appellant said that  his  brother's  evidence  had  always  been
       misunderstood by the First-tier Tribunal but there was no avenue for
       remedying that because the brother had obtained the result  that  he
       wanted to obtain and could not appeal or would not  wish  to  appeal
       the decision that led to his being recognised as a refugee.   It  is
       clearly right to  assert  that  successful  appellant  do  not,  and
       probably  cannot,  appeal  favourable  decisions.  If  that  is  the
       explanation then it is an explanation that could have been  set  out
       clearly in witness  statements  and  placed  before  the  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge. It is not an error of law by the judge if  that  was
       not done.

   29. In short although  the  layout  of  the  determination  gave  proper
       reasons for concern when the decision is considered  as  a  whole  I
       find the grounds are without merit.

   30. It follows there is no material error  of  law  and  I  dismiss  the
       appeal against the Secretary of State's decision.


|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 12 April 2019                  |



