
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: PA/10933/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Stoke                               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On September 27, 2017                        |On October 3, 2017            |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

                                  Mr o h a
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Ms Patel, Counsel instructed by Broudie Jackson &
Canter
For the Respondent:    Mr Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. I make an anonymity direction in this matter pursuant to Rule 14 of the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Iraq.

 3. On April 9, 2016 the appellant lodged an  application  for  asylum  but
    following an interview the respondent  refused  his  application  under
    paragraphs 336 and  339M/339F  HC  395.  The  appellant  appealed  that
    decision under section 82(1) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum
    Act 2002 on October 7, 2016 and the matter was listed before  Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal O'Hanlon  (hereinafter  called  the  Judge)  on
    February 7, 2017 and in a decision promulgated on February 22, 2017 his
    appeal was dismissed.

 4. The appellant appealed that  decision  and  permission  to  appeal  was
    granted by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Pedro on June 18, 2017.

 5. The matter came before me on the above date and I heard submissions  on
    the error or law from both representatives.  Having  heard  their  oral
    submissions I indicated to the parties there was no error in law.  This
    decision sets out my reasons for that conclusion.

    SUBMISSIONS

 6. Ms Patel adopted the grounds of appeal and submitted the Judge erred by
    failing to attach any weight to the appellant's  wife's  evidence.  She
    pointed out that the Judge made findings on the appellant's account  at
    [17] to [21] but failed to make any findings on his wife's  account  at
    [22] and simply rejected her evidence because it supported  an  account
    he had already rejected. The Judge did not consider the evidence in the
    round as he should have done. This failure infects the remainder of the
    decision and should be set aside.

 7. Mr Bates adopted a Rule 24 reply dated July 5, 2017 and  submitted  the
    Judge had considered  the  appellant's  wife's  evidence  at  [20]  and
    rejected aspects of that evidence and concluded the  appellant's  claim
    lacked credibility and that the Judge was entitled to make the findings
    he did.

    ERROR OF LAW

 8. The ground of appeal was a narrow  ground  concerned  solely  with  the
    Judge's approach to the appellant's wife's evidence. The Judge noted at
    [22] of his decision that the wife's evidence supported the appellant's
    claim but Ms Patel argues that finding should have been made  prior  to
    the Judge rejecting the appellant's claim because in  setting  out  his
    decision in the manner he did the Judge  had  not  considered  all  the
    evidence in the round.

 9. Having considered the submissions made I rejected Ms Patel's  argument.
    I am satisfied the Judge was aware of the appellant's wife's  evidence.
    He says as much in [22] of his decision but more importantly he set out
    the claim from [18] of his decision and whilst  [18]  and  [19]  are  a
    consideration of the appellant's account it is also  an  assessment  of
    the wife's evidence as her account supported this aspect of his  claim.
    In [20] the Judge gave reasons for rejecting both the  appellant's  and
    his wife's evidence. The fact he considered the claim with reference to
    both the  appellant  and  his  wife's  account  undermines  Ms  Patel's
    submission that he considered  the  appeal  without  reference  to  the
    wife's account. Whilst he did not go through each and every part of the
    wife's claim he made significant findings in [20] and  these  fed  into
    his finding at [22].

10. The findings made by the Judge were open to him and he was not required
    to make findings on each point raised. The Judge rejected, to the lower
    standard of proof, the appellant's claim and that included the fact the
    wife supported his claim. It was a finding open to him.

    NOTICE OF DECISION

11. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a  point  of  law.   I  uphold  the  original
    decision.


Signed                              Date     02.10.2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee award was made as I have dismissed the appeal.


Signed                              Date     2.10.2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis

