
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10069/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Heard at Glasgow  Decision & Reasons Promulgated
On 9th May 2019   On 10th June 2019


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY JUDGE UPPER TRIBUNAL FARRELLY


                                   Between

                                   MR K N
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                          Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                 Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Ms McKeeve of McGlashan MacKay Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr A Govan, Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

   1. This is a resumed hearing from 8 February 2019 and should be read with
      the earlier error of law decision. On that occasion I found a material
      error of law in the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge AMS Green.
      The judge found the underlying claim not credible. That finding had
      not been challenged. The error found related to how the judge dealt
      with the practicalities of the appellant's return to Iraq.

   2. The appellant is from a fairly large village in the Sala Al Din
      Province of Iraq. This is a contested area as identified in AA (Iraq)
      v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2017] EWCA Civ 944. That
      decision found that any civilian returned to that Province faced a
      real risk of being subjected to indiscriminate violence amounting to
      serious harm within the scope of Article 15(c) of the Qualification
      Directive.

   3. The refusal letter is dated 18 August 2018.It suggested that country
      conditions have changed whereby it would be safe for him to return to
      his home area. An alternative would be for him to travel via Baghdad
      to the IKR and seek to establish himself there.

The Hearing

   4. I acknowledge the careful preparation made by both representatives in
      presenting this appeal. There was a bundle of 20 documents running to
      over 500 pages produced on behalf of the appellant in the First-tier
      Tribunal. I have also been provided with an index of key passages. I
      have also received a copy of the skeleton argument used. Mr Govan has
      provided me with a map illustrating disputed areas in Iraq as at
      September 2018.

   5. There was some misunderstanding following the error of law hearing as
      to where the appeal was to be heard. Apparently both representatives
      understood after the error of law hearing it would be returning to the
      First-tier Tribunal with a view to further factual findings being
      made. This related as to whether the appellant had any family members
      who can assist; particularly whether there was any evidence that his
      immediate family members had died whilst fleeing as he claimed.
      However, both representatives indicated they were prepared and ready
      to proceed. Ms McKeeve acknowledged that it would be difficult to
      obtain evidence, for instance, by way of death certificates, about the
      fate of his parents. The appellant was present and an interpreter had
      been arranged. In fact the appellant did not give further evidence and
      the appeal proceeded by way of submissions.

Consideration

   6. The appeal at this stage still gives rise to a number of issues. The
      1st issue is whether country conditions have so changed that I would
      be entitled to depart from the country guidance case in relation to
      the appellant's home area.

   7.  In the alternative, it has not been suggested that Baghdad would be a
      viable alternative for the appellant. Rather, the suggestion was he
      could travel from Baghdad to the peaceful Kurdish region. AAH (Iraqi
      Kurds - internal relocation) Iraq CG [2018] UKUT 00212 (IAC) set out
      that  possession of a valid CSID or Iraqi passport is necessary for
      travel from Baghdad to the IKR, and that a displaced person cannot
      work without a CSID.

   8. There is a need to enquire about a number of matters before it could
      be concluded that requiring the appellant to relocate to the IKR would
      not be unduly harsh. That enquiry begins with consideration of how
      likely it is that the appellant will be able to acquire a CSID.

   9. AA (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG [2015] UKUT 544 (IAC), as revised and
      replaced by the annex to the judgment of the Court of Appeal( reported
      as AA (Iraq) [2018] 1 WLR 1083) emphasised the importance of having or
      being able to obtain a Civil Status Identity Document ("CSID"),
      reasonably soon after arrival in Iraq. Paragraph 9 of the guidance
      states:

         9. ...A CSID is generally required in order for an Iraqi to access
         financial assistance from the authorities: employment; education;
         housing; and medical treatment. If P shows that there are no family
         or other members likely to be able to provide means of support, P
         is in general likely to face a real risk of destitution, amounting
         to serious harm, if, by the time any funds provided to P by the
         Secretary of State or her agents to assist P's return have been
         exhausted, it reasonably likely that P will still have no CSID.

  10. What is required to obtain a CSID is addressed at paragraphs 10 and 11
      of the guidance:

         10. Where return is feasible but P does not have a CSID, P should
         as a general matter be able to obtain one from the Civil Status
         Affairs Office for P's home Governorate, using an Iraqi passport
         (whether current or expired), if P has one. If P does not have such
         a passport, P's ability to obtain a CSID may depend on whether P
         knows the page and volume number of the book holding P's
         information (and that of P's family). P's ability to persuade the
         officials that P is the person named on the relevant page is likely
         to depend on whether P has family members or other individuals who
         are prepared to vouch for P.

         11. P's ability to obtain a CSID is likely to be severely hampered
         if P is unable to go to the Civil Status Affairs Office of P's
         Governorate because it is in an area where ["serious harm" as is
         defined in article 15 (c) of Council Directive 2004/83/EC (the
         Qualifications Directive)] is occurring. ...There is however a
         National Status Court in Baghdad, to which P could apply for formal
         recognition of identity. The precise operation of this court is,
         however, unclear.

  11. A significant difficulty in considering these issues is the
      establishing of the factual matrix. There is no documentary evidence.
      In the First-tier Tribunal the appellant was found to lack
      credibility. He was found to have told lies on a number of significant
      matters. For instance, he changed the timeline of events after his
      original account was undermined by the objective evidence. He failed
      to disclose he had claimed in Germany. When he arrived, he claimed to
      be a minor. Given that he has been untruthful in certain aspects which
      could be established then his evidence about matters which cannot be
      checked must be circumspect. However, it is an accepted principle that
      the fact someone has told lies about certain aspects of their claim
      does not mean that all their evidence must be untruthful.

The Facts

  12. I bear in mind that it is for the appellant to establish his claim.
      With this in mind I will attempt to set out findings on the factual
      background. There is no dispute that the appellant is an Iraqi
      national of Kurdish ethnicity. He was interviewed in Kurdish Sorani.
      Whilst expressing an interest in Christianity he was raised as a
      Muslim. He claims to be from a village in in the Sala Al Din Province.
      This is not been challenged.

  13. In an attempt to establish the basic facts return to what was said at
      his screening and substantive interview. He is a young man of 25. He
      states he only living working alongside his father is a farmer.at
      question 35 he said he was only educated to primary school level and
      said the family were not well off financially and so he had to assist
      his father on the farm. This could be correct. He has no medical
      conditions beyond an old injury to his right elbow.

  14. Some aspects of his claim are much more questionable. He claims that
      his family, consisting of his parents and sister, fled towards the
      start of 2016.He claimed the precipitating factor was the fear that
      Isis would attack and occupy their home area, they having attacked at
      the end of 2015. The country information indicates that his village
      was liberated from Isis the year before. As this is based upon country
      information reliance can be placed upon this. This calls into question
      whether his family would have departed. Against this there is a
      possibility that the region was experiencing ongoing difficulty and
      they decided to leave when they could. At 4.1 he referred to the town
      being destroyed.

  15. He then claims that they travelled to Turkey and then on to Greece by
      boat. However the boat capsized and he awoke in hospital. He claimed
      not to know what had happened to his family members but understood
      that his father drowned. He refers to ta refugee organisation in
      Greece assisting his onward passage. There is the possibility of
      supportive evidence by way of media coverage of this incident;
      information from the authorities and refugee organisation he referred
      to, in support of the claim. However, this was not been forthcoming. I
      acknowledge there is no requirement to provide corroborative evidence
      but the more supportive evidence available then the easier the fact
      finding. In his substantive interview at question 89 he indicated he
      was separated from his family during the journey. This is not pursued
      in questioning because he claimed to be upset talking about his
      family.

  16. I have considered the evidence recorded in the original hearing. There
      is reference to mentioning having a CSI D in cross-examination.
      However, he said this was in his home village. It was recorded he was
      not involved in obtaining it and had never used it. This reflects what
      he said at question 27 of his interview. The judge at paragraph 20
      acknowledged the importance of a CSI D. At paragraph 23 the judge,
      based upon his negative credibility finding elsewhere, did not accept
      the appellant would be unable to obtain a replacement. The judge
      referred to the country information suggesting he could return to his
      home area and that family members or friends could help him obtain a
      duplicate.

  17. At his screening at 1.8 he indicated he had a passport but it was in
      Iraq. At question 34 he retreated from this, saying he had no
      passport. At question 22 of his substantive interview he said he had
      no family in Iraq. He was asked about extended family and he said he
      had relatives but did not know if they were there are not. He referred
      to paternal uncles and an aunt who had been living in the same
      village. He claimed to have no other family elsewhere. I accept as
      credible that if his home area had been ravaged by Isis they may well
      also have moved. He claimed not to be in contact with anybody in Iraq.

  18. The appellant has been away from his home country now for over 3
      years. The country information indicates that Isis had occupied is
      area but had been subsequently repulsed. Given that his home is in a
      contested area and there was a documented background of occupation I
      would accept is likely that there was considerable ongoing disruption
      in the area. I find it credible that some locals may have been fearful
      of a return of Isis and some decided to leave when they could.

  19. As stated, he has not been found reliable in some respects but it does
      not follow none of his evidence can be accepted. Bearing in mind the
      low standard of proof applicable I would accept as possible that his
      family left with him and they subsequently became separated. His claim
      that he has had no contact with them subsequently or with other family
      members is based solely upon his evidence. It is possible his family
      came with him and they became separated. His family may have perished
      on route as has happened with other families. It is also possible with
      the general disruption that his remaining relatives have scattered and
      he cannot contact them. Again, this is largely dependent upon his say-
      so.

  20. I would accept he has limited education. There is nothing at screening
      interview which would suggest to the contrary. The same applies in
      respect of his claim not to have documentation.

   Return

  21. Against this background I turn to consider the possibility of return.
      As a generality at the present moment the evidence indicates Isis are
      still a serious source of threat but their operations have contracted
      in the face of combined military opposition. The respondent's Policy
      Note of November 2018 contains the map that Mr Govan provided, showing
      the gradation of risk areas.8.5.2 shows a decline in the number of
      security incidents in 2018. 8.6.1 is a graph showing civilians killed
      in the 6 worst affected Governorates between June 2014 and October
      2018.Para 8.1.1. states:

         The Congressional Research Service (CRS), in a paper dated 4
         October 2018, explained 'Iraq's government declared military
         victory against the Islamic State organization (IS, aka ISIS/ISIL)
         in December 2017, but insurgent attacks by remaining IS fighters
         threaten Iraqis as they shift their attention toward recovery and
         the country's political future. Security conditions have improved
         since the Islamic State's control of territory was disrupted, but
         IS fighters are active in some areas of the country and security
         conditions are fluid.


  22. The report also contains a resume in respect of the disputed areas. In
      September 2017, the Kurdistan Regional Government (KRG) held a
      referendum on the independence of the Kurdistan region and the areas
      disputed between the Kurdish authorities and the Iraqi government
      (GoI). In response to the referendum, the Iraqi government sent in
      troops to retake areas. The focus was upon the cities and oil centres.

  23.    Ms McKeeve has referred me to the United Nations report of 3 May
      2019. It refers to a background of continuing insecurity in parts of
      Iraq. There is mention of widespread destruction of homes and
      agricultural lands. It does confirm that there has been a steady
      decline in attacks over the course of 2018 and military operations
      against Isis have largely ended. However, the beginning of 2019 saw a
      renewed increase in Isis attacks. The view was that security gains
      were mixed with continued insecurity in former Isis held areas.

  24. There is reference now to forced returns to contested areas which has
      resulted in secondary displacement. Humanitarian needs remain high
      with an estimated 18% of the population requiring assistance (page
      20). The article goes into further detail of ongoing difficulties.

  25. The premise behind a country guidance case is to provide guidance to
      be followed about a country situation following detailed consideration
      of background material. Naturally, the situation in a country can
      change and the guidance can become outdated. I am advised that an
      updated country guidance is anticipated in the relatively near future.
      However, based upon the information presented I cannot confidently
      depart from the existing country guidance. The evidence does not
      demonstrate a sustained settlement. Consequently, I find the appellant
      cannot return to his home area because of the general risk for
      civilians there which meets the 15 C threshold.

  26. I then turned to consider the possibility of relocation with a view to
      settlement in the IKR. This in turn requires consideration of
      documentation. I have been referred to the respondent's Operational
      Guidance of February 2019, version 9. The issues in relation to
      documentation are twofold. There is the basic travel documentation
      which enables the person to get into Iraq. In itself this is not the
      end of the matter. The case law illustrates the need to have a CSI D
      in order for a person to establish themselves.

  27. If the appellant's family have fled, as he claims, then given the
      conflict which occurred in his home area there would be difficulties
      in obtaining the original documentation. He claims not to know the
      whereabouts of his extended family in the area. As stated they may
      well have dispersed given the conflict. If he had a means of
      contacting them or friends they may well not wish to travel into an
      unsettled area in the hope of finding his papers. This then leads on
      to the question of redocumentation.

  28. 2.16 of the Guidance refers to AA which recorded that offices for
      Salahuddin have been established in Baghdad. The evidence does not
      demonstrate that the "Central Archive", which exists in Baghdad, is in
      practice able to provide CSIDs to those in need of them. There is,
      however, a National Status Court in Baghdad, to which the person could
      apply for formal recognition of identity. The precise operation of
      this court is, however, unclear. Clearly this suggests it is not a
      straightforward process. There are also other practical difficulties
      given the appellant's background for him spending time in Baghdad.

  29. The guidance covers entry requirements to the Kurdistan Region of
      Iraq. Those arriving by air must report to the nearest Asayish office
      to regularise their stay. Admission is at the discretion of Kurdish
      immigration and border officials. A variety of documents needed. The
      IDP must find a place to live and get a support letter from the local
      mukhtar.

  30. Whilst the appellant is Kurdish there is no evidence to suggest he has
      any connections with the IKR. He may be viewed with suspicion given
      the area he originates from. There is no evidence he has any
      particular skills. On his account his education has been limited.
      Given the large displacements of people that has taken place it is
      likely that those without particular skills or family support would be
      at risk of ending up in an IDP camp and the conditions are recorded as
      extremely difficult. The background material refers to the high number
      of displaced people in the IKR and the strains placed upon the
      infrastructure and the competition to establish a livelihood. Details
      are set out at page 551 of the United Nations report of 3 May 2019
      onwards. There is reference to the Kurdish region boasting around 30%
      of all IDP's as well as refugees from Syria. Obviously this will place
      considerable strain upon the region's resources. There is also
      information that faced with this the IKR authorities have sought to
      promote returns.

Conclusions.

  31. The appellant has been found to lack credibility in respect of a
      number of significant aspects of his claim. I would be prepared to
      accept, bearing in mind the low standard of proof applicable, his
      assertions about certain facts relevant to the issues now arising.
      Principally, I accept his claim that his family were displaced and are
      either dead or missing. I also accept his claim that there is no
      individual in Iraq a position to assist him. I also accept his claim
      that he does not have access to his documentation and does not have
      anyone to assist him obtaining a replacement. Although he is Kurdish I
      accept his claim that he has no support in the IKR.

  32. I am not prepared to depart from the country guidance and following
      this a 15 C risk exists in the appellant's home area. It has not been
      suggested he could relocate to Baghdad his background. It is my
      conclusion that it would be unreasonable and unduly harsh to expect
      him to relocate in the IKR. As stated he has no connections there. He
      has no particular skills. The area is under strain with the influx of
      people.

  33. The appellant does not have the necessary documentation, viz, a CSID
      to settle in the IKR. The evidence does not indicate that it would be
      reasonably practicable for him to obtain replacements in any sort of
      timely fashion.

  34. Following from these conclusions I find the appellant is entitled to
      humanitarian protection. This is because of the 15 C risk in his home
      area and the fact he cannot relocate elsewhere.

Decision

The appeal is allowed.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Farrelly.

Dated: 6th June 2019


