
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10540/2017




                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 10 April 2019                            |On 11 April 2019              |

                                   Before
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FINCH

                                   Between
                                 YASSER [A]

                                                               Appellant
                                     and
                  THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                     Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:              Mr. J. Howard, a solicitor from Fountains
Solicitors
For the Respondent:                  Mr. N. Bramble, Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS






BACKGROUND TO THE APPEAL

1.   The Appellant is a national of Sudan. He left there  in  2014  but  did
    not arrive in the United Kingdom until 8 May 2017.  He  claimed  asylum
    when he arrived here. It is his  case  that  the  Sudanese  authorities
    wanted him to provide information about those living in Darfur and that
    he was detained and tortured by the authorities.  His  application  was
    refused on 4 October 2017. The Respondent also found that  his  removal
    would not amount to a breach of his private or family life rights.

2.   The Appellant appealed against this decision on  18  October  2017  and
    explicitly stated that articles 2, 3 and 8 of the  European  Convention
    on Human Rights would be breached if he were to  be  removed  from  the
    United Kingdom.

3.   His  appeal  came  before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Grimmett  on  6
    September 2018 and she dismissed his appeal in a  decision  promulgated
    on 17 September 2018.  The Appellant was granted permission  to  appeal
    against this decision by First-tier Tribunal Judge O'Keefe on 8 October
    2018.





ERROR OF LAW HEARING

4.   The solicitor for the Appellant noted that the Rule 24 response  stated
    that the Respondent did not  oppose  the  Appellant's  application  for
    permission to appeal in respect of the human rights issues and the Home
    Office Presenting Officer confirmed that this was  the  case.  He  also
    accepted that First-tier Tribunal Judge Grimmett failed to address  the
    question of whether the Appellant would be at risk of persecution as  a
    failed asylum seeker if removed to Sudan.

ERROR OF LAW DECISION
THE HUMAN RIGHTS APPEAL

5.   The Appellant's grounds of appeal identify  that  he  had  appealed  on
    both asylum and human rights grounds. Paragraphs 20 -25 of the skeleton
    argument submitted on  his  behalf  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  also
    addressed his rights under Article 8 of the ECHR.

6.   In addition, the record of proceedings confirmed that the  Home  Office
    Presenting Officer had made  brief  oral  submissions  in  relation  to
    whether the Appellant was entitled to leave to remain  under  paragraph
    276ADE of the Immigration Rules.

7.   As a consequence, the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  had  failed  to  take
    into account part of the Appellant's  case  or  reach  any  reason  for
    dismissing this part of his appeal. This was clearly an error  of  law.



THE ASYLUM APPEAL

8.   The Appellant's second ground of appeal was  that  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Grimmett had failed to give any weight to  the  letter,  dated  8
    November 2017, from the  Chairman  of  Darfur  Fur  Community  UK  &  N
    Ireland.

9.   This was also an arguable error of law as she gave great weight to  the
    fact that the Appellant could not speak the  Fur  language.  Therefore,
    she should have considered all of the evidence which went towards  this
    issue, which included this letter, as it stated that he was a member of
    the Fur community and that his family originated in Zalengei.  She also
    failed  to  take  into  account  the  fact  that  the   Appellant   had
    consistently asked for a Fur (Sudanese) interpreter or that his  appeal
    had been adjourned on three occasions as no such interpreter  had  been
    provided.

10.  First-tier Tribunal Judge Grimmett also failed  to  take  into  account
    any of the objective evidence relating to Darfur  or  consider  whether
    the inconsistencies noted by the Respondent in his decision letter were
    accurate.

11.  In addition, the Judge failed to assess whether the Appellant would  be
    at risk of persecution in Sudan as a failed  asylum  seeker.  She  also
    failed to take into account the  guidance  provided  in  AA  (Non  Arab
    Darfurians - relocation) Sudan CG [2009] UKAIT 00056 and MM  (Darfuris)
    Sudan CG [2015] UKUT 00010 (IAC).

12.  For these reasons the manner in which  the  Appellant's  asylum  appeal
    was heard contained errors of law.

DECISION

(1)  The Appellant's appeal is allowed.

(2)  The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard  de  novo
    before a First-tier Tribunal Judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Grimmett or Boylan-Kemp or O'Keefe.


Nadine Finch

Signed                                  Date 10 April 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Finch


