
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
PA/10284/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 2nd June 2017                          |On 15th June 2017                 |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                                     GM
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Ahmed of Fountain Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant appeals against the decision of Judge J Robertson of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (the FtT) promulgated on 21st December 2016.

 2. The Appellant claims to be a male citizen of Eritrea born  1st  January
    1991.  He entered the United Kingdom illegally on 27th  June  2013  and
    subsequently claimed asylum.

 3. On 12th September 2016 the Respondent refused  the  Appellant's  asylum
    and human rights claim.  The Appellant appealed to the FtT.  The appeal
    was heard on 25th November 2016 and dismissed on all grounds.

 4. The Appellant applied for permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal.
    Permission to appeal was granted by Judge E S Martins of the FtT and  I
    set out below in part the grant  of  permission  which  summarises  the
    grounds upon which permission was sought;

         2.   The grounds assert that the  judge  erred  materially  in  his
             approach  to  credibility  and  to  risk  on  return.   It  is
             submitted that the judge  overlooked  the  Country  of  Origin
             Information Report regarding the language of the Appellant and
             failed to take into account that  he  attended  the  Ethiopian
             Embassy in  London  and  tried  all  means  to  ascertain  his
             nationality.   It  is  further  submitted  that  there  is  no
             analysis of the objective evidence, or  of  the  Appellant  or
             that of a witness, who has been found credible by the SSHD.

         3.   In respect of risk on return the  Appellant  argues  that  the
             judge failed to conclude on the matter that the Appellant left
             Eritrea illegally and would therefore face persecution at  the
             hands of the Eritrean authorities for having left the  country
             illegally.

         4.   The assertions made in the grounds are evident on the face  of
             the decision and disclose an arguable error of law.

         5.   An arguable error of law is shown.

 5. Following the grant of permission  the  Respondent  lodged  a  response
    pursuant to rule 24 of The Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 contending that the FtT directed  itself  appropriately.   It  was
    however conceded by the author  of  the  rule  24  response,  that  the
    Respondent had not seen the FtT decision, as it was not attached to the
    grant of permission.

 6. Directions were issued making provision  for  there  to  be  a  hearing
    before the  Upper  Tribunal  to  ascertain  whether  the  FtT  decision
    contained an error of law such that it should be set aside.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

 7. Mr Bates conceded that the FtT had materially erred in law as  set  out
    in the grounds, and the grant of permission.  Mr  Bates  accepted  that
    the FtT decision was not adequately reasoned.  It was not clear whether
    the FtT accepted the Appellant's claimed nationality, as  paragraph  22
    was unclear.  It was accepted that the FtT had not  made  any  findings
    upon the evidence of the Appellant's witness.

 8. Both representatives suggested that the appropriate course was  to  set
    aside the FtT decision with no findings preserved, and remit the appeal
    back to the FtT to be heard afresh.



My Conclusions and Reasons

 9. As announced at the hearing, I conclude that the FtT  materially  erred
    in law.  This has been conceded by the Respondent.  I find the error to
    be material.

10. Evidence was given to the FtT by a witness.  The evidence is summarised
    at paragraph 10, but there is no analysis  of  that  evidence,  and  no
    findings are made upon the evidence.  The witness was an  Eritrean  who
    had been granted refugee status by the Respondent.  The failure to make
    findings upon material evidence is an error of law.

11. It is not entirely clear whether the FtT  found  the  Appellant  to  be
    Eritrean.  At paragraph 22 the FtT concludes;

         "I find that the Appellant has not discharged the burden  of  proof
         and he has failed to satisfy me, even  to  the  lower  standard  of
         proof, that he is an Eritrean national with a well-founded fear  of
         persecution".

12.  It is clear from the above that the  FtT  does  not  accept  that  the
    Appellant has a  well-founded  fear  of  persecution,  but  it  is  not
    absolutely clear whether there is a finding  that  he  is  an  Eritrean
    national even though there is no well-founded fear of persecution.

13. The FtT at paragraph 16 did not accept  that  the  Appellant's  use  of
    Amharic at his  interview  to  be  conclusive  of  nationality  and  at
    paragraph 17 noted that the Appellant  answered  many  questions  about
    Assab without difficulty, and found that general knowledge alone  could
    not determine nationality.

14. This was an appeal involving disputed nationality.  There needed to  be
    a clear finding on nationality with adequate  and  sustainable  reasons
    given for that finding, and in my view that is lacking in this case.

15. Only after a finding on nationality has been  made,  can  there  be  an
    adequate assessment as to risk on return.

16. For the above reasons, the FtT materially erred in law and the decision
    is set aside with no findings preserved.

17. Having considered  paragraph  7  of  the  Senior  President's  Practice
    Statements, I find it appropriate to remit this appeal to the FtT to be
    heard afresh.  This is because the nature and extent of judicial  fact-
    finding which is necessary, means that it is more appropriate for  this
    to be carried out by the FtT rather than the Upper Tribunal.

18. The appeal will be heard by the FtT at the  Birmingham  Hearing  Centre
    and the parties will be advised of the time and  date  in  due  course.
    The appeal is to be heard by an FtT Judge other than Judge J Robertson.





Notice of Decision

The decision of the FtT involved the making of an error of law such that  it
is set aside.  The appeal is allowed to the extent that it  is  remitted  to
the FtT with no findings of fact preserved.



Anonymity

I make an anonymity order pursuant to rule  14  of  The  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 as this appeal involves considering a claim  for
international protection.  Unless and until  a  Tribunal  or  court  directs
otherwise,  the  Appellant  is  granted  anonymity.   No  report  of   these
proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify him or any member  of  his
family.   This  direction  applies  both  to  the  Appellant  and   to   the
Respondent.  Failure to comply with this direction could  lead  to  contempt
of court proceedings.

Signed                              Date         6th June 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee award is made by the Upper Tribunal.  The  issue  of  any  fee  award
will need to be considered by the FtT.

Signed                              Date         6th June 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall




