
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: PA/10544/2018
                                                               PA/10547/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham CJC              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 2 May 2019                        |On 10 May 2019                       |
|                                            |                             |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN


                                   Between

                                     ZM
                                     ZM
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Ms. E. Griffiths, Counsel instructed by Paragon Law
For the Respondent:    Ms. H. Aboni, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellants against a  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge M. Robertson, promulgated on 1 February 2019,  in  which
    she dismissed the Appellants' appeals against the Respondent's decision
    to refuse to grant asylum.


 2. I make an anonymity direction, continuing that made in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

 3. Permission to appeal was granted as follows:-

         "It  is  arguable  whilst  accepting  that  the   appellants   were
         identified as vulnerable witnesses (paragraph  20)  the  judge  has
         gone on to consider whether the medical  assessment  which  led  to
         this identification was reliable -  see  paragraphs  28  -33.   Her
         assessment of the appellants' written evidence is  then  formulated
         on discrepancy in  the  accounts  given  -  paragraph  35.   It  is
         arguable that whilst finding that the appellants were to be treated
         as vulnerable, on the basis of the medical evidence, the judge  has
         gone on to find the latter unreliable  -  see  paragraph  36.   The
         judge's findings have led to a procedural irregularity which is  an
         arguable error of law."

 4. The Appellants attended the hearing.

 5. At the outset of the hearing  Ms.  Aboni  accepted  that  the  decision
    involved the making of material  errors  of  law  in  relation  to  the
    Judge's treatment of the Appellants as vulnerable  witnesses,  and  the
    treatment of the medical evidence.

 6. Given the acceptance by the Respondent that there were material  errors
    of law in the decision, I set the  decision  aside,  and  remitted  the
    appeal to the First-tier Tribunal to be reheard.

Error of Law

 7. As stated at the hearing, given the acceptance by Ms.  Aboni  that  the
    Judge had made material errors of law, I do not intend  to  go  through
    all of the grounds of appeal.  I will address grounds 1 and 2.


 8. I find that the Judge  materially  erred  in  her  application  of  the
    Presidential Guidance Note No 2 of 2010: Child,  vulnerable  adult  and
    sensitive appellant guidance (the "Presidential  Guidance").   At  [20]
    the Judge states that the Appellants  "were  identified  as  vulnerable
    witnesses".  She identified them as such prior to the  commencement  of
    the hearing.  She later states in [20], following discussion  with  the
    representatives, that "the guidelines applied  to  questioning  of  the
    witnesses."  I find that the Presidential Guidance is not  so  limited.
    It applies to the entirety of the proceedings, including  consideration
    of the evidence.  I find that the Judge at the outset has  adopted  too
    narrow an interpretation of the Presidential Guidance.

 9. The Judge considers the medical evidence at [30],  having  set  out  at
    [29] the case of HE (DRC - credibility and psychiatric reports)  [2004]
    UKIAT 00321.  She states at [30] that she is unable to give the medical
    report significant weight and sets out seven reasons for this.  At [36]
    the Judge states:

         "I find that A1's account is vague and lacking credibility, and  it
         is difficult to say that it is vague because of his  mental  health
         condition.   The  medical  report  is   sufficiently   lacking   in
         transparency to undermine the  reliability  of  the  diagnosis.   I
         find, to the lower standard of proof, that A1's  account  is  vague
         because it did not take place."

10. The Judge stated at [20] that the  first  Appellant  was  a  vulnerable
    witness.  However it appears from her statement at [36]  that  she  has
    not treated him as vulnerable.  I find that her findings as to  whether
    or not the first Appellant was a vulnerable witness  are  inconsistent.
    I find that this is a material error of law.



11. I further find that she has erred  at  [30]  in  her  analysis  of  the
    medical evidence.  She has stated that the qualifications of the expert
    are not in doubt [30].  At [30(I)] she states that there was little  in
    the report to establish what was observed by the expert from which  her
    conclusions were drawn.  However as set out at 7(a) of the  grounds  of
    appeal, the expert had set out in her report how  the  first  Appellant
    had presented, indicating that her findings were based also on what she
    observed.


12. At 30(II) the Judge sets out how  the  expert  considered  whether  the
    first Appellant could have been feigning  his  psychological  symptoms.
    She then states "it is not clear how it is possible to  assess  whether
    someone is feigning symptoms from body language and presentation".  The
    expert is qualified to assess this, not the Judge.  It was not open  to
    the Judge to reject the  findings  of  the  expert  based  on  her  own
    understanding of how such as finding could or could not be arrived  at.
    That is a matter within the expert's knowledge.


13. At [43] the Judge states:


    "There is nothing to suggest that with the assistance of his family  he
    would not be able to manage life in Afghanistan,  particularly  because
    on the facts as found, any difficulties with mental health  are  likely
    to be caused by separation from his family,  rather  than  the  account
    given to Dr L on which the diagnosis of PTSD was made, and he  will  be
    returning to his family".




14. The Judge has made a finding that "any"  difficulties  that  the  first
    Appellant has with mental health are likely to be caused by  separation
    from his family.  This finding was not open to the Judge.  She  has  no
    medical expertise to attribute the first Appellant's mental  health  to
    any particular cause.  I find that the Judge has given less  weight  to
    the medical evidence for reasons which were not open to  her.   I  find
    that this is a material error of law.




15. I find that the decision involves the making of material errors of  law
    in relation to the application of the Presidential  Guidance,  and  the
    treatment of the  medical  evidence.   I  have  taken  account  of  the
    Practice  Statement  dated  10  February  2010,  paragraph  7.2.   This
    contemplates that an appeal may be remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal
    where the effect of the error has been to deprive a  party  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing  or  other  opportunity  for  the
    party's case to be put to and considered by  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    The Appellants have not had a fair hearing given  the  Judge's  failure
    properly to apply the Presidential Guidance, and her errors affect  the
    credibility findings. Given  this,  having  regard  to  the  overriding
    objective, I find that it is appropriate to  remit  this  case  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal.



Notice of Decision


16. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involves the making of material
    errors of law and I set the decision aside.


17. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be reheard.

18. The appeal is not to be listed before Judge Robertson.

Directions

      1. Given the submissions made by Ms. Griffiths relating to the case of
         AS (Afghanistan), currently in the Court of Appeal, the case is  to
         be listed for an oral CMR not before 1 July 2019.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008


Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  Appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellants and to the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date 8 May 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain
