
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10642/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 8th March 2019                             |On 29th March 2019            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PEART


                                   Between

                                 Jubair [A]
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Khan of Universal Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Lindsay, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh.  He was born on 10 June 1973.
     He appealed against the respondent's decision dated 17 August 2018  to
    refuse to grant him asylum, humanitarian protection and on human rights
    grounds.

 2.  Judge  Abebrese  (the  judge)  dismissed  the  appeal  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 31 December 2018.  He said that he was  only  concerned
    with human rights, the asylum claim no longer being pursued.  The judge
    found the respondent's decision to be proportionate.

 3.  The  grounds  claim  the  judge  made  material  errors  of  law.   In
    particular:

      a) Failure to have regard to material evidence.  See the  decision  at
         [21].  The judge made  incorrect  findings  on  matters  that  were
         material to the outcome.  In particular with regard to the  medical
         evidence.  The evidence from Burnham Health Centre (see  P11-14  of
         the appellant's bundle) confirmed the appellant registered  with  a
         medical practitioner on 14 August 2000.  The Burnham Health  Centre
         report at P11 confirmed the health status of the  appellant  on  14
         August 2000 and that he was seen by the GP on 17 August  2000  when
         he was diagnosed with back pain.  The registration form (P12 of the
         appellant's bundle) confirmed the  appellant  registered  with  the
         Burnham Health Centre on 14 August 2000 and that  is  confirmed  at
         P13 of the appellant's bundle by  Burnham  Health  Centre's  status
         history "notice  of  registration"  received  on  14  August  2000.
         Milcroft Medical Centre medical records (P19-24 of the  appellant's
         bundle) showed the appellant visited the GP  on  various  occasions
         from 25 September 2001 to  31  May  2005.   Diabetics'  appointment
         letters dated 16 January 2003, 21 August 2003, 25 May 2004 and  25
         April  2005  (P25-28  of  the  appellant's  bundle)  confirmed  the
         appellant was truthful in his claim that he was registered with the
         medical practitioner on 14 August 2000;

      b) The medical evidence set out in ground (a) above, established  that
         the appellant and his witness  were  reliable  and  credible.   The
         appellant's first formal record of presence in the  UK  was  on  14
         August 2000 such that the judge made a material error by concluding
         the appellant could not establish his presence here prior to  2005.
         The judge at [22] erred by making perverse or  irrational  findings
         which were material to the outcome  of  the  appeal.   The  grounds
         claimed that being absent for almost 30 years from the  appellant's
         country was significant.  He spent his formative years in Qatar and
         in the UK.  He would have significant obstacles in starting  a  new
         life in Bangladesh at the age of 46.  The  judge's  view  that  the
         appellant was not credible in his claim of failing to keep  contact
         with his siblings in Bangladesh was  mere  assumption  without  any
         adequate evidence;

      c) The judge failed to give  any  adequate  reasons  for  findings  on
         material matters.   In  particular  at  [24]  in  failing  to  give
         adequate reasons for his conclusions.  The appellant was 16 when he
         arrived in Qatar and 26 when he arrived in the UK.  It was easy  to
         adapt to a new environment in his youth.  The appellant would  have
         significant obstacles adapting to another environment at the age of
         46;

      d) The judge failed to consider the strong feature of the  appellant's
         private life claim as per Rhuppiah [2018] UKSC 58:

             "49. ... the provisions of Section 117B  cannot  put  decision
                  makers  in  a  straightjacket  which  constrains  them  to
                  determine claims under Article 8 inconsistently  with  the
                  Article itself.   Inbuilt  into  the  concept  of  'little
                  weight' itself is a small degree of flexibility; but it is
                  in  particular  Section  117A(2)(a)  which  provides   the
                  limited degree of flexibility recognised to  be  necessary
                  in para 36 above.  Although this  court  today  defines  a
                  precarious immigration status for the purpose  of  Section
                  117B(5) with a width from which most applicants  who  rely
                  on their private life under Article 8 will  be  unable  to
                  escape,  Section  117A(2)(a)  necessarily  enables   their
                  applications occasionally to succeed.  It is impossible to
                  improve on how, in inevitably general terms, Sales  LJ  in
                  his judgment described the effect of Section 117A(2)(a) as
                  follows:

                  53.  Although a court or Tribunal should  have  regard  to
                      the consideration that little weight should be  given
                      to  private  life  established  in  [the   specified]
                      circumstances, it is possible without violence to the
                      language  to  say  that  such  generalised  normative
                      guidance may be overridden in an exceptional case  by
                      particularly strong features of the private  life  in
                      question ...".

 4. Judge O'Keeffe granted permission on 28 January 2019.  She  said  inter
    alia as follows:

         "1.  ... the grounds of appeal assert that the judge failed to have
             regard to  material  evidence,  made  perverse  or  irrational
             findings, failed to give adequate reasons and failed  to  give
             effect to a binding decision.

         2.   The judge refers to the medical evidence and  states  that  it
             shows the appellant was registered with a medical practitioner
             in 2005 and  not  before.   The  appellant's  bundle  contains
             evidence to show that the appellant registered with  a  GP  in
             2000 and made visits to the GP  thereafter.   It  is  arguable
             therefore  that  the  judge  has  made   an   error   in   the
             consideration of the evidence before  the  Tribunal  which  is
             material to the proportionality assessment under Article 8.

         3.   The grounds disclose an arguable material  error  of  law  and
             permission to appeal is granted on all grounds."

 5. There was no Rule 24 response.

Submissions on Error of Law

 6. Mr Khan relied  upon  the  grounds.   He  submitted  that  the  judge's
    starting point was that the appellant was not telling the  truth.   See
    [21] of the decision.  Further, as regards [23] the judge was incorrect
    in what he said.   There  was  cogent  evidence  from  the  appellant's
    medical records that he was here in August 2000.

 7. Mr Khan submitted that the judge's incorrect findings contaminated  his
    decision on proportionality because he thought the appellant  had  been
    here much less  than  was  the  case.   Those  incorrect  findings  had
    hindered the judge's view on the appellant's credibility.

 8. Mr Lindsay accepted that the judge had erred but that  such  error  was
    not material.  The case had been put forward  on  the  basis  that  the
    extra time the appellant had spent here in some way assisted him.   The
    contrary was in fact the case.  If the appellant had  been  here  since
    2000 illegally, it strengthened,  rather  than  diminished  the  public
    interest in his removal.  He had received extensive healthcare  without
    making any contributions.  If the judge had  not  erred,  his  decision
    would arguably have been the same.

Conclusion on Error of Law

 9. The judge erred because the appellant did provide evidence to show that
    he had been here since 1999, not 2005 which is what the judge  thought.



10. The appellant did not pursue his asylum claim. The  only  issue  before
    the judge was with regard to human rights which he considered at  [21]-
    [30].  There  was  no  issue  that  the  appellant  did  not  meet  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules. Whether based upon arriving  and
    staying  here  unlawfully  from  either  1999/2000  or  2005  made   no
    difference to the judge's analysis which he comprehensively carried out
    at [22]-[29]. The judge acknowledged that the appellant had  been  here
    unlawfully for a long time. In fact, the appellant had been here for  5
    years longer than the judge thought but I do not  accept  that  if  the
    judge had not erred, that his decision would have been  any  different.
    The appellant failed to satisfy paragraph 276ADE(1)(iii) as of the date
    of his application because he had not lived here for at least 20 years;
    the judge's error was irrelevant in that analysis and Mr Khan  did  not
    suggest otherwise.

11. The judge took into account the appellant's medical conditions. He took
    into account he had received treatment here for various conditions  and
    was not entitled to such treatment.  He  took  into  account  that  the
    appellant had worked here unlawfully and made no contributions.

12. The judge also considered the appellant's claimed family life here, his
    resilience and his family in Bangladesh. He  correctly  considered  the
    appellant's circumstances in terms of s.117B.

13. The judge was entitled to reach the conclusion  that  the  respondent's
    decision was proportionate.

Decision

14. The judge erred but not materially.  His decision shall stand.

Anonymity direction not made.


Signed                              Date 27 March 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Peart

