

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                               Appeal
Number PA/10153/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at Field House
       Decision and Reasons Promulgated
On 3rd December 2018
     On 07th January 2019


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PARKES

                                   Between

                                     M H
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:       Mr A Gilbert (Counsel, instructed by Duncan Lewis
& Co, Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett (Home Office Presenting Officer)

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. The Appellant's asylum appeal and a human rights claim based on his
   relationship with his son were dismissed for the reasons given in the
   decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Loughridge promulgated on the 2nd
   of October 2018. The Appellant sought permission to appeal in grounds of
   the 11th of October 2018. Permission was granted on the basis that it was
   arguable that the Appellant's deafness and difficulty in understanding
   the interpreter may have made a material difference to the outcome.

2. The grounds can be summarised. In essence they rely on the Appellant's
   deafness with hearing aids in both ears and issues that the Appellant
   maintained arose with the interpreter at the hearing and before. It is
   also asserted that Somalia is not safe for the Appellant and that the
   Appellant has a son in the UK although he is separated from his son's
   mother.

3. Before the hearing I established that the proceedings in Newport had not
   been recorded. The Judge's Record of Proceedings did not indicate that
   there had been any issue with the interpreter and it appears that if
   there had been an issue it had not been brought to the Judge's attention.
   The submissions at the Upper Tribunal hearing are set out in the Record
   of Proceedings and referred to where relevant below.

4. The issue with regard to the Appellant's deafness is not as significant
   as might be thought from the grounds. The Judge's findings are set out at
   paragraphs 33 to 47 of the decision. In paragraph 34 the Judge accepted
   the Appellant's case that his father and brothers had been killed and in
   the following paragraphs, giving reasons, accepted the Appellant's
   account that he is from the Ashraf clan. The Appellant's case included
   that he has a brother and a sister in Mogadishu which was relevant to the
   Judge's assessment of the danger that the Appellant would face in
   Somalia. From paragraph 38 onwards the Judge fully assessed the
   circumstances in Somalia, supporting evidence and relevant case law.

5. Given that the Appellant's evidence had been accepted and that there had
   been no adverse findings against him the Appellant's concerns about any
   difficulties he may have had with communication are not borne out. The
   Appellant could not have had more positive or beneficial findings on the
   main point of his asylum claim and in the circumstances if there had been
   a difficulty in communication it cannot have been material as no better
   findings of the basic facts could have been made.

6. On the basis of the facts that the Judge accepted and following his
   analysis of the circumstances that the Appellant would face in Mogadishu
   the Judge was entitled to find that the Appellant would not be in need of
   international protection on the basis of the current situation. The
   grounds disagree with the findings but do not disclose any error in the
   approach taken or the findings made. On the principal grounds relating to
   the assessment of the Appellant's claim and international protection
   there is no error.

7. The subsidiary ground is that the Appellant's son is a British citizen
   who lives with his mother in the UK and that the Judge erred in finding
   that the Appellant's removal would be a proportionate response under
   article 8. This aspect of the decision was dealt with briefly in the
   decision at paragraphs 48 and 49.

8. There is now more guidance in this area from the recent decision of KO
   (Nigeria) [2018] UKSC 53. From paragraph 19 of the judgment of Lord
   Carnwarth it is clear that decisions are to be made in the real world and
   circumstances that exist rather than hypothetically. From paragraph 44 it
   is clear that it can be reasonable to expect a British citizen child to
   leave the UK but that is a separate and different consideration from
   whether a child would be required to leave the UK.

9. Albeit the decision is brief it is consistent with the approach that
   follows from KO and the circumstances of this appeal. The Appellant's son
   will remain living with his mother in the UK and he will not be required
   to leave the UK consequent on the Appellant's removal. Independent of the
   position of his son the Appellant would have no other basis on which to
   remain in the UK. There does not appear to have been any evidence beyond
   the usual assumptions of what would be in a child's best interests to
   show that the Appellant's son had any particular needs or requirements
   that would have demanded that the Appellant be permitted to remain.

10. Under Appendix V of the Immigration Rules the Appellant can apply to
   visit the UK for the purpose of visiting family. The prospects of success
   of such an application would not be a matter for the Judge to consider
   but the fact that that is an option that is open to the Appellant would
   be a relevant factor. In the circumstances the Judge was entitled to find
   that the circumstances did not show that the best interests of the
   Appellant's child outweighed the public interest in the enforcement of
   immigration control. In the absence of a need for the Appellant to
   receive international protection the fact that he has a parental
   relationship with a child does not by itself lead to position whereby the
   Appellant has to be allowed to stay. Evidence is required to show that
   the best interests of his son are such that the public interest is
   outweighed and in this case that evidence was not provided.

CONCLUSIONS

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside the decision.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of the
Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.

I continue that order (pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008.)

Fee Award

In dismissing this appeal I make no fee award.

Signed: [pic]

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal (IAC)

Dated: 17th December 2018






















