
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: PA/10649/2016
     PA/10653/2016
     PA/10654/2016
     PA/10655/2016
                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 15 May 2017                        |On 24 May 2017                        |
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM

                                   Between

                                     AF
                                     MR
                                     IF
                                     EF
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Ms M Gherman, Counsel, instructed by Nag Law
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The Appellants are citizens of Sri Lanka.  AF was born on [ ] 1978  and
    his wife, MR, on [ ] 1983.  Their children, IF and EF, was born on [  ]
    2008 and [ ] 2014 respectively.   The  Appellants  claimed  asylum  and
    their applications were refused on 21 September  2016.   They  made  an
    application to appeal against that  decision  and  their  appeals  were
    dismissed by Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Housego,  following  a
    hearing at Hatton Cross on 8 November 2016,  in  a  decision  that  was
    promulgated on 12 December 2016. Permission was granted by Judge of the
    First-tier Tribunal Baker on 21 March 2017.

2.   The adult Appellants gave evidence at the hearing before Judge  Housego
    and AF's evidence in a nutshell was that prior to coming to the  UK  he
    lived in Negombo with his mother, his wife and their eldest  child.  He
    and his friend TG on 30 April 2010 travelled to a church  which  was  a
    place of pilgrimage in a place called Chettikulum, Mannar, four  and  a
    half hours drive away.

3.   They travelled  on  the  Appellant's  motorcycle.   About  a  kilometre
    beyond the checkpoint at Chettikulum they were approached  by  a  white
    van which caused them to lose balance on the motorcycle.  Three  people
    got out wearing camouflage trousers and T-shirts carrying rifles. There
    was a fourth person armed with a pistol.  The Appellant was  kicked  in
    the groin and hit with the butt of a  rifle.   The  men  took  TG  away
    leaving the Appellant on the ground.  The  Appellant  was  taken  to  a
    hospital in Vavuniya where he was shown the badly beaten  body  of  TG,
    which had been found at the bottom of an abandoned well.

4.   The judge found that TG and the Appellant knew one another and that  TG
    was killed, but he did not find the rest of the Appellant's account  to
    be credible.  He noted gaps in  the  evidence  including  the  lack  of
    medical evidence observing that the Appellant had  been  treated  in  a
    private hospital after  the  incident  and  that  he  could  have  been
    obtained by his mother, who still lives in Sri Lanka.

5.   The Appellant's evidence was that he had reported the incident  to  the
    Human Rights Commission on 31 May  2010.  His  evidence  was  that  his
    complaint  was  passed  from  them   to   the   Lessons   Learned   and
    Reconciliation Commission (LLRC), and that he  had  received  a  letter
    from them which he produced.  His evidence was that he  had  telephoned
    the LLRC and was told that if they came across anything they would  let
    him know; however, their normal period of investigation was 2002-2009.

6.   The judge considered the lack of evidence from the LLRC in  respect  of
    the claim and that the evidence was historic was damaging to the claim.
     The judge went on to make findings in respect  of  inconsistencies  in
    the account given by the AF and MR and considered the delay  in  making
    an application for asylum damaging to the Appellants' credibility.  The
    judge attached weight to the fact that that AF was able  to  leave  Sri
    Lanka using his own passport without difficulty and  that  on  his  own
    evidence he was untroubled from September 2010 to March  2011  and  had
    obtained an exit visa.

7.   The grounds of appeal before me consist of five separate  grounds,  and
    for the purposes of this decision I will  focus  on  ground  3.  It  is
    argued that there was a failure  by  the  judge  to  consider  relevant
    evidence and make clear findings of fact, and reference is made to AF's
    evidence contained in an affidavit (page 13 of the Appellants'  bundle)
    which was put before the LLRC. This was sworn before a Justice  of  the
    Peace.  This document was sworn on 28 May 2010. It contains an  account
    of what happened to him and TG, which is, broadly speaking, on the face
    of it capable of supporting his evidence that he gave before the First-
    tier Tribunal.  It is asserted in the grounds that the  judge  did  not
    take into consideration and make relevant findings  in  relation  to  a
    letter from Reverend Nethasingher of 28 March 2010.  The letter  is  to
    the parish priest in Mannar requesting accommodation for the AF and  TG
    and for obvious reasons the Appellant relied on  this  to  support  his
    account.

8.   I have taken on board Mr Melvin's submissions and the Rule 24  response
    that was originally served and a more detailed Rule  24  response  upon
    which Mr Melvin relied.  However, I cannot be sure that the judge  took
    the two documents mentioned above  into  account  when  dismissing  the
    Appellants' claim.  Of course, it would be open to the  judge  to  find
    that neither document is reliable (and the judge  properly  noted  that
    there was no up to date evidence from  the  LLRC),  but  there  are  no
    findings about the reliability of the documents and what if any  weight
    he attached to them. I am not persuaded that had the judge  taken  them
    into account, this would not be material to the outcome.   The  failure
    to take the documents into account amounts to a material error of  law.
    I set aside the decision of the judge to dismiss the appeal  on  asylum
    grounds.

9.   None of the findings are sustainable. There will need to be a  complete
    re-hearing and an extensive  fact-finding  exercise  conducted  by  the
    Tribunal.  I remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal.


Notice of Decision


10.  The decision to dismiss the Appellants' asylum  appeal  is  set  aside.
    There will be a full rehearing which will take place in the  First-tier
    Tribunal.





Signed   Joanna McWilliam                             Date  23 May 2017
Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  Appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellants and to the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.
