
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10134/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Heard at Glasgow  Decision & Reasons Promulgated
On 26th April 2019     On 30th May 2019


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY JUDGE UPPER TRIBUNAL FARRELLY


                                   Between

                                MR M I E A S
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                          Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                 Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr Wintor, Counsel, instructed by Maguire
                    Solicitors, Glasgow
For the respondent:    Mr M Mathews, Senior Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

  Introduction

    1. The appellant is a national of Egypt, born in May  1996.  He  entered
       the United Kingdom in June 2017 on  foot  of  a  visit  Visa.  On  27
       September 2017 he made an application for an EU residence card on the
       basis he was  an  extended  family  member  of  a  European  National
       exercising Treaty rights. This was refused in January 2018.

    2. In February 2018 he made a claim for protection. This was refused  in
       August 2018.In summary, his claim is  that  he  is  afraid  of  being
       returned to Egypt because of his actual or imputed political opinion.
       This related to his involvement with the Muslim Brotherhood.

    3. He said since early childhood he had an association  and  in  January
       2011 he took part in the demonstrations  against  President  Mubarak.
       When the Freedom and Justice  Party  was  formed  he  helped  at  the
       demonstrations against the arrest of President Morsi.

    4. In November 2016 he visited a friend in prison.  One  of  the  guards
       questioned him about  his  `uncle',  his  father's  cousin,  and  his
       association with the Muslim Brotherhood. The guard became abusive and
       kicked him.

    5. Then in December 2016 he was arrested at a checkpoint.  He  was  held
       for 17 days when he was beaten and sexually assaulted. He said he was
       raped by one of his captors and an object was inserted into his anus.



    6. He was arrested again in May 2017. He was released after 4 days after
       signing a paper which could incriminate him in the future.

    7. He then obtained a visit Visa, coming here in June 2017. At the  time
       his parents were in the United Kingdom visiting his brother who lived
       here. His parents subsequently returned to Egypt. They  were  visited
       by the security services and in February 2018 he learnt he  had  been
       sentenced to 5 years imprisonment in his absence.

    8. The respondent refused his claim on the 6th of August  2018.  It  was
       not  accepted  he  was  facing  a  difficulties  from  the   Egyptian
       authorities. His account was considered to be inconsistent  with  the
       country information which suggested, because of the  massive  support
       for the Muslim Brotherhood, only key figures would be  targeted.  The
       appellant had claimed to be a supporter rather  than  a  member.  The
       respondent observed he only made his claim after his application  for
       a residence card had been refused. He was  also  able  to  leave  the
       country freely.

    9. A secondary aspect of his claim  was  a  fear  of  military  service.
       However the country information led the respondent to  conclude  that
       there are exemptions for medical conditions and the appellant said he
       suffered from Mediterranean fever. Furthermore, it was noted  he  had
       an Egyptian passport and was able to leave the country, suggesting he
       had either completed or was exempt from military service.




  The First tier Tribunal

   10. The appellant's appeal was heard before First-tier Tribunal Judge SPJ
       Buchanan at Glasgow on 23 November 2018.In a decision promulgated  on
       14 December 2018 it was dismissed. The judge set out the claim and at
       section 9 concluded it had  not  been  established.  The  appellant's
       credibility was an issue.

   11. The judge had been provided with medical evidence in support  of  the
       claim. There was a report from a  clinical  psychologist,  Dr  Fraser
       Morrison who saw the appellant on 7 September 2018. There  were  also
       reports from a Mr Crawford, a Consultant in A&E  medicine,  dated  17
       September 2018 and the 12th October 2018.

  The Upper Tribunal

   12. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted on  the  basis
       arguably the judge erred in his approach towards  the  assessment  of
       appellant's credibility and in particular, in  the  consideration  of
       the medical report provided in relation to this.

   13. In a rule 24 response dated 20 February 2019 the  respondent  opposed
       the appeal.

   14. At hearing Mr Wintor adopted the grounds upon  which  permission  had
       been granted. He submitted that the judge had  reached  a  conclusion
       without taking the medical evidence into account and treated it as an
       add-on feature. He submitted that the judge did not  properly  factor
       in the mental health issues identified.  This  was  relevant  to  the
       assessment of any inconsistencies as well as the reasons  behind  the
       delay  in  claiming.  He  submitted  that  the  judge's  approach  to
       plausibility was flawed, for instance, in criticising  the  appellant
       at paragraph 9.34 for returning to university to sit his exams if  he
       was genuinely in fear. I was referred to the decision of  KB  and  AH
       (credibility - structured approach) Pakistan [2017] UKUT 00491.

   15.  KB  and  AH  (credibility  -  structured  approach)  Pakistan   said
       sufficiency of detail; internal  consistency;  external  consistency;
       and plausibility, provide a helpful framework within which to conduct
       a credibility assessment. A more structured approach helps avoid  the
       temptation to look at the evidence in a one-dimensional way. However,
       the indicators are merely indicators, not necessary conditions.  They
       are not an exhaustive list. Credibility assessment is  only  part  of
       evidence assessment.

   16. I was also referred to the decision of AM (Afghanistan) -v- Secretary
       of State for the Home Department 2018 4 WLR 78 para 21. The Court  of
       Appeal said findings of medical experts must be treated  as  part  of
       the holistic assessment: they are not to be treated  as  an  "add-on"
       and rejected as a result of  an  adverse  credibility  assessment  or
       finding made prior to and without regard  to  the  medical  evidence.
       Expert medical evidence can be critical in providing explanation  for
       difficulties in giving a coherent  and  consistent  account  of  past
       events and for identifying any relevant safeguards required  to  meet
       vulnerabilities that can lead to disadvantage  in  the  determination
       process, for example in the ability to give oral testimony and  under
       what conditions.   An  appellant's  account  of  his  fears  and  the
       assessment of his credibility must also be judged in the  context  of
       the known objective circumstances  and  practices  of  the  state  in
       question.

   17. Mr Wintor referred me  to  specific  aspects  of  section  9  of  the
       decision where he sought to illustrate deficiencies. I  was  referred
       to sections 9.4, 9.5, 9.7, 9.8, 9.9, 9.19, 9.19, 9.20, 9.21 and 9.21.

   18. In response, Mr.  Mathews  pointed  out  that  this  was  a  detailed
       determination in which  the  judge  had  given  lengthy  reasons  for
       rejecting the appellant's claim. The decision of Mibanga (Francois) v
       Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  [2005]  EWCA  Civ  367;
       [2005] INLR 377, paras 24-25 held that it was an error  not  to  have
       regard to medical  evidence  submitted.  The  adjudicator  there  had
       rejected the  claimant's  evidence  wholly  and  having  reached  her
       conclusion, had gone on to consider whether the expert  evidence  was
       capable of shifting  her  position.  Had  she  fully  considered  the
       evidence of  the  reports  she  might  have  reached  an  alternative
       conclusion. Mr. Mathews said here the Tribunal did have regard to the
       medical evidence before reaching a conclusion. He submitted that  the
       fact medical evidence maybe referred to at the end of a decision does
       not mean it was not taken into account.

   19. He submitted the decision indicates the clear approach taken  to  all
       the evidence. The judge  was  entitled  to  emphasise  the  delay  in
       seeking protection and the medical evidence submitted  did  not  give
       any real explanation. It had  been  contended  that  the  appellant's
       mental state may have explained a reluctance on his part  to  divulge
       information:  this  was  different  from  explaining  the  delay.  He
       submitted the tribunal is entitled to assess  the  appellant's  claim
       and to reject his explanation for deficiencies.

  Consideration

   20. I turn to the details in the decision. Para 8.16 records  the  report
       from Mr Crawford (A&E) who formed the view  that  the  appellant  had
       "significant psychological symptoms causing severe emotional distress
       and the personal shame related to homosexual rape ...". At  9.20  the
       judge records that the doctor stated  that  other  causes  of  trauma
       might explain the scarring on his right shin though it was consistent
       with having been  beaten.  The  appellant's  toenails  could  not  be
       attributed to trauma from avulsion as he claimed.

   21. The report from the psychologist, Dr Morrison, is referred to at 8.37
       as  recording  that  he  `presents  with  significant   psychological
       symptoms of post-traumatic stress  disorder'.  At  9.1  B  the  judge
       records the doctor as stating, 'it is reasonable to assume that there
       may be inconsistencies in terms of the account of this time  period'.
       At 9.4 there is reference to 'nightmares he experiences [in] a replay
       of the sexual assaults that were perpetrated against him'. At 9.5 the
       judge quotes from the report "... Mr [S] presents  with  difficulties
       with regards to providing a detailed account of  the  events  he  had
       experienced beyond the general level".

   22. The judge  then  relates  this  evidence  to  the  claim  and  raises
       credibility issues. At 9.1 the judge records that he is  taking  into
       account the opinion of the doctors about the appellant's recollection
       on the basis  of  the  claimed  abuse.  However,  at  9.2  the  judge
       commented upon the appellant's  delay  in  claiming  protection.  The
       judge sets out the chronology and concluded the appellant would  have
       had a heightened awareness of the need to claim protection.  However,
       he arrived in June 2017 but did not claim until  February  2018.  The
       judge  concluded  the  delay  in   the   circumstance   damaged   his
       credibility.

   23. At 9.3 the judge commented about the  appellant  going  back  to  the
       University after his claimed detention. The  appellant's  explanation
       was that he wanted to complete his studies  but  the  judge  was  not
       convinced of this explanation for him remaining behind.  At  9.4  the
       judge goes into more detail on this point and  points  out  that  the
       psychologist does not explain this. The judge expressed  the  opinion
       that if the appellant had suffered the trauma claimed he  was  likely
       to have made urgent arrangements  to  leave  the  country  and  claim
       protection at an early opportunity. Clearly his failure to do so  was
       taken as a credibility point.

   24. At 9.5  the  judge  refers  to  the  psychologist  referring  to  the
       appellant's inability  to  provide  a  detailed  account  of  events.
       However, this was not consistent with the detailed statement provided
       by the appellant.

   25. At 9.19 the judge observes that the history given to Mr Crawford  did
       not coincide with the details  in  the  statements  provided  by  the
       appellant. The judge gave examples such as the guard hitting  him  on
       the neck and of being stopped at the checkpoint on the way home  from
       prison rather than sometime later. The judge goes into the details of
       the discrepancies. The judge acknowledged the possibility his  mental
       health could affect his recollection but was unable to reconcile this
       explanation with the discrepancies noted. At 9.20 the  judge  focused
       upon the appellant's claim that his toenails  had  been  pulled  out.
       This was not supported by the doctor.  The  judge  felt  this  was  a
       significant factor against  the  claim  of  torture.  The  judge  was
       comparing the medical evidence with the appellant's claim and it  was
       not being treated as something to be summarised  after  a  conclusion
       had already been reached.

   26. At 9.21 the judge refers to the Mr  Crawford  acknowledging  that  an
       assessment of  the  appellant's  mental  health  and  psychology  was
       outside his area of expertise. At  9.22  the  judge  referred  to  Dr
       Morrison's report and the reference  to  the  appellant  meeting  the
       diagnostic criteria for post-traumatic  stress  disorder.  The  judge
       acknowledged the opinion supported the  conclusion  he  has  suffered
       trauma but refers to the inconsistencies in the appellant's  account.
       The judge pointed out that third-party sources of evidence  would  be
       particularly relevant.

   27. The judge also looks at  wider  factors  in  the  assessment  of  the
       credibility of the appellant. The appellant had produced a membership
       card for the Freedom and Justice party which he said belonged to  his
       father's cousin. The judge questions how he came to produce  this  in
       light of the appellant's account about the lack of contact  with  his
       family in the United Kingdom for some time.

   28. The judge then refers to the evidence about his friend he claimed  he
       visited in prison. It is set out at 9.9. The judge refers to  a  lack
       of detail and questions why he would agree to allowing this  person's
       brother live with them if he was fearful of being associated.

   29. The judge referred to the absence of third-party  evidence.  At  9.12
       the judge refers to the claimed involvement of a lawyer to secure the
       appellant's release. However there was an absence of evidence of this
       as well as a lack of evidence about his being sentenced in absentia.

   30. In summary, I  find  the  judge  has  carefully  considered  all  the
       evidence and looked at matters in the round. The decision is detailed
       and in context. The structure  of  the  decision  clearly  shows  the
       medical evidence was not treated simply as supplementary. Rather, the
       judge analysed the medical evidence in relation  to  the  claim.  The
       judge also looked at wider matters, such as  inconsistencies  between
       the history given in the claim and that told to the doctors  and  the
       lack of third-party support. The  judge  acknowledged  there  was  no
       requirement for corroborative evidence. The  judge  referred  to  the
       appellant's delay in claiming. I find these were features  the  judge
       was legitimately entitled to have regard to. In conclusion, I find no
       material error of law established.

  Decision.

  No material error of law has been demonstrated in the decision of  First-
  tier Tribunal Judge SPJ Buchanan.Consequently, that  decision  dismissing
  the appellant's appeal shall stand.

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Farrelly.

26th May 2019
