
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/10169/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                   |Decision issued                    |
|On 20th June 2019                  |On 12th July 2019                  |
|                                   |                                   |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DEANS


                                   Between

                                     KM
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr P Harvey, Advocate, instructed by Latta & Co,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A Govan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This appeal is brought against a decision by Judge of the First-tier
      Tribunal S Gillespie dismissing an appeal on asylum and human rights
      grounds.

   2. The appellant is a national of Iraq.  He is a lawyer.  He claims to
      fear persecution or serious harm in IKR because he represented a man
      who was tortured in police custody.

   3. Permission to appeal was granted principally on the ground that the
      Judge of the First-tier Tribunal failed to consider the evidence of an
      expert witness.  It was also contended in the application for
      permission to appeal that the judge did not properly take into account
      the evidence of the appellant's wife; assumed without justification
      that judges and lawyers in the IKR would act in the same way as judges
      and lawyers in the UK; erred in making adverse credibility findings
      about the appellant's conduct in Turkey on his way to the UK; and
      misdirected himself when considering the possibility of internal
      relocation.


Submissions
   4. Mr Harvey addressed me on the grounds set out in the application.  For
      the respondent, Mr Govan acknowledged that the decision might have
      been clearer.  The expert evidence was, however, referred to by the
      judge at paragraphs 15-16 of the decision.  The judge accepted that
      the appellant had been involved in a case against the police but did
      not accept that proceedings were continuing.  The judge referred at
      paragraph 49 to the witness statement by the appellant's wife.  There
      was no material error arising from any failure properly to consider
      the evidence.

   5. In relation to the behaviour of judges and lawyers in IKR, Mr Govan
      submitted that the findings made by the Judge of the First-tier
      Tribunal at paragraphs 46 and 50 were broader than contended in the
      application for permission to appeal.  The judge might have speculated
      at paragraph 50 about the reaction of the investigating judge in IKR.
      Nevertheless it was pointed out at paragraph 50 that the appellant did
      not show how the case in IKR had progressed.  There was no material
      error.

   6. In relation to the Appellant's experiences in Turkey, Mr Govan pointed
      out that the appellant had had access to a significant amount of
      money, as referred to at paragraph 48 of the decision.  The judge
      properly considered the judge's explanation of events in Turkey.
      Finally, Mr Govan submitted that the issue of internal relocation was
      not material as the appellant was not found to be at risk in Iraq.


Discussion
   7. I regret to have to say that I have significant concerns about the way
      the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal made his decision in this appeal.
       The judge recorded at paragraph 41 that a significant concession in
      respect of the appellant's credibility was made on behalf of the
      respondent at the hearing.  Nevertheless the judge then made a number
      of adverse credibility findings with almost no evidence or adequate
      reasoning to support them.  For instance, at paragraph 48 the judge
      found that the appellant was safe in Turkey after he left Iraq and
      then brought his family across Europe "without considering securing
      himself" in Turkey.  Mr Harvey pointed out that the appellant could
      not seek refugee status in Turkey because of Turkey's geographical
      limitation on the Refugee Convention, which means that Turkey only
      accepts as refugees those facing persecution in Europe and offers only
      temporary protection to those originating outwith Europe.  It is not
      at all clear what the judge meant by saying the appellant left Turkey
      "without considering securing himself".  This was not an adequate
      basis on which to draw an adverse inference in respect of credibility.

   8. The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal also drew an adverse inference
      from the appellant's claim that his mobile phone, containing evidence
      crucial to his protection claim, was taken from him by people
      smugglers in Turkey.  At paragraph 46 the judge wrote: "I do not find
      it credible that a lawyer with experience in handling evidence would
      lose such important evidence recorded on his phone by handing it to a
      smuggler in Turkey."  I do not know whether the judge meant that the
      appellant should have backed-up the evidence on his phone to another
      device or medium, or whether he meant that the appellant should not
      have handed over his phone, or both.  So far as handing over his phone
      is concerned, the type of people he handed it to are not known for
      respecting the law, or indeed for respecting the property or safety of
      the people they seek to exploit.  If the judge meant to imply that the
      appellant had a choice over whether to part with his phone, the
      evidence for this is lacking.

   9. If, on the other hand, the judge meant that he should have held in
      another form the evidence of threats against him and his family said
      to have been sent to his phone, then as the application for permission
      to appeal points out, the judge should have taken into account the
      difficulties likely to be faced in general terms in gathering and
      securing evidence by those who may have had to flee from their country
      to escape persecution.

  10. Both of the adverse credibility findings made by the Judge of the
      First-tier Tribunal in respect of events in Turkey lack an adequately
      reasoned foundation.

  11. It is pointed out in the application for permission to appeal that in
      the second part of her report the expert witness concluded that the
      appellant had produced reliable evidence of representing a client who
      alleged torture by the police; that such cases against the police in
      IKR rarely, if ever, succeeded but complainants would face threats and
      coercion to make them abandon their case; and that there would be
      neither a sufficiency of protection for the appellant nor any prospect
      of internal relocation.  Following the concession made on behalf of
      the respondent the judge indeed accepted, at paragraph 41, that the
      appellant was involved in a case alleging torture of his client by the
      police.  This, however, was only a part of the expert evidence.

  12. Mr Govan submitted that the expert evidence was addressed by the judge
      at paragraph 16.  This contains, however, no more than a very brief
      refence to the evidence being before the judge, although even in these
      few words the judge makes a mistake over the expert's gender.  Simply
      noting that an expert report was provided was not sufficient in this
      appeal to show that the judge had engaged with the terms of the
      report, so far as material, and taken it into account in making
      findings and conclusions.  The judge erred by omitting to have proper
      regard to the expert report.


  13. There is a further issue over the judge's treatment of the evidence by
      the appellant's wife.  The judge stated at paragraph 49 that her
      evidence showed no more than that she served refreshments to certain
      individuals who visited the appellant at home.  It is pointed out in
      the application for permission to appeal that her evidence included
      other matters, such as a threat towards the children received by the
      appellant on his phone, and the circumstances in which the family
      fled.   Because of the appellant's evidence that his phone was taken
      from him, his wife's evidence of what she saw on the phone was
      potentially material and the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal erred by
      not properly taking her evidence into account.


  14. It was contended in the application for permission to appeal that the
      Judge of the First-tier Tribunal erred by making assumptions about how
      lawyers and judges in IKR would behave.  There is some substance in
      this point.  Furthermore, even by the standards and practices of the
      judiciary in the UK, a judge might feel constrained from making
      comments about a case in which he or she had been directly involved,
      particularly where those comments were to be used in evidence in
      another jurisdiction.  Mr Govan pointed out that the judge in IKR was
      an investigating judge, a post which has no direct equivalent in the
      UK, but the point made on behalf of the appellant is not without
      merit.

  15. Having found a number of errors in the assessment of the evidence by
      the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal I do not consider it necessary to
      consider in detail the ground of the application relating to internal
      relocation.  To an extent this is linked to the judge's inadequate
      consideration of the expert report, in which internal relocation was
      addressed.

  16. The errors made by the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal go to the
      heart of the credibility findings.  In view of the extent of fact-
      finding required to re-make the decision it is appropriate to remit
      the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal, in terms of Practice Statement
      7.2(b), for a fresh hearing before a differently constituted tribunal
      with no findings preserved.  The concession made on behalf of the
      respondent would of course stand unless withdrawn in writing in
      advance of the hearing.

Conclusions
  17. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the
      making of an error of law.

  18. The decision is set aside.

  19. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing
      before a differently constituted tribunal with no findings preserved.


Anonymity
The First-tier Tribunal did not make a direction for anonymity.  In order
to preserve the positions of the parties until the appeal is decided I make
a direction in the following terms.  Unless or until a court or tribunal
directs otherwise no report of these proceedings shall directly or
indirectly identify the appellant or any member of his family.  This
direction applies to the appellant and the respondent.  Failure to comply
with the direction may give rise to contempt of court proceedings.


M E Deans
                                        9th July 2019
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge




