
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)              Appeal Number:  PA/11650/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated             |
|On 18 May 2017                    |On 7 June 2017                             |
|                                  |                                           |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

                                     a a
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Nelson, legal representative from Universe
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Alice Holmes, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
      2008 I make an order prohibiting the disclosure or publication of  any
      matter likely to lead members of the public to identify the appellant.
      Breach of this order can be punished as a contempt of  court.  I  make
      this order because, even though the appellant's claim to  be  gay  has
      been disbelieved, he might be at risk if is became known that  he  had
      identified himself as a gay man. It  is  not  necessary  to  know  his
      identity to understand this decision.

   2. This is an appeal  against  a  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
      dismissing the appellant's appeal against a decision of the respondent
      refusing him asylum or humanitarian protection and ruling that he  was
      not entitled to remain.  Refusing him leave  did  not  contravene  his
      rights under Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights.

   3. Permission to appeal was granted because it was thought arguable that:

  "The judge failed to consider that the production of documentary evidence
  in an asylum claim to be the exception rather  than  the  rule  under  ST
  (corroboration - Kasolo) Ethiopia [2004] UKAIT 00119."

   4. At paragraph 14 in ST the Tribunal said:

  "The main issue in this appeal is whether the Adjudicator's  findings  on
  the issue of credibility are undermined by her comments on the absence of
  documentary evidence.  There is no requirement for corroboration  and  in
  Kasolo the Tribunal held  that  it  was  a  misdirection  to  imply  that
  corroboration was necessary."

   5. The Tribunal then continued at paragraph 15:

  "The fact that corroboration is  not  required  does  not  mean  that  an
  Adjudicator  is  required  to  leave  out  of  account  the  absence   of
  documentary evidence which might reasonably be expected.  An appeal  must
  be determined on the basis of the evidence produced but the weight to  be
  attached to oral evidence may be affected by a failure to  produce  other
  evidence in support."

   6. I begin by considering the First-tier Tribunal's decision.  The  judge
      noted that it was  the  Secretary  of  State's  case  that  homosexual
      relationships between men in Nigeria are illegal and that  homosexuals
      generally are unable to seek protection from the police.  He noted too
      from the background evidence that public opposition  to  gay  activity
      has accelerated at both state and local  level  when  the  judge  said
      expressly at paragraph 17 that if  he  had  believed  the  appellant's
      claim to be gay he would have allowed the appeal.

   7. It is plain  from  the  fact  of  the  Decision  that  the  judge  was
      conspicuously aware of his responsibilities and the  possibility  that
      the appellant might have been telling the truth when he gave  evidence
      of ill-treatment in Nigeria and a  fear  of  return.   The  judge  was
      careful to direct himself, twice, that corroboration  was  not  needed
      but he did list seven points that he considered to be significant gaps
      in the appellant's  case.   There  was  no  evidence  to  support  the
      appellant's claim that he had been caught taking part in a sexual  act
      with a man at university.  There was no evidence from the  appellant's
      parents indicating that they knew what was supposed to  have  happened
      and that the appellant was ostracised and beaten as a result and  that
      news of his sexuality had got back to his home  area.   There  was  no
      evidence from the alleged sexual partner in Nigeria even though it was
      the appellant's case that  his  relationship  with  that  partner  had
      lasted for  about  three  years.  Neither  was  there  any  supporting
      evidence from his alleged partner in the United Kingdom, who is  named
      in the decision, except possibly a card and  a  letter  attributed  to
      that person that I consider below.  Neither was there any support from
      the one other person in the United Kingdom who the  appellant  claimed
      knew about his sexuality.   Further  there  was  no  evidence  of  the
      appellant having problems in university at Nigeria even though it  was
      his case he had been so badly beaten that he was  left  for  dead  and
      revived in the university hospital.

   8. The judge made no finding on the submission  that  the  appellant  was
      unbelievable because his claim was late but he did say  that  although
      the appellant had been convicted  for  an  offence  of  possession  of
      counterfeit documents and that necessarily related to his  credibility
      generally the judge  did  not  find  it  helpful  in  determining  the
      appellant's sexuality.  The point is that  the  judge  clearly  showed
      that he was persuadable and was not looking for points to take against
      the appellant but, having evaluated the evidence as a whole, he  found
      it unpersuasive.

   9. Before me Mr Nelson argued that the judge had  ignored  a  Valentine's
      card and letter that had been shown to the Secretary of  State.   This
      submission is not sustainable in the light  of  paragraph  20  of  the
      Decision and Reasons.

  10. Put simply, it is clear  to  me  that  the  judge  has  not  erred  by
      requiring documentary evidence or other corroboration  but  has  acted
      properly by approaching the evidence with a  transparently  open  mind
      and an awareness of the potential seriousness of the decision.  Having
      reflected on that evidence he was unpersuaded by it and he gave proper
      reasons for the decision that he made.  Once the findings of fact  had
      been made the decision to dismiss the appeal with reference to Article
      8 of the European Convention  on  Human  Rights  was  inevitable.  The
      finding could not support a different conclusion.

  11. Mr Nelson did all that could be expected of him and I realise that the
      appellant has made allegations which if  truthful  would  put  him  at
      risk.  I see no basis for criticising the First-tier Tribunal  Judge's
      decision and I dismiss the appeal.




|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 6 June 2017                    |





