
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11142/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Civil Justice    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Centre                               |                                     |
|On 16th May 2019                     |On 20th June 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                 Mr Omid [H]
                        (NO ANONYMITY direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Woodhouse (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Ms H Aboni (Senior HOPO)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

This is an appeal against the determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge
James, promulgated on 20th March 2018, following a hearing at Birmingham on
9th January 2018.  In the determination, the judge dismissed the appeal of
the Appellant, whereupon the Appellant subsequently applied for, and was
granted, permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter
comes before me.



The Appellant's Claim

The essence of the Appellant's claim is that there had been on 3rd November
2015, a bombing in Dubz and that his employer and two co-workers had been
arrested in connection with it.  He claimed that the Iraqi authorities were
pursuing him because they believed he was connected with the bombing due to
his association with his co-workers.  He claimed that on return to either
Iraq or Kurdistan he would be detained and tortured.

The Appellant is a male, a national of Iraq, and was born on 1st January
1997.  He appealed against the decision of the Respondent dated 30th
September 2016 refusing his claim for asylum and humanitarian protection.

At the hearing before me on 16th May 2019, there was agreement between Ms H
Aboni, and Mr Woodhouse, that given that the Appellant's claim was that he
came from the Diyala region of Iraq, which according to the country
guidance case of AA (Iraq) [2017] was a "contested area", the judge ought
not to have come to a different conclusion, namely, that the Appellant was
returnable to Diyala because the judicial review case of Amin [2017] EWHC
2417, provided a basis for this.

This was particularly, given that the judge had before him an Appellant's
expert report, which was in the bundle of documents (referred to at
paragraph 9 of the determination), but to which the judge made absolutely
no reference whatsoever, and still less undertook an analysis of the expert
report, before concluding that Diyala was a region to which the Appellant
could be returned.

If the judge were, as encouraged by the Respondent authority, to place
reliance upon the Home Office's CPIN report, to the effect that Diyala was
now not a contested area, then, given that there was a country guidance
case to the contrary in AA (Iraq) [2017] EWCA Civ 944, it behoved the judge
to consider what the expert had to say on the Appellant's behalf in this
regard as well, before concluding in favour of the Home Office.

This, suggested Ms Aboni, indicates that the judge had not exercised
"anxious scrutiny" in relation to the appeal before him.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error on
a point of law (see Section 12(1) of TCEA 2007) such that it falls to be
set aside.  I set aside the decision of the regional judge.  I remake the
decision as follows.  This appeal is remitted back to the First-tier
Tribunal, to be determined by a judge other than Judge James, pursuant to
practice statement 7.2(b).

No anonymity order is made.

This appeal is allowed.


Signed                              Date
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 17th June 2019
