
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/11873/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 10th January 2018                   |On 26th January 2018           |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DEANS


                                   Between

                                     R B
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Winter, Advocate, instructed by Latta & Co,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Matthews, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This is an appeal against a decision by Judge of the First-tier
      Tribunal Clough dismissing an appeal on protection and human rights
      grounds.


   2. The appellant is a national of Bangladesh.  He claims to be at risk in
      Bangladesh because he criticised Islam in a blog.  He also claims to
      fear persecution as a Hindu.

   3. The appellant entered the UK in January 2015 as a student.  In March
      2016 the Home Office was notified that the appellant was no longer
      studying at the university he was supposed to be attending.  Shortly
      afterwards the appellant made a protection claim.

   4. The appellant claimed that he started his blog around the end of 2012
      or the beginning of 2013.  He claims he was assaulted in October 2013,
      as a result of which he required hospital treatment.  It was after
      this he decided to leave Bangladesh to study in the UK.  On 5th March
      2016 some people came to the appellant's father's house asking for the
      appellant's whereabouts and threatening to kill him.  The appellant
      provided police reports of the incidents in October 2013 and March
      2016.  In addition he provided a newspaper report of the incident in
      March 2016.  The newspaper report was examined by an expert witness,
      who considered it authentic.

   5. The judge did not accept the appellant's evidence as credible.

   6. Permission to appeal was granted principally on the ground that the
      judge arguably erred by failing to have proper regard to the expert
      report when assessing the appellant's credibility.  The expert report
      considered it was plausible that the appellant would have received
      threats from militant Islamists because of his online activities and
      the judge arguably failed to take this into account.  The grounds of
      the application for permission to appeal further contended that the
      judge erred by not making clear findings in respect of the appellant's
      activities online.

   7. Mr Winter addressed me in relation to the grounds of the application.
      He submitted that the judge did not adequately explain why she had not
      followed the expert's conclusions.  The judge did not state whether
      she agreed with the expert's view that the newspaper report was
      authentic.  If the newspaper report was accepted as authentic this
      would strengthen the weight to be given to the police reports.  An
      expert report should be given significant weight unless proper reasons
      were provided for not doing so.  The appellant's delay in claiming
      asylum, while founded upon by the judge in making an adverse
      credibility finding, was not a sufficient reason for rejecting the
      appeal.

   8. Mr Winter further submitted that the judge failed to make a specific
      finding on whether the appellant was a blogger.  There was evidence
      before the Tribunal to show that bloggers were targeted.

   9. For the respondent, Mr Matthews submitted that the judge was entitled
      to find that the first police report, relating to the alleged assault
      in October 2013, was not reliable.  The judge then considered the
      reports of the alleged incident at the family home in March 2016.  The
      judge did not accept the content of these reports as reliable.

  10. Mr Matthews acknowledged nevertheless that it was incumbent upon the
      judge to make findings on the appellant's alleged involvement in
      blogging but there was a lack of clear findings on this issue.

  11. It is common ground between the parties that the judge did not make
      proper findings on the existence or extent of the appellant' blogging
      activity.  In the view of the expert report a blog criticising Islam
      might attract the adverse attention of Islamist groups.  Findings on
      this matter were therefore potentially material to the outcome of the
      appeal.

  12. I am inclined to accept Mr Matthew's submission to the effect that the
      judge was entitled to find for the reasons which she gave that the
      evidence relating to the alleged assault in October 2013 was not
      reliable.  I consider, however, that different considerations arise in
      relation to the alleged threats made at the family home in March 2016.
       For one thing, this incident was more or less contemporaneous with
      the claim for protection.  Secondly, the newspaper report of the
      incident was regarded by the expert report as authentic.  If it was
      the view of the judge, as Mr Matthews suggested, that while the
      newspaper report was a genuine document the account given in the
      newspaper report was not reliable, then it was incumbent on the judge
      to make this important distinction in her findings.  What the judge
      seems to have concluded, at paragraph 19, was that even if the
      incident at the family home occurred, it had not been shown that it
      was provoked by the appellant's anti-Islamic blogging.  This comes
      right back to the issue already identified of the inadequacy of the
      judge's findings on the question of the appellant's alleged blogging.
      Without proper findings on this matter I cannot be satisfied that the
      judge's approach to the alleged incident in March 2016 is sound.


  13. Because of the deficiencies in the judge's findings the proper course
      is for the appeal to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal with no
      findings preserved for the decision to be re-made before a different
      judge.


Conclusions

  14. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the
      making of an error of law.


  15. The decision is set aside.

  16. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal with no findings
      preserved for the decision to be re-made before a differently
      constituted tribunal.


      Anonymity
      No direction for anonymity was made by the First-tier Tribunal.  As
      the appeals are to be reheard I consider it appropriate to make a
      direction for anonymity to preserve the positions of the parties until
      the appeals are decided.  Unless or until a tribunal or court directs
      otherwise, no report of these proceedings shall directly or indirectly
      identify the appellant or any members of his family.  This direction
      applies to the appellant and to the respondent.  Failure to comply
      with this direction may lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Deans
      25th January 2018

