
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: PA/11790/2016
                                                               PA/11787/2016
                                                               PA/11784/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 15th June 2017                   |On 3rd July 2017                      |
|                                    |                                      |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON


                                   Between

                           A G i (First Appellant)
                           S i (Second Appellant)
                            s i (Third Appellant)
                         (aNONYMITY DIRECTION made)

                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr Trussler
For the Respondent:    Mr Tufan, Senior Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellants

 1. The appellants appeal against a decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Rowlands who dismissed their appeals  against  the  Secretary  of
    State's refusal dated 11th October 2016 of  their  claims  for  asylum,
    humanitarian protection and protection under the  European  Convention.
    The First-tier Tribunal Judge's decision was issued on 29th March 2017.



 2. The appellants are citizens of Pakistan.  The first  appellant  is  the
    mother born on [ ] 1970 and the second and  third  appellants  are  her
    daughters aged 27 and 23 respectively at the date  of  hearing.   Their
    claims were linked to  those  of  their  mother  and  also  independent
    thereof.

 3. The immigration history of the first appellant  showed  she  was  first
    granted a visa as a dependent of her husband in 2007  and  entered  the
    country on 20th July 2007.  The second and third appellants accompanied
    her as dependants of their father.  On  5th  November  2013  the  first
    appellant was granted a student visa which was extended  until  October
    2015.  However, her leave was curtailed on 13th August 2014  as  having
    been obtained by deception.  Her application on the basis  of  domestic
    violence was rejected in March  2016  and  in  July  2016  she  claimed
    asylum.  The second and third appellants' leave was also  curtailed  in
    August 2014 and they too claimed asylum in 2016.

 4. I take note that at the hearing the appellants were  unrepresented,  as
    indeed were their applications for permission to appeal.

The Grounds for Permission to Appeal

 5. It was asserted that (i) the Immigration Judge  wholly  relied  on  the
    reasons for refusal letter without considering the appellants' evidence
    as a whole  (ii) the judge failed to appreciate the appellants' case in
    terms of them having taken a promise from the first appellant's husband
    to allow them to study abroad before he gave his  daughters'  hands  in
    marriage to his cousins in Pakistan  (iii) The evidence was  stated  in
    the witness statements but no reliance was placed on that by the judge.

 6. The grant of permission made by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Ford  noted
    that the decision made  brief  reference  to  the  appellants'  witness
    statements, but there was no mention of the history of  their  attempts
    to seek forced marriage protection orders in the UK, nor was there  any
    mention of the first appellant's allegations of blackmail  by  a  third
    party and it was arguable that the Tribunal may have  overlooked  these
    aspects of the claim in relation to the assessment of risk.

 7. I note that the grant of permission appears to refer  to  aspects  that
    were not set out in the  application  for  permission  to  appeal,  but
    nonetheless I will deal with the grounds as they are set out.

 8. At the hearing before me Mr Trussler submitted that the appellants were
    litigants in person and he wished to amend the appellants'  grounds  of
    appeal to include a challenge to the failure of the judge  to  consider
    in full the report of Dr  Giustozzi,  specifically  paragraph  15.   He
    considered that the judge  had  by-passed  any  consideration  of  that
    report.

 9. Mr Trussler argued in his submissions that the judge  had  not  engaged
    with the appellants' explanation that the father was  merely  complying
    with their wishes in coming to the  UK  whilst  waiting  to  marry  the
    daughters back in Pakistan.

10. Mr Trussler also submitted that the witness statement of Miss U K was a
    detailed statement and had not been placed in  context  by  the  judge.
    The judge had merely indicated a summary dismissal.

11. Mr Trussler agreed that at the date of the hearing the proceedings  for
    a forced marriage order had not been pursued because the ex-husband and
    father had not been located. He had disappeared, as identified  by  the
    judge.  He noted there was no documentation in the  appellants'  bundle
    but considered that there  were  such  documents  in  the  Home  Office
    bundle.  In fact there was a letter from the Foreign  and  Commonwealth
    Office dated 17th March 2016 acknowledging an application for a  forced
    marriage order.

12. Mr Tufan, protested that their was no ground  of  appeal  regarding  Dr
    Giustozzi's report  but nonetheless criticised  the  report's  sweeping
    assertions regarding abuse and trafficking, none of which had been made
    in the appeal.  The mother had previously been a  teacher  in  Pakistan
    and was an educated woman and the case law had indicated that  she  and
    her daughters could  re-settle  in  Pakistan.   Simply,  there  was  no
    knowledge of where the appellants'  ex-husband  and  father  was.   The
    judge did not accept that the husband came to the UK in order to  force
    the daughters to marry.  I was referred  to  the  case  of  Gheisari  v
    Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  [2004]  EWCA  Civ  1854,
    specifically paragraph 14. whereby it  was  accepted  that  a  sentence
    simply added by a judge, that is "His evidence lacks the ring of truth"
     was considered by the  Court  of  Appeal  to  be  sufficient  to  show
    separate consideration from that of the respondent, went beyond  simply
    echoing the  Secretary  of  State's  incredulity,  and,  indicated  the
    Adjudicator's own evaluation of the veracity of the account.  That  was
    his task and that was found to be acceptable by the  Court  of  Appeal.
    That was the case here.

13. Mr Trussler responded  that  the  first  appellant  had  been  able  to
    engineer a situation such as to force the husband to come  to  the  UK.
    He repeated that there  was  no  consideration  of  the  report  of  Dr
    Giustozzi.

Conclusions

14. I am not persuaded there is any error of law in  the  decision  by  the
    judge on an overall reading of  the  decision  or  that  he  overlooked
    relevant factors or evidence.  In response to the permission to appeal,
    the judge specifically stated at paragraph 32 that  he  had  considered
    all of the evidence in the case (including that to  which  he  did  not
    specifically refer to) and reached his following conclusions.

15. The judge rehearsed the evidence in detail,  noting  specifically  that
    the first appellant came to the UK as a dependant  of  her  husband  as
    long ago as 2007.  He also identified that at the date of  the  hearing
    the second and third appellants were indeed the age of 23 and 27  years
    old.

16. At paragraph 19 the judge notes:-

         "At the hearing it was accepted that there  was  evidence  to  show
         that her husband's behaviour towards her [the first appellant]  had
         warranted her making an application in the Family Courts for a non-
         molestation order and that there had been a complaint to the Police
         about an assault upon her".

    The judge clearly took  into  account  the  background  of  molestation
    occasioned by the husband.  That does not indicate that  he  failed  to
    address the relevant documentation.

17. The judge also recorded that the respondent had noted  that  since  the
    assault that took place in February 2016 there had been:-

         "... no further problems and indeed no  contact  with  her  husband
         which casts doubt on the credibility of their  claim  that  he  was
         attempting to force the daughters  into  marriage.    She  had  not
         claimed asylum at all on that basis in 2016 when her daughters  had
         claimed but had instead made a claim outside the Immigration  Rules
         on the basis of her being  a  victim  of  domestic  violence.   Her
         explanation for doing so was not credible and consistent with their
         claim".

18. In relation to the claim of being harassed by  a  Mr  S  R,  the  judge
    recorded at [24] that  the  first  appellant  was  clear  she  had  not
    appeared in any indecent  videos  and  that  it  was  asserted  by  the
    Secretary  of  State  that  the  claim  was  'wholly  speculative   and
    unfounded'.  Indeed, the judge noted

          "...  in  reaching  the  conclusions  that  the  respondent   had
          concerning the first Appellants claim they had taken into account
          her failure to make a claim during the whole nine years that  she
          had been in the United Kingdom".

19. Thus regarding the threat of blackmail by Mr S R the  judge  noted  the
    respondent's conclusion  that  there  was  absolutely  no  evidence  to
    confirm that that was the case, and in fact it was contradicted by  the
    claim of the first appellant that the obscene photographs were  of  her
    and not her daughter [29].   The  judge  clearly  stated  that  he  had
    considered the refusal letter as it related to the third appellant  and
    the conclusions to be drawn thereon.

20. The grounds assert that the judge failed to appreciate the  appellants'
    case in terms of them having taken  a  promise  from  the  husband  and
    father to allow them to study abroad  before  he  gave  his  daughters'
    hands in marriage to his cousins in Pakistan. It is evident  the  judge
    did not accept this. At paragraph  33  the  judge  notes  the  violence
    perpetrated on the first appellant, that all three appellants were well
    educated and modern thinking women and would not believe  that  it  was
    right for girls to enter into  marriage  that  was  not  of  their  own
    choosing but he specifically asserted contrary to their  assertions  on
    the threat of marriage that

           "I am not satisfied that it is the reason for them coming to the
          United Kingdom"

    and he proceeded to give his reasons,  clearly stating at paragraph 33,
    that he rejected the  first  appellant's  account  of  the  history  of
    friction with the husband's family in Pakistan:-

         "The respondent rightly points out that the husband's  family  were
         totally accepting of their marriage despite it not being  arranged.
         They had been able to live with the Appellants sister-in-law for  a
         number of years which would indicate that  they  [the  family]  are
         less traditional than claimed".

21. Mr Trussler urged me to accept  that  the  judge  had  not  taken  into
    account the first appellant's witness  statement,  but  the  contention
    that the family was merely  following  an  agreement  was  specifically
    rejected by the judge because of the passing of time.  Indeed,  as  the
    judge states they had been able to  live  with  the  first  appellant's
    sister-in-law for a number of years.   This  entirely  contradicts  the
    first  appellant's  statement  whereby  she  states  that  the   enmity
    continued and to which I have referred above.

22. The judge  also  specifically  states  at  paragraph  34  that  he  was
    satisfied that there were issues between the first  appellant  and  her
    husband before they left Pakistan, but  specifically  does  not  accept
    that she would agree to accompany him with their two daughters  to  the
    United Kingdom if he still insisted on them  marrying  and/or  that  he
    would have brought them all to the United  Kingdom  and  tolerated  the
    situation for the length of time he did in the UK if  he  still  wanted
    them to marry his family's chosen person.  I note  that  the  daughters
    are now aged 27 and 23 years of age.

23. As indeed the judge states that he was:-

         "... equally satisfied that he would not have financed the whole of
         their trip and remained with them not just when  they  arrived  but
         also from 2007 right through to 2016.  That is not the  actions  of
         somebody who was insisting on them all going back  to  Pakistan  so
         the girls could marry and not the actions of somebody who was angry
         with them for their failure to do so".

24. The judge has clearly made findings over and beyond those made  by  the
    respondent.  The  judge  identified  the  discrepancies  in  the  first
    appellant's claim, the delay in her claim, and the changes made in  the
    claims.  That  effectively  undermined  the  credibility  of  all   the
    appellants. The judge clearly departed from  the  reasons  for  refusal
    letter making up his own mind and expressed a  finding  that  the  real
    reason for the marriage breaking up was the  violence  that  he  showed
    towards  the  first  appellant.   That  was  fully  factored  into  the
    decision.

25.  Although  there  was  a  letter  of  receipt  from  the  Foreign   and
    Commonwealth Office dated 17th March 2016 regarding an application  for
    a forced marriage order there was no firm evidence before the judge  to
    confirm that this had indeed been taken forward or  indeed  that  there
    was substance to this.  There was a separate letter from a letter  from
    the Criminal Justice System Witness Care Officer  dated  2nd  September
    2016 but this did not identify the case against the ex husband, and was
    addressed to the first appellant and not the daughters,  and  took  the
    case on forced marriage no further forward.  Nor did  it  identify  the
    case against the husband.  On considering the  documentation  that  was
    produced, I do not find it a  material  error,  in  the  light  of  the
    findings made on violence, that the judge, did not specifically further
    address the one letter on the marriage order application.

26. I reject the suggestion that the witness statement of Miss U K was  not
    taken into account.  As the judge stated at paragraph 41,  he  rejected
    the witness statement  and  gave  reasons  for  it  because  "the  vast
    majority of the evidence is of things that have been said to her by the
    first Appellant".  Although Mr Trussler urged me to  consider  this  in
    the context in which it was given, there  is  no  doubt  that  the  key
    elements of the witness evidence was indeed information from the  first
    appellant.

27. Once again at paragraph 43  the  judge  noted  "Having  regard  to  the
    totality of the evidence both oral and documentary"  he  dismissed  the
    claim.  A Judge does not have to refer  to  every  piece  of  evidence,
    Budhathoki (reasons for decision) [2014] UKUT 00341  and  it  is  quite
    clear for a series  of  reasons  as  to  why  the  judge  rejected  the
    appellants' claim and the witness evidence.

28. I reject the amendment application made by Mr Trussler.  First, it  was
    not raised in the grounds.  Secondly, the judge clearly dealt with  the
    conclusion of Dr Giustozzi who appears to refer  to  trafficking  which
    was not raised as an issue in the appeal and further makes reference to
    lone  women,  which  these  appellants  are  not.   They  would  remove
    together.  Indeed the judge refers at paragraph 37, in essence  to  the
    conclusions of the report, such that he did not accept that  the  first
    appellant's ex-husband would be able to find the family because of  his
    rank: first that he was not senior and "although he may have been  able
    to find them he certainly was not able to force his wife to be with him
    nor his daughters to enter into any kind of marriage".  In fact it  was
    only after he apologised to her that she would accept him back  on  her
    terms.  As the judge stated:-

         "This does not indicate to me someone who  has  such  influence  in
         Pakistan that he would be able to find them wherever they  were  if
         they returned even assuming that he knew for one minute  that  they
         had actually returned to Pakistan".

29. At paragraph 39 the judge was quite clear that he  had  considered  the
    expert's report in the case and the country guidance cases finding:-

         "... from the evidence given by the first Appellant that she has in
         the past succeeded not only in relocating in Pakistan but also been
         able to survive by finding work.   She  is  clearly  a  resourceful
         woman and well qualified and would able (sic) to fend  for  herself
         and there is no reason why she could not do so again.   So  far  as
         the second and third Appellants are concerned they  are  also  well
         educated and there is no reason why they could not be successful in
         Pakistan even without family support".

30. Shizad (sufficiency of reasons: set  aside)  [2013]  UKUT  00085  (IAC)
    confirms that the judge  needs  to  give  adequate  but  not  extensive
    reasoning for his findings if the decision  as  a  whole  makes  sense.
    That is the case here.  For the reasons given above I find no error  in
    the decision and it shall stand.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.





Signed      Helen Rimington                        Date 30th June 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington

