
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11761/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 11 January 2019                           |On 31 January 2019            |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE APPLEYARD


                                   Between

                                   S M A N
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer.
For the Respondent:    Mr E Nicholson, Counsel.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen  of  Afghanistan  who  sought  international
    protection. His application was refused and he  subsequently  appealed.
    Following a hearing, and in a decision promulgated on  23  April  2018,
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Row, dismissed the Appellant's appeal.
    In so doing he found the Appellant had given inconsistent evidence  and
    made adverse credibility findings.

 2. The Appellant sought permission to appeal which was initially  refused.
    However, a renewed application was  granted  by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Finch on 3 September 2018. Her reasons for so granting were: -

         "The Appellant is appealing  against  the  decision  by  First-tier
         Tribunal Judge Row to dismiss his appeal against  the  decision  by
         the Respondent to refuse to grant him asylum.

         The First-tier Tribunal Judge was required to consider the evidence
         in the round in accordance with Karanakaran v  Secretary  of  State
         for the Home  Department  [2000]  EWCA  Civ  11.  However,  in  his
         decision, the First-tier Tribunal Judge does not give any weight to
         a  substantial  number  of   certificates,   letters,   references,
         commendations and an extract from a biography. Instead, he required
         the Appellant  to  provide  further  evidence  to  corroborate  the
         evidence he had submitted.

         It is also arguable that, when reviewing the evidence,  the  First-
         tier Tribunal Judge failed to apply the requisite low  standard  of
         proof and failed to  give  sufficient  reasons  for  disputing  the
         validity of his documentary evidence.

         As a consequence, the grounds of appeal identify arguable errors of
         law and it is appropriate to grant permission to appeal."

 3. Thus, the appeal came before me today.

 4. At the outset Mr Nicholson  referred  me  to  an  additional  Appellant
    bundle provided  for  today's  hearing  along  with  further  materials
    provided by his instructing Solicitors.  He  acknowledged  though  that
    they amounted to fresh evidence that did not go to  the  heart  of  the
    issue for me to decide which is whether  or  not,  within  Judge  Row's
    decision, there is a material error of law.

 5. Mr Nicholson asserted firstly that the Judge had erred  by  failing  to
    attach  weight  to  substantial  numbers  of   certificates,   letters,
    references, commendations and an extract from a  biography  and  in  so
    doing effectively required the Appellant to provide further evidence in
    relation to such matters  to  corroborate  the  evidence  that  he  had
    submitted. In particular, he referred me to paragraph 23 of the Judge's
    decision where, in relation to whether or not the Appellant worked  for
    a non-government organisation called ACTED, the  Judge  had  materially
    erred  in  finding  that  it  "would  have  been  for  the  Appellant's
    representatives to contact the organisation to ask them to confirm  the
    Appellant's account. ACTED would presumably either have confirmed it or
    said that they had never heard of him...". In any event, this error was
    compounded by the failure of the Judge to  recognise  that  this,  like
    others, was not  challenged  by  the  Respondent.  He  referred  me  to
    paragraph 27 of the Respondent's refusal letter. It states: -

         "27. It is accepted that you are  an  Afghan  national  and  it  is
         accepted that you have undertaken employment as  you  have  stated,
         however it is not accepted that you are at risk from the Taliban or
         anyone else because of this employment.  In  addition,  it  is  not
         accepted that you have written a biography for  which  you  are  at
         risk in Afghanistan."

 6. Mr Diwnycz responded by arguing that  this  was  no  more  than  a  "TK
    (Burundi) v SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ 40 point" and that as  such,  it  was
    evidence that the Appellant ought to have produced.

 7. I considered this first challenge. It was incumbent upon the  Judge  to
    consider the totality of the evidence in the round. That, he has failed
    to do. He does not give any weight to a substantial number of documents
    as referred to in the grant of permission to appeal and has  failed  to
    appreciate the concession that was made by the Respondent  in  relation
    to the Appellant's claim to work for ACTED.

 8. I find that not only is such an error  a  material  one,  but  that  it
    infects the totality of the adverse credibility findings  made  by  the
    Judge. In light of that, his decision cannot stand. There  is  no  need
    for me to consider further grounds.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making
of an error on a point of law.

The decision is set aside.

The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be  dealt  with  afresh
pursuant to Section 12(2)(b)(i) of the  Tribunals,  Courts  and  Enforcement
Act 2007 and Practice Direction 7(b) before any Judge aside from Judge Row.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                                Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard                     15 January 2019


