
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/11835/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 16 November 2018                  |On 27 November 2018                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                     Z J
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Ms J McCallum, of Latta & Co, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A Govan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals against a decision by FtT Judge Boyd, promulgated
    on 15 May 2018.  Her grounds are set out in the application filed on 29
    May 2018, paragraphs 1 - 5.

 2. The essence of the grounds is as follows:

    (1)  Error at [32] - [33] of the decision, preferring a document  which
    described the appellant as "a technical inspector  assistant",  without
    giving reasons.

    (2)  At [33] the judge said there was no evidence the appellant trained
    to be a supervisor, and did not accept "that the girls were  under  her
    observation", a matter at the heart of her claim, but failed  to  place
    weight upon  a  letter  from  her  employer  confirming  that  she  was
    "employed at the female section of the student  accommodation  and  ...
    supervising the students when the  incident  occurred";  and  that  had
    appropriate weight been placed on the document, a different  conclusion
    might have been reached on the appellant's role at  the  University  of
    Raparin, which was material.

    (3) At [37] and [39] the judge  referred  to  lack  of  detail  in  the
    appellant's screening interview, but (under reference to case law) such
    an interview is not a verbatim account but a summary.

    (4)  At [42] the judge  "misapplied"  [misunderstood]  the  appellant's
    evidence, finding the issuing of arrest warrants inconsistent with  the
    appellant's claim that the police lacked interest  in  honour  matters,
    when her evidence was that the warrants were for the crime  of  kidnap,
    "not presented to the police as an issue relating to honour".  At  [29]
    and [33] of her statement she  said  that  she  and  her  brother  were
    accused  of  kidnapping  (and  subject  to  an  arrest  warrant   valid
    throughout Iraq).

    (5)  The judge at [47]  failed  to  provide  reasons  for  finding  the
    appellant not entitled to humanitarian protection, based on submissions
    in respect of the country guidance case law.

 3. Mr Govan said at the outset that ground (5) disclosed an  error,  which
    should be corrected by the UT, but that grounds (1) - (4) were opposed.

 4. Ms McCallum submitted along these lines:

      i) Grounds (1) - (4) disclosed errors, any one of which might not have
         been fatal, but which did cumulatively undermine the decision.

     ii) On ground (1), the judge gave no reason at all for  preferring  one
         document over another.  It  was  not  a  case  where  the  document
         preferred was obviously  more  consistent  with  the  rest  of  the
         evidence.  One was more consistent with  the  screening  interview,
         and the other with the substantive asylum interview.

    iii) On ground (2), the judge failed  to  consider  that  the  appellant
         might not have needed specific training to  be  a  supervisor,  but
         could have worked her way up.  The judge failed to refer  to  other
         parts of the evidence which suggested that she was a supervisor.

     iv) There was nothing to add to ground (3).

      v) Ground (4) disclosed an error of fact.  The evidence had been  that
         the police do not mediate  between  families  on  "honour"  issues,
         whereas the warrant was for kidnapping, a criminal charge.

     vi) On ground (5), error on grounds (1)  -  (4)  would  lead  to  fresh
         findings of fact, laying a new basis for  humanitarian  protection.
         Alternatively, even if not believed  on  the  "honour"  claim,  the
         appellant might be reliable about difficulties in the  way  of  her
         return.

 5. Having considered also the submissions for the respondent, I find  that
    grounds (1) - (4) disclose no error in point of law,  and  that  ground
    (5) does not lead to a different outcome.

 6. Grounds (1) and (2) may be taken together, as Mr Govan suggested.   The
    appellant  was  employed  as  an  electrician.   There  was  a   slight
    discrepancy over whether she was an assistant or a supervisor  at  some
    level, but the significant point is at [33] and [35].  At its realistic
    highest, the evidence did not support the proposition that  the  family
    of her brother's girlfriend would have taken her to be responsible  for
    the welfare of  416  girls  living  in  student  accommodation  at  the
    university.

 7. It is doubtful if ground (3) amounts to a  proposition  of  error.   At
    most, it is a disagreement.  The judge at [37] allowed for  the  nature
    of the screening interview.

 8. Ground (4) shows no misunderstanding or error of fact.  The distinction
    it seeks to draw is not well  rooted  in  the  evidence.   The  alleged
    kidnapping arose directly from a matter of "family honour", which would
    have been obvious to the police investigators.

 9. The judge's  adverse  credibility  findings  are  reached  for  several
    reasons.  Some of those have not been criticised,  and  the  criticisms
    which have been made are not upheld.  Those findings therefore are  the
    starting point for further conclusions on  humanitarian  protection  in
    terms of the country guidance.

10. The appellant's submissions on humanitarian protection put to the  FtT,
    with which the judge did not explicitly deal, were inextricably  inter-
    written throughout (paragraphs 1 - 49)  with  the  case  of  risk  from
    family and tribe, which she failed to establish.

11. An appellant may of course be reliable on some matters although not  on
    others; but there is no reason why credit should be given, even to  the
    lower standard, to the claims interspersed in  those  submissions  that
    she has no ID documents and  no  passport  (having  given  them  to  an
    agent), no  means  of  obtaining  such  documentation,  no  family,  no
    friends, and no prospects.  She has failed to establish  any  facts  by
    which she might be entitled to protection.

12. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set  aside,  to  the  extent
    required by ground (5), and is remade  by  dismissing  the  appeal,  as
    brought to the FtT, on all grounds.

13. The matter of anonymity was not addressed in the UT, so  the  direction
    made by the FtT is maintained herein.

[pic]
            20 November 2018
 Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman
