
                                [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11398/2019 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Determined without a hearing pursuant to rule|Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|34 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)|                              |
|Rules 2008                                   |On 24 September 2020          |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE blum


                                   Between

                                     JM
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Grounds of Appeal by J. Holt, Counsel, further
                    written submissions by I Palmer, Counsel, both
                    instructed by Barnes Harrild & Dyer Solicitors
For the Respondent:    written submissions provided by Ms H Aboni, Home
                    Office Presenting Officer


                          DECISION AND REASONS (P)


      1. This is an 'error of law' decision  determined  without  a  hearing
         pursuant to rule 34 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
         Rules 2008, paragraph 4 of  the  Practice  Direction  made  by  the
         Senior  President   of   Tribunals:   Pilot   Practice   Direction:
         Contingency arrangements in the First-tier Tribunal and  the  Upper
         Tribunal  on  19  March  2020,  and  paragraphs  4  -  17  of   the
         Presidential Guidance Note no 1 2020: Arrangements During the Covid-
         19 Pandemic, 23 March 2020.


      2. The appellant appeals against the decision of Judge of  the  First-
         tier Tribunal Malik (the judge) who, in a decision  promulgated  on
         20 January 2020, dismissed his appeal in respect of a  decision  by
         the respondent dated 8 November  2019  to  refuse  the  appellant's
         protection claim.

      3. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted by Judge  of
         the First-tier Tribunal O'Brien in a  decision  dated  19  February
         2020 but sent on 24 February 2020.

      4. On 30 April 2020  the  Upper  Tribunal  issued  directions  to  the
         parties authored by Upper Tribunal Judge Coker on  31  March  2020.
         The directions expressed Judge Coker's provisional  view  that,  in
         light  of  the  pandemic,  it  was  appropriate  to  determine  the
         questions (i) whether the judge's decision involved the  making  of
         an error of law and, if so, (ii) whether the decision should be set
         aside, without a  hearing.  On  13  May  2020  the  Upper  Tribunal
         received further submissions from the appellant in respect  of  the
         two questions. The appellant indicated that he was content for  the
         two questions to be determined without a hearing. On  19  May  2020
         the Upper Tribunal received further submissions from the respondent
         in respect of the two questions. No consideration was given by  the
         respondent to whether the two questions could be determined without
         a hearing or whether a hearing was acquired.

      5. Having regard to the overriding interest in rule 2 of the  Tribunal
         Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 to deal with cases justly and
         fairly,  and  having  considered  the  nature  of  the  appellant's
         challenge to the judge's decision (which does not involve the  need
         for further evidence to be considered), and having  regard  to  the
         relatively narrow focus of the legal challenge (relating to whether
         the judge failed to give adequate reasons or  resolve  an  material
         issue, and whether he failed to give sufficient reasons in  respect
         of his findings relating to the appellant's sur  place  activities)
         and the written submissions from both parties, and having satisfied
         itself that both parties have been  given  a  fair  opportunity  of
         fully advancing  their  cases,  the  Upper  Tribunal  considers  it
         appropriate, in  light  of  the  Covid-19  pandemic,  to  determine
         questions (i) and (ii) without a hearing pursuant to rule 34 of the
         Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.



Background

      6. The appellant is a male national of Iran of Kurdish  ethnicity.  He
         was born in 1986. He claims to have left Iran on 20 August 2015. He
         arrived in the UK 16 December 2017 and  claimed  asylum  four  days
         later.


      7. I summarise the appellant's claim. He was a supporter of  the  KDPI
         (the  Democratic  Party   of   Iranian   Kurdistan),   an   illegal
         organisation in Iran. He and his father worked as  kolbars  (cross-
         border labourers) transporting goods, including goods for the KDPI.
         On 19 August 2015 he and his father were ambushed  by  the  Iranian
         authorities after they delivered items to the Peshmerga/KDPI in the
         mountains. Gunshots  were  fired  and  everyone  ran  in  different
         directions. The appellant did not know that  his  father  had  been
         arrested. Instead of going home he went to the home of his father's
         cousin in a different village. He found out that  his  family  home
         had been raided and his father arrested, and that  the  authorities
         were looking for him. The appellant  left  Iran  illegally  seeking
         international   protection.   The   appellant   attended    several
         demonstrations against the Iranian regime in the UK and he  claimed
         to have a Facebook account  that  contains  posts  criticising  the
         Iranian regime. Although the respondent accepted that the appellant
         was Iranian, she rejected his account of the events that caused him
         to leave Iran. The appellant appealed the respondent's decision  to
         the First-tier Tribunal.


The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

      8. The judge considered a range of documents including the appellant's
         two statements dated 16 August  2019  and  16  December  2019,  and
         screenshots of a Facebook account said to belong to the  appellant.
         The judge heard oral evidence from the appellant. The judge was not
         satisfied that  the  appellant  gave  a  credible  account  of  his
         involvement with the KDPI or  of  being  ambushed  by  the  Iranian
         authorities, or that any  sur  place  activities  would  bring  the
         appellant to the adverse attention of the Iranian authorities.


      9. The judge held against the appellant his failure to mention in  his
         screening interview that he was a kolbar  or  a  supporter  of  the
         KDPI, and his failure to  mention  the  ambush.  Whilst  the  judge
         accepted that a screening interview was a preliminary interview and
         that an applicant cannot be expected to give the  full  reasons  of
         their claim, the judge did not find it reasonably likely  that  the
         appellant would have omitted reference to  the  ambush  and/or  his
         support for the KDPI ([21](a) and (e)). The judge  then  separately
         drew an adverse inference because  the  appellant  said  he  was  a
         shepherd when asked his occupation in his screening  interview  and
         failed to mention being a kolbar ([21](b)). The judge did not  find
         it reasonably likely that the appellant would  have  been  able  to
         escape in the manner claimed, or that the appellant would have gone
         to his cousin's home if the Iranian authorities  were  looking  for
         him, "given the sophistication of the Iranian authorities" [21(c)].
         Nor was the judge  satisfied,  "given  the  sophistication  of  the
         Iranian authorities", that the appellant's mother  would  not  have
         been taken for questioning.  The  judge  identified  three,  albeit
         minor, inconsistencies in the appellant's  account  of  the  ambush
         ([21](d)]). The judge  drew  an  adverse  inference  based  on  the
         appellant providing false details in  an  asylum  claim  lodged  in
         Germany (including claiming that he was an Iraqi national) and  his
         failure to lodge a protection claim in France.


     10. From [23] to [28] the judge considered the  appellant's  sur  place
         activities based on his participation at demonstrations against the
         Iranian regime and posts on a Facebook account  registered  in  the
         name 'JR'. At  [23]  the  judge  summarised  the  Country  Guidance
         decision in BA (Demonstrators in Britain - risk on return) Iran  CG
         [2011] UKUT 36 (IAC). At [24] the judge summarised the  appellant's
         account of attending several  protests  in  front  of  the  Iranian
         embassy in London as well as in Manchester  on  various  states  in
         2019. The judge stated there was no evidence of the details of  the
         demonstration or  where  they  occured  "other  than  his  say-so."
         Although the judge accepted that the  Facebook  posts  appeared  to
         show the appellant in a  group  with  other  people  there  was  no
         confirmation of the  particular  demonstrations.  The  judge  found
         there was nothing to suggest the Iranian authorities would even  be
         aware of the appellant's attendance and she cited the facts of MA v
         SSHD [2017] CSOH 134 and the Court of Session's conclusion that  it
         was reasonably open to the FTT to find that full disclosure  by  MA
         of his activities, when  questioned  by  the  Iranian  authorities,
         would not establish an interest in him sufficient  to  put  him  at
         risk of serious treatment.


     11. Although the appellant claimed that his name  was  'JR'  the  judge
         noted that the appellant's first statement dated 16 August 2019 was
         signed the name 'JM' and that it did not  mention  the  appellant's
         name being 'JR' [25]. Given that the  appellant  provided  a  false
         name and date of birth to the German authorities and given that  he
         was in contact with  his  family  in  Iran,  but  had  provided  no
         documentation to confirm his correct name [25], the judge  did  not
         find it reasonably likely that the appellant used his true identity
         in the Facebook posts such that they could be linked  back  to  him
         [26]. While  the  judge  accepted  that  there  were  a  number  of
         photographs on the Facebook posts that included the appellant there
         was nothing to suggest that the photographs had been taken  outside
         the Iranian embassy as claimed. The judge stated that there was  no
         evidence that the appellant made and operated the Facebook  account
         and she did not find it reasonably likely that he would  have  been
         able to prepare the posts himself given his  claimed  inability  to
         write [26]. Nor was the judge satisfied that the appellant provided
         evidence that the posts remained public (supra). The judge was  not
         satisfied that the appellant had a profile in  the  UK  that  would
         bring him to the attention of the Iranian authorities.


     12. Having found that the appellant would  not  face  a  real  risk  of
         serious ill-treatment even if he did  leave  illegally,  the  judge
         dismissed the appeal.


The challenge to the judge's decision

     13. The grounds of appeal, amplified in Mr Palmer's further submissions
         dated 12 May 2020, contend that  the  judge  failed  to  resolve  a
         submission made by counsel at the hearing that to be  a  kolbar  in
         Iran is an inherently illegal act and that it would be  unrealistic
         and unfair to have expected the appellant to disclose  illicit  and
         illegal activity at an early stage such as his screening interview.
         This matter was neither considered nor determined by the judge.  It
         was further claimed that the judge failed to consider and apply the
         decision in YL (Rely on SEF) China [2004] UKIAT 00145, and that the
         judge appeared to rely at  [21(c)]  on  unsourced  evidence  and/or
         personal knowledge not brought to the attention of the  appellant's
         representative in respect of her knowledge of the  'sophistication'
         of the Iranian security forces which,  in  the  judge's  view,  ran
         counter to the appellant's evidence on how  he  had  been  able  to
         escape. To the extent that the determination suggest the  appellant
         had not attended anti-Iranian government demonstrations,  this  was
         inconsistent with a wealth of evidence from the appellant  that  he
         had done so including his statements and the photographic  evidence
         contained in the downloaded Facebook posts.


     14. The grounds further contend that the judge failed  to  consider  or
         apply the findings of the Tribunal in HB  (Kurds)  Iran  CG  [2018]
         UKUT 00430 (IAC) and that she failed to  consider  that  even  low-
         level pro-Kurdish  activity  will,  if  discovered,  lead  to  ill-
         treatment. The judge's  conclusion  that  the  Iranian  authorities
         would be unaware of the appellant's  attendance  at  demonstrations
         was said to be inconsistent with the findings of the Tribunal in AB
         and Others (internet activity - state of evidence) Iran [2015] UKUT
         0257 (IAC). The grounds further contend  that  the  judge  was  not
         entitled to find that it was open to the appellant  to  delete  his
         Facebook account.

     15. In her written submissions the respondent maintains that the  judge
         gave adequate reasons for rejecting the appellant's claim of  being
         a KDPI supporter and working as a kolbar. The judge  gave  adequate
         reasons for finding that the appellant had not been involved in  an
         ambush and was of no adverse interest to the  Iranian  authorities.
         The judge's adverse credibility findings  were  open  to  her.  The
         judge properly directed herself according to the  relevant  country
         guidance cases on  sur  place  activities  and  she  gave  adequate
         reasons for finding that the appellant's activities would not bring
         him to the attention of the authorities such as to put him at  risk
         on return. The judge also gave adequate reasons  for  finding  that
         the Facebook activity would not be linked to the  appellant  as  it
         was not his true identity, there was no  evidence  that  the  posts
         were public, and the appellant had not made his own posts  but  had
         used other people's posts in order to bolster a false asylum claim.


Discussion

     16. There is no merit in the contention that the judge was not entitled
         to draw an adverse inference based on the  appellant's  failure  to
         mention his support for the KDPI  or  the  alleged  ambush  by  the
         Iranian authorities in his screening  interview.  These  were  core
         elements of the  appellant's  claim  and  the  judge  did  not  act
         unreasonably when expecting them  to  be  identified  even  at  the
         screening stage. The appellant relies on YL  (Rely  on  SEF)  China
         [2004] UKIAT 00145. Here the Tribunal stated, at [19]

           ... a screening interview is not done to establish in detail the
           reasons a person gives to support her claim for asylum. It would
           not normally be appropriate for the Secretary of  State  to  ask
           supplementary questions or to entertain elaborate answers and an
           inaccurate summary by an  interviewing  officer  at  that  stage
           would be excusable. Further the screening interview may well  be
           conducted when the asylum seeker is tired after a long  journey.
           These things have to  be  considered  when  any  inconsistencies
           between  the  screening  interview  and  the  later   case   are
           evaluated.

     17. The judge was however demonstrably  aware  of  the  nature  of  the
         screening interview. At [21(a)] the judge referred to the screening
         interview as a "preliminary interview" and acknowledged  that  "...
         an applicant cannot be expected to give the full reasons  of  their
         claim" at that stage. Given that the appellant's claim support  for
         the KDPI and the alleged ambush by the authorities went to the very
         core of his account, the judge was rationally entitled to hold that
         his failure to mention these factors  in  his  screening  interview
         could be held against him.


     18. The grounds further contend that the  judge  failed  to  resolve  a
         submission made by counsel at the hearing to the effect that  being
         a  kolbar  was  "inherently  an  illegal  act"  and  that  it   was
         unrealistic and unfair to expect the  appellant  to  disclose  such
         activity  at  the  screening  interview.  Although  counsel's  oral
         submission at the hearing does not appear to have been  accompanied
         by any independent supporting evidence relating to  the  nature  of
         kolbar activities,  the  appellant's  answers  in  his  substantive
         asylum interview  (see  in  particular  question  89  -  where  the
         appellant indicates that being a kolbar is always illegal, as  well
         as his answers to question 91 and 141), and his account of being  a
         kolbar in his August 2019 statement (see, for example, paragraphs 3
         and 6, where he describes a  kolbar  as  a  "border  smuggler")  do
         suggest that being a kolbar was  an  illegal  activity.  The  judge
         failed to engage with counsel's submission,  or  to  take  it  into
         account when drawing an adverse inference based on the  appellant's
         answer when asked about his occupation in the screening  interview.
         Whilst the judge may ultimately  have  been  entitled  to  draw  an
         adverse inference from the appellant's failure to mention that  his
         occupation was a kolbar, even if  that  occupation  was  inherently
         illegal, the judge's failure to engage  with  counsel's  submission
         and to consider whether the appellant should have been expected  to
         disclose a potentially illegal occupation at the preliminary  stage
         of his screening interview amounted to an error of law. I find  the
         judge's failure to engage with and to resolve  this  issue  renders
         unsafe the particular adverse inference drawn by the judge based on
         the appellant's answer to the question asked about  his  occupation
         in his screening interview.


     19. I am additionally concerned that there was no adequate  explanation
         and no  evidential  basis  for  the  judge's  conclusion  that  the
         appellant's account of the manner  of  his  escape  was  incredible
         based on the "sophistication of the Iranian authorities". The judge
         does not refer  to  or  identify  any  knowledge  or  authority  or
         supporting evidence relating to the sophistication of  the  Iranian
         authorities. The judge does not describe the manner of the  Iranian
         authorities'  'sophistication',  nor  does  she  explain  how  that
         'sophistication' would prevent the authorities from  capturing  the
         appellant when he ran away from an ambush in a mountainous area  in
         the early hours. Whilst it may ultimately have  been  open  to  the
         judge to reject the appellant's  description  of  his  escape,  the
         judge has failed to support her finding with adequate reasoning  or
         evidence.

     20. The appellant's further submissions contend that  the  judge  acted
         irrationally when concluding that  the  appellant  gave  materially
         inconsistent descriptions of the ambush. Whilst I acknowledge  that
         the differences in the description given by the  appellant  in  his
         substantive asylum interview, his August 2019 statement, and in his
         oral  evidence  at  the  hearing  are  relatively  minor  (a  point
         acknowledged by the judge herself at [21(d)]), I  cannot  say  that
         her conclusions were irrational. There were some differences in the
         descriptions given by the appellant and the judge cannot be said to
         have  acted  in  an  unreasonable  manner  in  drawing  an  adverse
         inference based on those, albeit relatively minor, differences.

     21. I must now consider whether the errors of law identified above  and
         relating to the appellant's account of events in Iran  require  the
         decision to be set aside. I have found that the judge was  entitled
         to draw an adverse inference against the appellant for his  failure
         to mention his claimed involvement with the KDPI  and  the  alleged
         ambush in his screening interview. I have also found that the judge
         was  entitled  to  draw  an  adverse  inference  based   on   minor
         differences in the appellant's account of  the  ambush.  There  has
         been  no  challenge  to  the  judge's  finding  that  the   Iranian
         authorities would have taken his  mother  for  questioning  if  the
         appellant was suspected of being involved with the KDPI. The  judge
         was additionally entitled to draw a general adverse inference based
         on the fabricated information given by the appellant to the  German
         authorities, and his failure to claim asylum  in  France.  However,
         even taking account of these adverse credibility findings  'in  the
         round', I cannot say that the errors of law that I have  identified
         would have made no material  difference  to  the  judge's  ultimate
         conclusion relating to the appellant's account of events in Iran. I
         am consequently satisfied that the errors of law  identified  above
         are material.

     22. I have additional concerns  with  the  judge's  assessment  of  the
         appellant's claimed sur place activities. The appellant produced  a
         number of screenshots from a Facebook page registered in  the  name
         'JR'. The judge was not satisfied that  this  was  the  appellant's
         true identity and  she  supported  this  conclusion  with  adequate
         reasons (see, for example, [25]; the judge was rationally  entitled
         to conclude that, if the appellant's identity was  as  claimed,  he
         would have been able  to  ask  his  family  in  Iran  to  send  him
         documentation confirming this).  Although  the  judge  stated  that
         there was no evidence that the  appellant  made  and  operated  the
         Facebook account [26] the judge did not actually make a finding  to
         this effect. Further, although the judge found that  the  posts  on
         the Facebook page may have  been  public  at  the  time  they  were
         printed, she was not satisfied  that  the  appellant  provided  any
         evidence that they were and remained public, the  burden  being  on
         him [26]. It is not however clear what further evidence could  have
         been provided and it is not apparent that this particular point was
         put to the appellant during the hearing. The judge also found there
         was no evidence that the appellant attended demonstrations  outside
         the Iranian embassy  "other  than  his  say-so."  This  is  however
         contrary to the  colour  photographs  in  the  appellant's  bundle,
         particularly at page 31 and  33  of  his  bundle,  which  show  him
         attending a demonstration outside the Iranian  embassy  in  London.
         Nor did the judge appear to consider the decision in AB and  Others
         (internet activity - state of evidence) Iran [2015] UKUT 0257 (IAC)
         or the more recent country guidance case  of  HB  (Kurds)  Iran  CG
         [2018] UKUT 00430 (IAC), which indicated that the  authorities  may
         well ask Kurdish individuals about their Internet activity (AB,  at
         [457]) at the airport.


     23. For the above reasons I am satisfied that the judge's  decision  is
         unsafe and must  be  set  aside  in  its  entirety.  Under  Part  3
         paragraph 7.2(b) of the Upper Tribunal Practice Statement of the 18
         June 2018 a case may be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal if  the
         Upper Tribunal is satisfied that:

              a) the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before
                 the  First-tier  Tribunal  of  a  fair  hearing  or  other
                 opportunity for  that  party's  case  to  be  put  to  and
                 considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or


              b)  the nature or extent of any judicial fact  finding  which
                 is necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be
                 re-made is such that,  having  regard  to  the  overriding
                 objective in rule 2, it is appropriate to remit  the  case
                 to the First-tier Tribunal.

     24. I have determined that the  judge's  conclusions  relating  to  the
         issue of the appellant's credibility are unsafe. The appeal will be
         remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  so  that  a  new  fact-finding
         exercise can be undertaken. It will be for the First-tier  Tribunal
         to determine the most appropriate mode of hearing the appeal.


Notice of Decision

The making of the First-tier Tribunal's  decision  involved  the  making  of
errors on points of law and is set aside.

The case is remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal to  be  decided  afresh
by a judge other than judge of the First-tier Tribunal Malik.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  in
this appeal is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.  This
direction applies both to the appellant and to the  respondent.  Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


D.Blum

Signed

Upper Tribunal  Judge  Blum                                            Date:
    22 September 2020


