
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11921/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 25 April 2019                              |On 7 May 2019                 |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM


                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                   mr k t
                       (anonymity direction continued)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr T Bobb, Solicitor Aylish Alexander Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   I shall refer to the Respondent as "the  Appellant"  as  he  was  known
    before the First-tier Tribunal.

2.   The FTT made a direction to anonymise the Appellant. This  order  shall
    continue to protect the identity of the Appellant's children.



The background

3.   The Appellant is a citizen of Turkey. His date of birth is 18  February
    1983.  He came to the UK lawfully in 2001.  In 2005 he was convicted of
    road traffic offences and sentenced to eight weeks'  imprisonment.   He
    was convicted of further road traffic offences  in  December  2006  and
    sentenced to eighteen months.  On 26 June  2013  he  was  convicted  of
    perverting the course  of  justice  ("the  trigger  offence").  He  was
    sentenced to 30 months' imprisonment.

4.   The circumstances of the trigger offence can  be  understood  from  the
    sentencing judge's comments. There were two Defendants  in  that  case.
    There was an incident where an innocent bystander was shot through  the
    hand and both Defendants played an important part in getting the gunman
    out of the  jurisdiction.    The  First  Defendant  was  sentenced  for
    possession of a firearm. He was sentenced  to  5  years.  However,  the
    sentencing judge was satisfied  that  the  Appellant  did  not  play  a
    leading role in this.   They were  both  convicted  of  perverting  the
    course of justice and the sentencing judge  found  that  the  Appellant
    took a "lesser role".  He said, "I am satisfied with no  disrespect  to
    you that you are not, perhaps, as intelligent as [the co-Defendant] and
    you were not as involved in whatever the background  all  of  this  may
    have been".  However, the judge commented that he  had  done  a  "great
    disservice to the interests of justice".  He said that  he  aspired  to
    have  a  family  life.  The  Appellant  pleaded  guilty  at  the  first
    opportunity.  The sentencing judge noted that he is unlikely to trouble
    the courts again.

5.   Following conviction the Secretary of State made  a  deportation  order
    on 12 February 2016. The order was made pursuant to s 5(1) of the  1971
    Act  because  the  respondent  considered  the  Appellant   liable   to
    deportation because deportation is conducive to the  public  good  (s.3
    (5) of the 1971 Act). In accordance with s32 (4) of the UK Borders  Act
    2007, for  the  purpose  of  section  3(5)(a)  of  the  1971  Act,  the
    deportation of a foreign criminal is  conducive  to  the  public  good.
    Section 35 (5) of the 2007 Act states that the Secretary  must  make  a
    deportation  order  in  respect  of  a  foreign  criminal.  It  is  not
    challenged that the Appellant is a foreign criminal.

6.   The Appellant  appealed  on  human  rights  grounds.   His  appeal  was
    allowed by Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  ("FTT")  S  L  L  Boyes
    following a hearing on 13 December 2018.  The decision was  promulgated
    on 12 February 2019.  The appeal was allowed under  Article  8  of  the
    1950 Convention on Human Rights. It was dismissed on protection grounds
    and under Article 3 and on humanitarian protection grounds.  The  judge
    found that the Appellant was not a danger to the community  in  respect
    of  certification  under  Section  72  because  he  had  rebutted   the
    presumption, however he concluded that he  would  not  be  at  risk  on
    return to Turkey.  There is no cross-challenge made by the Appellant.

7.   The Secretary of State was granted permission to appeal by FTT Judge  S
    P J Buchanan on 7 March 2018, thus the matter came before me to  decide
    whether the judge had erred in allowing the appeal under Article 8.



The decision of the FTT

8.   Much of the decision of the judge of the FTT  is  not  material  to  my
    decision because it relates to the  Appellant's  protection  claim  The
    Appellant's human rights case relied on his relationship  with  HP  and
    their British citizen children, LT (date of birth 10 January 2009)  and
    E (date of birth 17 May 2018).   The  judge  found  that  there  was  a
    genuine and subsisting  relationship  between  the  Appellant  and  his
    partner and children.   The  Appellant  relied  on  the  report  of  an
    independent social worker, Mr Ali Khan, of 10 December 2018. The  judge
    recorded his experience at paragraph 96 of the decision; namely that he
    was a qualified social worker and had practised  for  28  years.    The
    judge noted that the focus of the report related to the child L and  he
    concluded at paragraph 98 that he attached "significant weight" to this
    evidence.  The judge stated as follows at paragraph 98: -

         "... The information provided by [L] under such conditions provides
         compelling evidence that the Appellant has a genuine and subsisting
         relationship with [L].   Whilst  the  Appellant  is  not  presently
         residing within the family home because of his bail conditions,  on
         the basis of the oral evidence before me, when read  together  with
         the independent social work report, I am  entirely  satisfied  that
         the Appellant has always played an integral part in the  upbringing
         of his children on a day to day basis and that he continues  to  do
         so.  This includes taking [L] to  school  each  day  and  attending
         parents evenings, as well as facilitating her attendance at  extra-
         curricular school activities and social events and taking  her  out
         for recreational activities."

9.   The judge went on to conclude at paragraph 100  of  the  decision  that
    the social worker provided "compelling  evidence"  that  the  Appellant
    enjoyed a genuine and subsisting relationship with his  children.   The
    judge went on to consider the children's best interests  in  accordance
    with ZH (Tanzania) [2011] UKSC 4. He concluded at paragraph 107 that it
    would be in L's best interests to remain in the UK growing up with both
    parents, whereas in E's situation  because  he  is  still  a  baby  his
    interests would be met wherever he was residing as long as he continued
    to have the day-to-day involvement of both parents. L  was  at  school.
    Neither child had lived in Turkey. They had a number of relatives  here
    in the UK with whom L enjoyed a close relationship.

10.  The judge went on to  consider  "the  public  interest  considerations"
    between paragraphs 110 to 117.  He concluded that there was a low  risk
    of the Appellant reoffending.  He said that he had committed a  serious
    offence.  He had helped a dangerous gunman to evade  justice  and  took
    into account the judge's sentencing comments.

11.  At paragraphs 118 and 119 the judge directed  himself  on  the  law  in
    relation to KO and the test to  be  applied.   He  went  onto  consider
    unduly harsh and the context of separation of the family. At  para  122
    he set out the following parts of the social worker's report;

         [L] has not experienced life in Turkey and there are no significant
         or in fact any family networks that either she or the parents  have
         identified there.  In the event that  the  father  is  deported  to
         Turkey it is unlikely that [L] and [I's] mother  will  be  able  to
         meet their needs as effectively as both parents are able to at  the
         moment.

         [L] will experience her father's absence as a betrayal of trust  on
         is part and she will likely blame him for  being  absent  from  her
         everyday life.

         [Mr T] is a father who is emotionally  available  to  both  of  his
         children.  This means that the impact of removal will be  extremely
         traumatic for [L].  She has missed him enormously in the past  when
         he has been  absent  form  [sic]  the  family  home  or  unable  to
         accompany them on holiday.  The shared experiences of  family  life
         that make  for  a  childhood  and  in  [L's]  [sic]  case  a  happy
         childhood, will be missing for want of the father in  both  of  the
         children's lives.

         Without the guidance and support from the father it is likely  that
         [L's] education will suffer and arrangements for meeting the  daily
         needs of both the children on  her  own  will  become  an  enormous
         challenge for the mot.  Both children are tied emotionally to their
         father.  [L] more completely than her young brother with  whom  the
         process of forming a secure attachment is just beginning.

         [L] will feel the absence of her father on a daily basis  and  will
         pine for him; probably quietly and as at present she is unlikely to
         share the more painful aspects of this separation with anyone.   It
         is unlikely that she will ever get over this painful event  and  it
         will remerge [sic] as a painful and intrusive memory  as  she  goes
         into her adolescence.

         The outcome for [L] will not be a positive one  and  her  education
         and ability to form trusting relationships  is  likely  to  suffer.
         She is deeply affected as it is with the situation that her  father
         and the family find themselves  in.   In  the  event  that  [L]  is
         separated from her father in an involuntary and irreversible manner
         the damage to her educational and  emotional  development  will  be
         profound and she  will  suffer  significant  harm.   [L]  tends  to
         internalise  her  difficulties  and  does  not  have  the  complete
         emotional resources to be able to deal with the permanent  loss  of
         her father form her daily life.'"

    The judge found, at paragraph 125, that both children could visit their
    father in Turkey and L  could  have  telephone  contact  with  him  and
    contact him via social media.  However, deportation would prevent  face
    to face daily contact taking place whilst  they  are  growing  up.  The
    judge found  that  E  was  too  young  to  use  electronic  methods  to
    communicate with his father  and  that  deportation  "would  result  in
    severance of any meaningful contact with his father other  than  during
    occasional visits" which the judge found would be a poor substitute for
    both parents having day to day involvement with their upbringing.   The
    judge considered that the Appellant would be excluded for 10 years  and
    that he would miss much of E's early development and the  period  would
    span the rest of [L's] childhood and teenage years".  The  judge  found
    that it was clear from the evidence from  the  school  and  the  social
    worker that the Appellant's  involvement  in  L's  life  is  "of  great
    significance"  to  her  and  that  separation  from  him  when  he  was
    imprisoned was "very disturbing for  her  and  is  having  an  ongoing,
    significantly deleterious effect upon her  emotional  well-being."  The
    judge, at paragraph 127 found that the "absence of the  Appellant  from
    the children's lives on a day  to  day  basis  would  have  an  ongoing
    significant effect on their wellbeing and would be likely to cause them
    significant emotional harm." He considered that the absence  would  not
    be short lived and that would mean for L until she reached majority and
    for E "this would mean that  he  would  have  no  real  opportunity  to
    properly bond with his father during his early formative years"

The Legal Framework

12.  "117C Article 8: additional considerations in cases  involving  foreign
    criminals

         (1)   The  deportation  of  foreign  criminals  is  in  the  public
             interest.

         (2)  The more serious the offence committed by a foreign  criminal,
             the greater is the  public  interest  in  deportation  of  the
             criminal.

         (3)  In the case of a foreign  criminal  ('C')  who  has  not  been
             sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years  or  more,
             the public interest requires C's deportation unless  Exception
             1 or Exception 2 applies.

         (4)  Exception 1 applies where-

             (a)      C has been lawfully resident in  the  United  Kingdom
                  for most of C's life,

             (b)      C is socially and culturally integrated in the United
                  Kingdom, and

             (c)      there would be  very  significant  obstacles  to  C's
                  integration into the country to which C is proposed to  be
                  deported.

         (5)  Exception 2 applies where  C  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
             relationship with a  qualifying  partner,  or  a  genuine  and
             subsisting parental relationship with a qualifying child,  and
             the effect of C's deportation on the partner or child would be
             unduly harsh.

         (6)  In the case of a foreign criminal who has been sentenced to  a
             period of imprisonment of at  least  four  years,  the  public
             interest requires deportation unless there are very compelling
             circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions  1
             and 2.

         (7)  The considerations in subsections (1) to (6) are to  be  taken
             into account where  a  court  or  tribunal  is  considering  a
             decision to deport a foreign criminal only to the extent  that
             the reason for the decision was the offence  or  offences  for
             which the criminal has been convicted."

13.  "Deportation and Article 8

         A398.    These rules apply where:

                (a)    a foreign criminal liable to deportation claims  that
                    his  deportation  would  be  contrary  to   the   United
                    Kingdom's obligations  under  Article  8  of  the  Human
                    Rights Convention;

                (b)    a foreign criminal applies for  a  deportation  order
                    made against him to be revoked.

         398. Where a person claims that their deportation would be contrary
                to the UK's obligations under Article 8 of the Human  Rights
                Convention, and

                (a)     the  deportation  of  the  person  from  the  UK  is
                    conducive to the public good and in the public  interest
                    because they have been convicted of an offence for which
                    they have been sentenced to a period of imprisonment  of
                    at least 4 years;

                (b)     the  deportation  of  the  person  from  the  UK  is
                    conducive to the public good and in the public  interest
                    because they have been convicted of an offence for which
                    they have been sentenced to a period of imprisonment  of
                    less than 4 years but at least 12 months; or

                (c)     the  deportation  of  the  person  from  the  UK  is
                    conducive to the public good and in the public  interest
                    because, in the view of the Secretary  of  State,  their
                    offending  has  caused  serious  harm  or  they  are   a
                    persistent offender who shows a particular disregard for
                    the law, the Secretary of State in assessing that  claim
                    will consider whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and,
                    if it does not, the public interest in deportation  will
                    only be outweighed by other factors where there are very
                    compelling circumstances over and above those  described
                    in paragraphs 399 and 399A.

         399. This paragraph applies where paragraph 398 (b) or (c)  applies
                if -

                (a)    the person has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
                    relationship with a child under the age of 18 years  who
                    is in the UK, and

                    (i)    the child is a British Citizen; or

                    (ii)   the child has lived in the UK continuously for at
                        least the 7 years immediately preceding the date of
                        the immigration decision; and in either case

                        (a)    it would be unduly harsh for  the  child  to
                             live in the country to which the person  is  to
                             be deported; and

                        (b)    it would be unduly harsh for  the  child  to
                             remain in the UK without the person who  is  to
                             be deported; or

                (b)    the person has a genuine and subsisting  relationship
                    with a partner who is in the UK and is a British Citizen
                    or settled in the UK, and

                    (i)    the relationship was formed at a  time  when  the
                        person (deportee) was in the UK lawfully and  their
                        immigration status was not precarious; and

                    (ii)   it would be unduly harsh for that partner to live
                        in the  country  to  which  the  person  is  to  be
                        deported, because of compelling circumstances  over
                        and above those described  in  paragraph  EX.2.  of
                        Appendix FM; and

                    (iii)  it would be unduly  harsh  for  that  partner  to
                        remain in the UK without the person who  is  to  be
                        deported."

Application of the Legislation and the Immigration Rules

14.  In KO (Nigeria) v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  [2018]
    UKSC 53, Lord Carnwath (giving  the  judgment  of  the  Supreme  Court)
    analysed the exception, based on the  deportee's  relationship  with  a
    qualifying child, in Section 117C(5) NIAA 2002 and paragraph 399(a) IR.
     At [15], he explained that he started from the  presumption  that  the
    provisions were intended to be consistent with the  general  principles
    relating to the "best interests" of children, including  the  principle
    that "a child must not be blamed for matters for which he or she is not
    responsible, such as the conduct of a parent" (see Zoumbas v  Secretary
    of State for the Home Department [2013]  UKSC  74  per  Lord  Hodge  at
    [10]).  He concluded that the exception was self-contained and  so,  in
    deciding whether or not it applied,  the  decision  maker  should  only
    consider the factors specified and disregard the degree of  seriousness
    of the parental offending and other public interest considerations  (at
    [20]-[23]).

15.  Lord Carnwath gave guidance on the meaning of unduly harsh at [23]:-

         "On the other hand the  expression  'unduly  harsh'  seems  clearly
         intended to introduce a higher hurdle than that of 'reasonableness'
         under section 117B(6), taking account of the public interest in the
         deportation of foreign criminals. Further the word 'unduly' implies
         an element of comparison. It assumes that there is a 'due' level of
         'harshness', that is a level which may be acceptable or justifiable
         in the relevant context. 'Unduly' implies  something  going  beyond
         that level. The relevant context is that set  by  section  117C(1),
         that  is  the  public  interest  in  the  deportation  of   foreign
         criminals. One is looking for a degree of  harshness  going  beyond
         what would necessarily be involved for any  child  faced  with  the
         deportation of a parent. What it does not require in my  view  (and
         subject to the discussion of the cases in the next  section)  is  a
         balancing of relative levels of severity of the  parent's  offence,
         other than is inherent in the  distinction  drawn  by  the  section
         itself by reference to length of sentence.  Nor  (contrary  to  the
         view of the Court of Appeal in IT (Jamaica) v  Secretary  of  State
         for the Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ  932,  [2017]  1  WLR  240,
         paras 55, 64) can it be equated with a requirement  to  show  'very
         compelling reasons'. That would  be  in  effect  to  replicate  the
         additional  test  applied  by  section  117C(6)  with  respect   to
         sentences of four years or more."

16.  Lord Carnwath cited with approval  the  guidance  given  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal in MK (Sierra  Leone)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2015] UKUT 223:-

         "...  'unduly  harsh'   does   not   equate   with   uncomfortable,
         inconvenient, undesirable or merely difficult.  Rather, it poses  a
         considerably more elevated threshold.   "Harsh"  in  this  context,
         denotes something severe,  or  bleak.   It  is  the  antithesis  of
         pleasant or comfortable.   Furthermore, the addition of the  adverb
         'unduly' raises an already elevated standard still higher".

17.  The Upper Tribunal has recently considered KO in  RA  (s.117C:  "unduly
    harsh"; offence: seriousness) Iraq [2019] UKUT 00123 (IAC) and  decided
    that unduly harsh in the context of Section 117C(5) does not mean  that
    the test includes the way in  which  the  Upper  Tribunal  applied  the
    formulation to the facts of the case before it in  MK  (Sierra  Leone).
    As a result of KO the position is in determining whether exception 2 in
    Section  117C(5)  applies  a  court  is  not  to  have  regard  to  the
    seriousness of the offence committed by the person  who  is  liable  to
    deportation.  However, as concluded in RA the expression "unduly harsh"
    sets a high threshold.  In this context  the  Upper  Tribunal  rejected
    submissions that the Upper Tribunal  was  obliged  to  adopt  the  same
    approach as MK (Sierra Leone) to children aged at or around 7 and  said
    in respect of this as follows:-

         "14. We reject these submissions.  Although the  application  of  a
             legal test to a particular set of  facts  can  sometimes  shed
             light on the way in which the test falls to be applied, it  is
             the test that matters.  If this were not so,  everything  from
             the  law  of  negligence  to   human   rights   would   become
             irretrievably mired in a search for factual precedents.

         15.  What might at first appear to be hard-edged findings  of  fact
             often turn out to be evaluative assessments.  On analysing the
             above passages from MK (Sierra Leone), that  is  the  position
             here.  The Upper Tribunal's conclusion that  children  aged  7
             are at a 'critical stage of their  development'  was  such  an
             assessment, based on the facts  before  it.  It  was  not  the
             laying bare of an obvious fact, of which any  other  court  or
             tribunal must take 'judicial notice'.  One could  envisage  an
             equally valid argument that a child of 2 or 3 is at a critical
             stage of  its  development;  or  a  child  at  or  approaching
             puberty, and so on.  Childhood is a developmental  progression
             towards becoming an adult.

         ...

         17.  As can be seen from paragraph 27 of KO (Nigeria), the test  of
             'unduly harsh' has a dual aspect.  It is not  enough  for  the
             outcome to be 'severe' or  'bleak'.   Proper  effect  must  be
             given to the adverb 'unduly'.   The  position  is,  therefore,
             significantly far removed from the test  of  'reasonableness',
             as found in section 117B(6)(b)."

Submissions

18.  I heard  submissions  from  Mr  Kotas  who  relied  upon  the  skeleton
    argument of 21 March 2019.  He accepted that  the  judge  gave  correct
    self-direction  at  paragraphs  118  and  119.   The  thrust   of   the
    submissions was that the judge did not identify how the evidence before
    the judge established unduly harsh.  Mr Kotas submitted that the  judge
    relied quite heavily on the social  worker's  evidence,  but  that  the
    conclusions of the  social  worker  on  which  the  judge  relied  were
    speculative, for example, the  judge  at  paragraph  122  set  out  the
    conclusions of the social worker that the impact  of  separation  on  L
    would be irreversible. The conclusion is speculative. In any event, the
    evidence of the social worker does  not  establish  that  the  elevated
    standard is met.  The consequences identified do  not  amount  to  more
    than  the  normal  consequences  of  deportation  where  children   are
    concerned. Mr Kotas submitted  that,  at  paragraph  98  of  the  FTT's
    decision, where the judge indicated he attached significant  weight  to
    the social worker's report, this was in the context  of  whether  there
    was a genuine and subsisting which was an issue  before  the  FTT.  The
    judge did not have regard to how the family coped  when  the  Appellant
    was in custody for a period  of  fifteen  months,  which  represents  a
    material omission.  Whilst the evidence may not have been challenged by
    the presenting office before the FTT, it was incumbent on the judge  to
    appraise the issue for himself, and in any event, what is identified by
    the social worker in his report is not capable of meeting the  elevated
    threshold.

19.  I heard submissions from Mr Bobb. There was no Rule 24  response.    He
    submitted that unduly harsh is not a fixed test. It  is  fact-specific.
    What may be the ordinary consequences of deportation for one family may
    not be for another.   Mr  Bobb  referred  to  the  vast  and  extensive
    experience of the social worker. He submitted that there will always be
    a degree of speculation because the impact of deportation is a forward-
    looking test.  However, the conclusions of the social  worker  are  not
    perverse or fanciful. The judge was entitled to attach  weight  to  his
    opinion.  L is an emotionally vulnerable child.

Conclusions

20.  The social worker's conclusions were far reaching. He  interviewed  the
    children and parents together and separately. He considered the  impact
    of deportation (page 55, Appellant's bundle). He  concluded  (page  57,
    Appellant's bundle) that ... "it is unlikely that  [L]  will  ever  get
    over this painful  event  and  it  will  re-emerge  as  a  painful  and
    intrusive memory as she goes into her adolescence." He  concluded  that
    "the outcome for [L] will not be a positive one and her  education  and
    ability to form trusting relationships is  likely  to  suffer.  She  is
    deeply affected as it is with the situation that  her  father  and  the
    family find themselves in. In the event that [L] is separated from  her
    father in an involuntary and irreversible  manner  the  damage  to  her
    educational and emotional development will be  profound  and  she  will
    suffer significant harm. [L] tend to internalise her  difficulties  and
    does not have the complete emotional resources to be able to deal  with
    the permanent loss of her father from her daily life"

21.  The judge was entitled to attach weight to the  report  of  the  social
    worker.  There was no issue about the timeliness of the service of this
    piece of evidence. If the  Secretary  of  State  took  issue  with  the
    conclusions reached, he should have mounted a challenge to it. Whilst I
    accept that some of the conclusions in the report, read  in  isolation,
    appear unsupported, it must be read in its entirety to  understand  the
    social worker's reasoning. I accept Mr Bobb's submissions that inherent
    to an assessment of future impact is a degree of speculation. Whilst  a
    qualified psychologist's opinion may be  capable  of  carrying  greater
    weight when assessing the emotional wellbeing of a child than that of a
    social worker, there was no persuasive argument  by  the  Secretary  of
    State before the FTT or UT that such evidence is not within  the  remit
    of a qualified and experienced social worker. What weight to attach  to
    this evidence was a matter for the judge.   The judge was  entitled  to
    attach significant weight to the evidence.  In  any  event,  the  judge
    accepted the evidence about  the  Appellant's  family  life.  The  sole
    source of this evidence was not the social worker's report.  The  judge
    attached weight to it  the  evidence  in  resolving  all  issues;  both
    whether there was a genuine and subsisting relation and when  assessing
    unduly harsh. I reject Mr Kotas' submission on this point.

22.  There were a number of matters relied on by the judge  which  I  accept
    amounted to nothing more than the normal  consequences  of  deportation
    and in isolation cannot  meet  the  elevated  test.  However,  what  is
    significant in this case is the  evidence  in  respect  of  the  eldest
    child, L and the cumulative effect of all the factors identified by the
    judge.  A fair assessment of the evidence about L,  including  that  of
    the social worker, described a particularly vulnerable  child  who  had
    experienced extreme difficulties following  the  incarceration  of  her
    father.  On meeting L, the social worker opined that "she presents as a
    serious child who rarely smiles, speaks in  a  low  subdued  voice  and
    appears worried" (page  50,  Appellant's  bundle).  The  social  worker
    conducted an exercise called "the three houses" with L and  the  result
    was a reversal of  the  more  normal  scenario  (see  p56,  Appellant's
    bundle).  Having taken it account all factors  cumulatively  the  judge
    was entitled to conclude that the elevated test in this case  had  been
    met. The grounds are a disagreement with the findings of the judge.

23.  In the case of Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  v  Garzon
    [2018] EWCA Civ 1225,  there  was  no  material  misdirection  and  all
    relevant  considerations  were  taken  into  account,  but   the   SSHD
    challenged the weight given by the FTT  to  various  factors,  and  the
    FTT's conclusion. I am mindful of what McFarlane LJ said  at  [28]  and
    [30]:

         "28. ... an appellate court must afford due deference  and  respect
         to the evaluation of an expert tribunal charged with  administering
         a complex area of law in challenging  circumstances  (per  Baroness
         Hale in AH (Sudan) v Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
         [2008] 1 AC 678 at paragraph 30) ...  There  is  no  error  of  law
         ...The appeal solely turns  on  the  attribution  of  weight.   The
         tribunal heard oral evidence ...

         "30. Whilst  another  specialist  tribunal  might  have  reached  a
         contrary conclusion, it is, in my view, not possible to  hold  that
         the FTT in the present case  arrived  at  a  conclusion  which  was
         insupportable on the evidence or otherwise perverse..."

24.  There is no error of law and the decision of the  judge  to  allow  the
    appeal under Article 8 is maintained.



Notice of Decision

25.  The grounds amount to a disagreement with the  findings  of  the  judge
    but do not properly identify an error of law.

26.  The decision of the  FTT  to  allow  the  appeal  under  Article  8  is
    maintained.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed        Joanna McWilliam                        Date 6 May 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam
