
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11499/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On the 24th October 2018             |On the 21st November 2018            |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     AJ
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Diwnycz, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Morrison, Counsel instructed on behalf of the
Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State appeals, with permission against the decision of
    the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on the 9th May 2018  in  which  the
    Tribunal allowed the appeal of AJ against the decision of the Secretary
    of State to refuse his human rights claim  and  the  decision  made  to
    deport him made on the 19th October 2017.

 2. I make a direction regarding anonymity under Rule 14  of  the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal  Rules)  Rules  2008.   Unless  and  until  a
    Tribunal or court directs otherwise the Appellant is granted anonymity.
     No report of these proceedings shall directly or  indirectly  identify
    him or members of his family.   This  direction  applies  both  to  the
    Appellant and to the Respondent.  Failure to comply with this direction
    could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

 3. Although the Secretary of State is the Appellant before the Tribunal, I
    will for ease of reference refer to him as the Respondent as he was the
    Respondent in the First-tier Tribunal.  Similarly I will refer to AJ as
    the Appellant as he was the Appellant before the First-tier Tribunal.

 The Background:

 4. The Appellant is a citizen of  Sri  Lanka.   He  appealed  against  the
    decision of the Respondent who, on the 19th October 2017,  refused  his
    human rights claim and had made a deportation order against  him  under
    section 5(1) of the Immigration Act 1971 on the basis that his presence
    in the UK is not conducive to the public good.

 5. The Appellant's history and relationship with his partner is set out in
    the papers.  The Appellant arrived in the United  Kingdom  in  November
    2000 and claimed asylum on 10 November of that  year.  His  application
    was refused on non-compliance  grounds  and  after  lodging  an  appeal
    against the decision, on 30 March 2001 the decision was maintained.  In
    October 2001 his appeal against the refusal of his protection claim was
    dismissed and on 24 October 2001 he became appeal rights exhausted.

 6. In 2009 he applied for a certificate of approval  to  marry  a  British
    citizen but that marriage never took place. There was one child of that
    relationship born in August 2009 who  was  a  British  citizen.  It  is
    common ground between the parties that the appellant has not  seen  the
    child since the beginning of 2013 (see paragraph 32 of the decision).

 7. On 24 March 2010 the appellant was granted leave to remain  in  the  UK
    outside of the rules.

 8.  The  appellant  has  a  number  of  criminal  convictions;  the  First
    conviction in 2003 was for a driving offence with  excess  alcohol  for
    which he was disqualified from holding or obtaining a  driving  licence
    for 12 months and received a community punishment order  60  hours.  In
    2006 he was convicted of an offence obtaining property by deception and
    was sentenced to a conditional discharge of 18 months. In 2007  he  was
    convicted of theft (in breach of the  conditional  discharge)  and  was
    sentenced to a conditional discharge for two  years.  In  2011  he  was
    convicted of battery and sentenced to a community order with the curfew
    requirement of two months and in January 2012 he was convicted of theft
    (shoplifting)  and  failing  to  surrender  to  custody   receiving   a
    conditional discharge of six months and ordered to pay  costs,  a  fine
    and victim surcharge.

 9. In December 2012 he was convicted  of  assault  causing  actual  bodily
    harm. The sentencing remarks are set out in the respondent's bundle  at
    K1. On 23 January 2013 he was sentenced for that offence to  12  months
    imprisonment.

10. Following his conviction at the Crown Court for  which  he  received  a
    total sentence of 12 months' imprisonment, he was served with a  notice
    of  liability  to  deportation  on  the  1st  March  2013.   His  legal
    representatives'  submitted  representations  dated  17th   June   2013
    alleging breaches of Article 3 and 8.

11. In 2015 the appellant began a relationship with A,  a  British  citizen
    and they became engaged to marry in 2016. They have one child, born  in
    2016 and at the time of the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal  was
    pregnant with their second child. They do not live  together  and  have
    separate addresses but they spend every  day  together.  The  appellant
    helps look after the child and feeds and changes the child.

12. The full reasons for that decision are set  out  in  a  letter  of  the
    Respondent dated 19th October 2017 (see Respondent's bundle).

13.  The  Appellant  appealed  against  that  decision  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  It was asserted in the Grounds of Appeal that to deport  him
    would be a breach of Articles 3 and 8 of the ECHR based on  his  family
    life with his partner and minor child and that the mother of his  child
    suffered from ill health and as a result would be unable  to  care  for
    the child as a single parent.

The Decision of the First-tier Tribunal:

14. The appeal came before the First-tier Tribunal on the 30th January 2018
    and the 25th April 2018.

15.  In a decision promulgated on the 9th  May  of  that  year,  the  judge
    allowed the appeal. Whilst the appellant had a child with the  previous
    partner, the judge found that he had no contact that child at last  saw
    her in 2013 (see paragraph11(b)).

16. In respect of his relationship with his partner, the judge  noted  that
    they had met in 2015 and became engaged in 2016. They had a child  born
    at the end of 2016 and she was pregnant with a second child.  They  did
    not live together but maintained separate addresses but spent every day
    together. The appellant helped to look after the child; he  would  feed
    and change the child. He recorded a paragraph 11 (l) that  his  partner
    had a history of addiction and low mood and that the  relationship  had
    helped her and improved her mood.

17. The judge considered his asylum claim, in  the  light  of  the  earlier
    claim that had been dismissed in 2001. At paragraphs 20 - 24 the  judge
    gave reasons as to why the appellant could not discharge the burden  of
    proof to establish that he was a refugee.

18. The judge noted that the focus on the case was  his  relationship  with
    his partner and child (see paragraph  32).  At  paragraph  33,  he  was
    satisfied that the appellant  had  a  parental  relationship  with  the
    second child whom we saw every day and spends most of the day with. The
    judge again set out that the appellant played with his  child  fed  him
    and he changed the child and thus the judge found that he had a genuine
    and subsisting relationship with him. He also recorded a  paragraph  36
    that the respondent accepted that  he  had  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship with his son. At paragraph 39 the judge stated  that  "the
    appellant's partner clearly struggled to cope  and  has  a  history  of
    difficulties. At the moment the appellant's son has the benefit of both
    parents." The judge went on to state "the interests of the  appellant's
    children will be served with the integrity of the family  unit  is  not
    challenged. It has long been settled that it  is  in  the  interest  of
    children to live with their parents."

19.  Having found that the children  had  a  close  relationship  with  the
    Appellant and in conclusion at [40] that "it is in the interests of the
    children to live in a nuclear family. In the  particular  circumstances
    of this case it would  be  unduly  harsh  on  the  appellant's  son  to
    separate him from the stabilising influence of the appellant. It  would
    be unduly harsh on the appellant's son to break up the home he has with
    both parents and force him to into  live  in  a  single-parent  family,
    particularly at the time when  their  family  is  expecting  to  expand
    within the next two months." He therefore found that the  exception  of
    paragraph 339  was  made  out.  At  paragraph  45  he  found  that  the
    appellant's partner would struggle to cope without  the  appellant  and
    that "he played a crucial role in parenting his  child".  At  paragraph
    [48] the judge found that the effect of the  respondent's  decision  is
    "unduly harsh on the appellant's partner  and  child  because  it  will
    break a fragile family unit in which the appellant is the most  capable
    person. The decision will force a British  citizen  infant  to  lose  a
    caring, active, father."

20. When considering Article 8, he found that the appellant had spent  most
    of his life in the UK having lived in the UK since 2000; his  home  was
    in the UK and he's  had  employment  there.  Considered  the  offending
    history at paragraph 49 he found that he not offended  since  2012  and
    that his offending was mostly at summary level  but  it  had  been  six
    years since he last offended. He made reference to the evidence stating
    that the appellant had disassociated himself with his  peers  that  had
    led to his offending behaviour. He made reference to the  appellant  as
    potentially vulnerable and that the effect of deportation  would  leave
    two British citizen children to be brought by vulnerable single  mother
    (although there was  only  one  relevant  child).  He  found  that  the
    appellant did not present is a risk of reoffending.

The Appeal before the Upper Tribunal:

21. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal  that  decision  and
    permission was granted on the 6th  July  2018  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Jackson for the following reasons:-

         "The grounds  of  appeal  are  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  has
         materially erred in failing to provide adequate reasons for finding
         that the appellant falls within the exceptions  to  deportation  in
         paragraph 399 (a) of the Immigration Rules in Section 117C  of  the
         Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002;  in  failing  to
         identify unduly harsh consequences on the children if the appellant
         were deported and in failing to attach  sufficient  weight  to  the
         public interest in deportation even if the  appellant  was  not  at
         risk of reoffending.

         It is arguable that the First-tier  Tribunal  has  failed  to  make
         adequate findings as to  why  it  would  be  unduly  harsh  on  his
         children (one of whom he has had no contact with since 2013 and the
         third had not been born at the time of the appeal) to remain in the
         United Kingdom without him. The passing  reference  to  the  mother
         struggling to cope alongside a description of the usual effects  of
         deportation of a parent is arguably insufficient to satisfy one  of
         the exceptions to deportation. It is  further  arguable  First-tier
         Tribunal has failed to  attach  sufficient  weight  to  the  public
         interest, attaching to much weight in the appellant's favour  to  a
         lack of risk of reoffending.  The  First-tier's  decision  contains
         arguable errors of law capable of  affecting  the  outcome  of  the
         appeal and permission to appeal is therefore granted."

22. The appellant was represented before the Upper Tribunal by Mr  Morrison
    of Counsel. The Secretary of State was represented by Mr Diwncyz.

23. I therefore heard submissions from both parties which are  set  out  in
    the Record of Proceedings.  These submissions will be incorporated into
    my consideration of whether or not the  grounds  demonstrate  that  the
    judge's decision involved the making of an error on  a  point  of  law.
    The Appellant had not provided a Rule 24 response but Mr Morrison  made
    oral submissions.  It is not necessary to set out  the  submissions  of
    each of the parties as I will set out the  relevant  aspects  of  those
    submissions when dealing with the grounds advanced  on  behalf  of  the
    Secretary of State and my consideration of those issues.

Discussion:

24. I remind myself I can only interfere with the decision of a judge if it
    has been demonstrated that there was an error of law.

25. The effect of the provisions relating to  the  deportation  of  foreign
    criminals is that by Section 32(4)  Parliament  had  decided  that  the
    deportation of foreign criminals is conducive to the public  good.   By
    Section 32(5), the Secretary of State is obliged to make a  deportation
    order subject to  Section  33.   Section  33  identifies  a  number  of
    exceptions, which if applicable, have the consequences that sub-Section
    32(4) and (5) will not apply.

26. On the present facts, the only exception relevant  is  whether  removal
    would breach his rights and those of his family members under the ECHR.



27. The Immigration  Rules  reflect  the  statutory  obligation  to  deport
    foreign criminals whilst recognising that there may be cases where  the
    making of a deportation order would be incompatible with Article 8 (see
    Rules 398, 399 or 399A).

28. The correct approach, where an appeal on human rights grounds has  been
    brought in seeking to resist deportation, is to  consider  whether  the
    Appellant is a foreign criminal as defined by Section  117D(2)(a),  (b)
    or (c).  If so, does he fall within  paragraphs  399  or  399A  of  the
    Immigration Rules and if not, are there compelling  circumstances  over
    and beyond those falling within paragraphs 399  or  399A  relied  upon,
    such  identification  to  be  informed  by  the  seriousness   of   the
    criminality and taking into account the factors in Section 117 and C.

29. On the facts of the case there is no dispute that the Appellant  was  a
    foreign criminal; he was not a British citizen and  by  reason  of  his
    offending history was properly characterised as someone  who  had  been
    convicted of an offence of at least 12  months  imprisonment  that  and
    therefore in accordance with paragraph 398 of  the  Immigration  Rules,
    the public interest required his deportation  unless  an  exception  to
    deportation applies (see decision letter at paragraph 28).

30.  Thus the issue before the judge  was  whether  he  could  fall  within
    paragraphs 399 or 399A.

31. The judge's findings at paragraph 31 demonstrated  that  he  could  not
    meet the requirements of paragraph 399A (relating to private  life)  or
    Exception 1.

32. Thus the issue turned on  paragraph  399(a).   That  section  reads  as
    follows:-

         "399 This paragraph applies if paragraph 398(b) or (c) applies if -

               a)  the  person  has  a  genuine  and   subsisting   parental
                  relationship with a child under the age of 18 years who is
                  in the UK, and

              i) the child is a British citizen or

             ii) the child has lived in the UK continuously for at least the
                 7 years immediately preceding the date of this  immigration
                 decision; and in either case

                      (a)  it would be unduly harsh for the child  to  live
                          in the country to  which  the  person  is  to  be
                          deported;

                      (b)  it would be unduly harsh for the child to remain
                          in the  UK  without  the  person  who  is  to  be
                          deported ..."

33. There was no dispute in the decision letter that the Secretary of State
    conceded that in the light of the child E (based on his residence  with
    his mother) that it would be unduly harsh for the child to live in  the
    country to which the Appellant states he is a citizen.

34. Therefore the judge was required to consider what was meant by  "unduly
    harsh  "in  the  context  of  the  law  and  the  public  interest  and
    importantly in the context of specific  factual  circumstances  of  the
    Appellant and the children.

35. On the morning of this hearing the  Supreme  Court  handed  down  their
    decision of KO (Nigeria) and others v Secretary of State for  the  Home
    Department [2018] UKSC 53 and  considered  what  was  correct  approach
    relating to what is meant by "unduly harsh" within the context  of  the
    legislation. It gave particular consideration to  paragraphs  from  the
    judgment of Laws LJ, with  whom  Vos  and  Hamblen  LJ  agreed,  in  MM
    (Uganda) v the SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 450 and the Upper Tribunal decision
    in MAB (USA)v SSHD [2015] UKUT 435. Both  parties  had   copy  of  that
    decision and were able to make any submissions that they wished to.

36. As the decision for the Supreme Court was not available to the judge he
    was not able to have the advantage of that  decision.  He  had  in  any
    event made no reference to  the  decision  in  MM  (Uganda)  or  direct
    himself in accordance with that decision.

37. I have therefore considered the decision of the FTTJ and  his  analysis
    in the light of the decision of the Supreme Court in KO (as cited).

38. There was no dispute in the decision letter that the Secretary of State
    conceded that in the light of the child E (based on his residence  with
    his mother) that it would be unduly harsh for the child to live in  the
    country to which the Appellant states he is a citizen.

39. The points raised in the grounds and relied upon by  the  Secretary  of
    State relate to  the  judge's  consideration  of  the  issue  of  undue
    harshness and the public interest and that the judge erred in law  when
    considering the issue of whether the removal of the Appellant would  be
    "unduly harsh". Mr Diwncyz, behalf of the respondent  relied  upon  the
    grounds. It was submitted that whilst it was accepted the appellant was
    in a relationship with a British partner and that  they  have  a  child
    together they did not reside together. He had  not  seen  his  previous
    child since early 2013 and the third child had not been  born.  However
    whilst the judge found that it was in the best interests of  the  child
    that he remained in close contact with  both  biological  parents,  the
    respondent submitted that it was well established that in a deportation
    context the requirement was far more stringent. In this respect it  was
    submitted that the judge had failed to  provide  reasoning  as  to  why
    paragraph 339 (a) had been met on the facts of the case.

40. In particular, it was asserted that  the  judge  had  referred  to  the
    appellant's "crucial  role"  at  paragraph  45  however  that  was  not
    consistent with paragraph 11 (l) in which the judge made  reference  to
    the appellant "playing with the child, feeds and changes the child" and
    that was described as "routine activities" and that it  fell  short  of
    meeting the high threshold of the unduly harsh consequences.

41. The grounds at paragraph 8 also stated that  there  was  no  "objective
    evidence or finding within the  body  of  the  determination  that  the
    appellant's continual presence in the United  Kingdom  is  required  to
    safeguard and protect the future of the  appellants  child  and  making
    that finding the judge erred in law."

42. Mr Morrison on behalf of the appellant  submitted  that  there  was  no
    legal error in the First-tier Tribunal's decision.  He  submitted  that
    the judge did address the legal issues and at paragraph  37  -  40  had
    dealt with the authorities and addressed the issues at paragraphs 37  -
    41 and also at paragraph 45 - 48 and paragraph 50. The  judge  had  not
    made any specific reference to the decision in MM  (Uganda)  which  had
    been the leading authority at  that  time  but  in  the  light  of  the
    decision of the Supreme  Court  and  in  particular  paragraph  23,  he
    submitted that the judge had found a degree of harshness  going  beyond
    that which would necessarily be involved, on the findings of fact. Thus
    Mr Morrison submitted that the judge had correctly analysed  the  issue
    despite not having the advantage of the Supreme Court's decision.

43. As to the facts found by the judge, he found that there was  a  genuine
    and subsisting relationship between the appellant and his child and  at
    paragraph 35 identified the issues (the  issue  of  unduly  harsh).  At
    paragraph 37 the judge made reference to the decision in  AJ  (Zimbabwe
    [2016] EWCA Civ 1012 and NA (Pakistan) [2016) EWCA Civ 662. Mr Morrison
    submitted that the judge applied law to the facts and at  paragraph  39
    found that the appellant's partner struggled to cope and had history of
    difficulties and that the appellant's  son  had  the  benefit  of  both
    appellants. He submitted that the judge considered the  best  interests
    of the children which he found to be for their best interests  to  live
    with both their parents. At paragraph 40 he found that it  was  in  the
    interests of the children to live in a nuclear family and that it would
    be unduly harsh for his son  to  be  separated  from  the  "stabilising
    influence of the appellant", and that "it would be unduly harsh on  the
    appellant's son to break up the family unit and forced him to live in a
    single-parent family, particularly at the time  when  their  family  is
    expecting to expand."

44. Mr Morrison also made reference to paragraph 45 in  which  the  genuine
    and subsisting relationship with his partner and child was set out  and
    that the judge found that the appellants partner would struggle to cope
    without the appellant and that he played a crucial  role  in  parenting
    the child. At paragraph 48 the judge had found it would be unduly harsh
    because it would break up a "fragile family unit which the appellant is
    the most capable person "and that the decision would "force  a  British
    citizen infant to lose a caring, active father."

45. When asked to identify the evidence  upon  which  those  findings  were
    made, Mr Morrison referred the  Tribunal  to  paragraph  11  (l).  That
    paragraph made reference to the mother having a  history  of  addiction
    and low mood. He also identified paragraph 33 where  the  judge  stated
    that the appellant had a parental relationship with his child  who  saw
    every day and spend most of the day with; he would feed the  child  and
    change the child and has a genuine subsisting relationship with him. At
    paragraph 40 he made reference to the appellant  having  a  stabilising
    influence on the appellant and that at paragraph 45  he  found  him  to
    play a crucial role in parenting. Those matters were  set  out  in  the
    decision but not referenced by any evidence set out in the papers.

46. He was able to take further instructions in relation  to  the  evidence
    and whilst the doctor's statement referred to the appellant and not the
    appellant's partner he identified that there was  a  witness  statement
    from the appellants partner dated 18 April 2018 which made a  reference
    to her having had a history of depression and having been in an abusive
    relationship. There was reference to having used alcohol and  that  she
    had had the support of the appellant. He  also  identified  an  earlier
    statement (in the bundle page 95 of a short statement dated 16  January
    2018) which although  did  not  make  reference  to  past  events  made
    reference to paragraph 15 to the appellant's relationship with his  son
    and that he was very attached to his father and that they had  a  great
    bond. He also made reference to the pregnancy notes and that she  would
    be in a vulnerable position. Thus he submitted  that  the  findings  of
    fact must have come from that evidence.

47. Mr Morrison submitted that at [39-40] he set out the best interests  of
    the children and therefore he submits the judge had in mind the correct
    test and balanced all the relevant factors.

48. I have carefully considered the parties submissions in the light of the
    determination of the First-tier Tribunal. In my judgement, the FTT  did
    not properly apply the relevant legal principles when  determining  the
    issues in this appeal relating to whether or not  it  would  be  unduly
    harsh for the child  to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  without  the
    Appellant.

49. In particular I consider that the judge failed to apply  the  necessary
    threshold. It is set out in the decision of the Supreme Court at  which
    reaffirmed the definition of "unduly harsh" from the earlier  decisions
    of  MK and MAB at paragraph [33], stating as follows:-

         "Whether the consequences of deportation will be 'unduly harsh' for
         an individual  involves  more  than  'uncomfortable,  inconvenient,
         undesirable,  unwelcome  or  merely  difficult   and   challenging'
         consequences and imposes a considerably  more  elevated  or  higher
         threshold.

         The consequences for an individual will  be  'harsh'  if  they  are
         'severe' or 'bleak' and they  will  be  'unduly'  so  if  they  are
         'inordinately' or 'excessively' harsh taking into  account  all  of
         the circumstances of the individual."  Although  I  would  add,  of
         course, that  'all  of  the  circumstances'  include  the  criminal
         history of the person facing deportation."

    Thus the question is whether the First-tier Tribunal  applied  that  in
    the context of the factual matrix of this particular Appellant and  the
    family's circumstances.  As the Supreme Court stated at  paragraph  23,
    the expression "unduly harsh" is intended to introduce a higher  hurdle
    than that of "reasonableness" under section 117B(6), taking account  of
    the public interest in the deportation of foreign criminals.

    The Supreme Court further stated at paragraph 23 as follows:-

         "Further the word "unduly" implies an  element  of  comparison.  It
         assumes that there is a "due" level of "harshness", that is a level
         which may be acceptable or justifiable  in  the  relevant  context.
         "Unduly" implies something going beyond that  level.  The  relevant
         context is that set  by  Section  117C  (1),  that  is  the  public
         interest in the deportation of foreign criminals.  One  is  looking
         for a degree of harshness going beyond what  would  necessarily  be
         involved for any child faced with the deportation of a parent. What
         it does not require in my view (and subject to  the  discussion  of
         the cases in the next section) is a balancing of relative levels of
         severity of the parent's offence other  than  is  inherent  in  the
         distinction drawn by the section itself by reference to  length  of
         sentence."

50. Whilst the judge expressly referred to the decision in AJ (Zimbabwe) at
    paragraph 37, earlier at paragraph 17 the  Court  of  Appeal  had  made
    reference to the case law relevant to the best  interests  of  children
    and that at paragraph 17 "these cases show that it would  be  rare  for
    the best interest  of  the  children  to  outweigh  the  strong  public
    interest in deporting foreign criminals. Something more than a  lengthy
    separation from a parent is required, even though  such  separation  is
    detrimental to the child's best interests."

51. Mr Morrison submitted that on the facts  of  this  appeal,  there  were
    additional factors which included  his  wife's  past  history  and  the
    medical condition of the Appellant's partner and the involvement of the
    Appellant in the care of the children.

52.  I have taken into account the decision of SSHD v AM  (Jamaica)  [2017]
    EWCA Civ1782 where at paragraph 22 the assertion made by the  judge  in
    that case the mother was not able  to  care  was  described  as  "self-
    interested speculation" on the part of that Appellant  and  that  there
    was no objective evidence from a neutral  third  party  for  example  a
    report from the ISW and/or any medical evidence. This was  referred  to
    at paragraph 89 of the respondent's grounds that there was no objective
    evidence that the appellant's presence was requited  to  safeguard  and
    protect the child. I asked Mr Morrison to identify for the Tribunal the
    evidence that was before the judge as the judge had made  no  reference
    to this evidence or the source of the  evidence  in  his  determination
    when reaching any findings. The written evidence  (in  the  appellant's
    bundle and in the respondent's bundle)  did  not  include  any  medical
    evidence in support of the appellant's partner's position. There was  a
    witness statement from her at page 92, referring to having  spent  time
    with him and  a  further  witness  statement  dated  16  January  which
    referred to the appellant's relationship  with  his  son  but  made  no
    reference to her circumstances. There  was  an  additional  handwritten
    statement which made reference to having had  depression  in  the  past
    (page 128) and at page 135 there is  a  reference  to  depression.  The
    antenatal  notes  at  page  93  make  reference  to  there   being   no
    safeguarding issues identified; there was an  up-to-date  statement  in
    April  2018  which  made  reference  to  having  been  diagnosed   with
    depression and an abusive relationship. However Mr Morrison  could  not
    refer me to any medical evidence or any detailed evidence in the papers
    that set out  the  circumstances  of  the  family  or  the  appellant's
    partner.

53. In my judgment the analysis of the evidence did not  identify  anything
    other than that which normally would be the position of a child who was
    separated from a father with whom he had a close relationship.  This is
    underlined by the fact that the phrase "unduly  harsh"  anticipates  an
    evaluation being undertaken as it is not just the nature and quality of
    the relationship because  paragraph  339(a)  requires  there  to  be  a
    genuine and subsisting relationship before considering whether it would
    be "unduly harsh". Whilst the judge made  reference  to  the  appellant
    playing a "crucial  role",  as  it  was  submitted  on  behalf  of  the
    respondent that is not consistent with the evidence of playing with the
    child, feeding and changing the child (see paragraph 11(l).  The  judge
    did not make any analysis of the evidence given and it is difficult  to
    see from the determination how he reached the overall findings when  he
    made no reference to any evidence to underpin those findings which  are
    relevant to the issue of "undue harshness".

54. I have therefore reached the conclusion that the decision does  involve
    the making of an error  on  a  point  of  law  for  those  reasons  and
    therefore the decision should be set aside. The decision which  related
    to the dismissal of the protection claim shall remain as  preserved  as
    there has been no cross-appeal on behalf of the appellant and the error
    of law identified relates to the human rights appeal (Article 8).

55. As to the re-making of the decision, the Appellant was not  present  at
    court. In the light of matters  referred  to  in  the  decision  (which
    previously included the necessity of an ISW report) and the birth of  a
    second child to the parties, it is necessary for further evidence to be
    provided by the parties which would  also  include  updating  oral  and
    documentary evidence. There has been a material change of circumstances
    since the hearing. Paragraph 10 of the FTTJ decision makes reference to
    evidence which was not provided that was relevant  to  any  adjustments
    for the appellant. That should also be  considered  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and the appellant's solicitors will be able to provide any  up
    to date evidence in this respect.

56. Consequently, I am satisfied  that  the  correct  course  to  adopt  in
    relation to this appeal namely that having found an error  of  law  and
    having set aside the decision, that it is one that should  properly  be
    re-made by way of a remittal to the First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  fresh
    hearing so that a decision can  be  made  on  the  available  evidence,
    including any change in the circumstances of the  parties  relating  to
    Article 8 and not the protection appeal.


Notice of Decision



57. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law and is therefore set aside.  It is  remitted  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed [pic]
                                Date 18/11/2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds


