
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: pa/11843/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 14th December 2017                         |On 22nd January 2018          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                                    [K H]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Karnik, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Miss Petterson, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of  Iraq  born  on  26th  April  1984.   The
    Appellant left Iraq by plane and flew to Turkey using his own  passport
    before making his way thereafter by air to  the  UK  arriving  on  10th
    April 2016 whereupon he claimed  asylum.   The  Appellant's  claim  for
    asylum was refused by Notice of Refusal dated 12th October  2016.   The
    Secretary of State had noted therein that  the  Appellant's  claim  was
    based upon a fear that if returned to Iraq he would  face  mistreatment
    due to his political opinion due to attending protests  and  conducting
    surveys regarding Kurdish rights.

 2. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Turnock sitting  at  Bradford  on  30th  March  2017.   A
    decision and reasons promulgated on 17th  April  2017  the  Appellant's
    appeal was dismissed on all grounds.

 3. On 3rd May 2017 Grounds of Appeal were lodged to  the  Upper  Tribunal.
    Those grounds asserted that

      i) that there as an erroneous finding of inconsistency in  respect  of
         the screening interview because an incomplete part  of  the  answer
         from the interview was cited by the judge;

     ii) that it was not open to the judge to  make  the  findings  made  in
         respect  of  the  surveys  that  the  Appellant  claimed  to   have
         undertaken;

    iii) that there was a failure to reach proper conclusions in respect  of
         the Appellant's level of  political  activity  and  engagement  and
         consequent future risk to him and

     iv) the Appellant had submitted substantial background country material
         to show that it was not only high profile individuals who  were  at
         risk on return but also activists like  him  especially  when  upon
         return he would continue to engage in such activities.

 4. On  6th  September  2017  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Mahmood  granted
    permission to appeal.  He considered that in respect of Ground 1 it was
    arguable that if the judge had considered the whole of  the  answer  in
    the screening interview then an adverse finding may not have been made.
     Similarly in respect of Ground  2  the  Appellant's  background  as  a
    claimed activist the reliance by him on extensive  background  material
    arguably required specific findings.  Whilst he did  not  restrict  the
    grant of permission he considered the remainder of the grounds did  not
    appear to be as strong.

 5. On 11th October 2017 the Secretary of State responded to the Grounds of
    Appeal under Rule 24.  The Respondent submitted that the Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal directed himself appropriately and that it would be
    argued that although the judge had potentially erred in not considering
    the  whole  of  the  answer  in  the  screening  interview,  when   the
    determination of the judge is considered as a whole  the  findings  are
    properly reasoned and sufficient to show that the Appellant is  not  at
    risk in the IKR.

 6. It is on that basis that  the  appeal  comes  before  me  to  determine
    whether or not there is a material error of law in the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.  The Appellant  appears  by  his  instructed
    Counsel Mr Karnik.  Mr Karnik is very familiar with  this  matter.   He
    appeared before the First-tier Tribunal.  He is also the author of  the
    Grounds of Appeal.  The Secretary of State appears by her  Home  Office
    Presenting Officer Miss Petterson.

Submissions/Discussion

 7. Mr Karnik contends there are errors in paragraphs  40  and  41  of  the
    judge's findings and as such the findings on credibility  made  by  the
    First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  are  flawed.   Mr  Karnik  relies  on  the
    authority of AJ (Angola) v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department
    [2014] EWCA Civ 1639  and  submits  that  significant  weight  must  be
    attached to the public interest, and  proportionality  and  exceptional
    circumstances have to be assessed through the lens of  the  Immigration
    Rules emphasising the burden is on the Secretary of State.   He  relies
    on paragraph 49.

         "There are two categories of case in which an identified  error  of
         law by the First-tier Tribunal or the Upper Tribunal might be  said
         to be immaterial: if it is clear that on the materials  before  the
         Tribunal  any  rational  Tribunal  must  have  come  to  the   same
         conclusion or if it is clear that, despite its failure to refer  to
         the relevant legal instruments, the Tribunal has  in  fact  applied
         the test  which  it  was  supposed  to  apply  according  to  those
         instruments."

 8. Mr Karnik submits that the conclusions of the First-tier Tribunal Judge
    cannot be taken from the evidence that was before the Tribunal and that
    the judge has failed to  give  proper  and  due  consideration  to  the
    Appellant's asylum interview.  He contends that that similarly  applies
    to the findings at paragraph 41 of the decision regarding the anonymity
    of the surveys.  Further he takes me to paragraph 48 that the judge has
    said

         "The country information provided by the Appellant has  established
         that there are risks in IKR but these appear to be primarily  faced
         by those in the media or who have a high profile."

    Mr Karnik points out that this is not the Appellant's case.   His  case
    was that he was an activist not just one who attended  meetings  but  a
    "prime mover."

 9. In response Miss Petterson indicates that what is  being  submitted  is
    essentially a disagreement and that the judge had  given  full  reasons
    and she refers me to paragraphs 24 onwards of the decision.  She points
    out that the judge made findings but did not accept that the  Appellant
    was the organiser or a person of high profile and that the findings  he
    made at paragraph 42 were ones that he was entitled to make.

10. She further points out that the survey answers are anonymous  and  that
    by themselves they are not a risk factor.  She submits  the  judge  has
    considered the basis of the whole of the  claim  and  was  entitled  to
    conclude in his findings that the Appellant had  exaggerated  his  case
    and that he was not the main organiser.

The Law

11.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

12. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings on Error of Law

13. A proper approach to credibility requires an assessment of the evidence
    and of the general  claim.   In  asylum  claims  relevant  factors  are
    firstly the internal consistency of the claim,  secondly  the  inherent
    plausibility of the claim and thirdly the consistency of the claim with
    external factors of the sought typically found in country guidance.  It
    is theoretically correct that a Claimant need do no more than state his
    claim but that claim still needs to be  examined  for  consistency  and
    inherent plausibility and in nearly  every  case  external  information
    against which the claim can be checked will be available.

14. Those factors appear to have been completely mirrored in this case.  It
    is the contention by Mr Karnik that the judge has erroneously found  an
    inconsistency between the  screening  interview  and  his  account.   I
    accept that there are inconsistencies here that may constitute an error
    but the question arises as to whether that error  is  material  to  the
    overall finding of the judge.  I am satisfied  that  it  is  not.   The
    decision has to be considered not just on the whole of  the  answer  of
    the screening interview but on the whole of the findings and  they  are
    well set out and properly reasoned.  The judge has gone on to  consider
    all of the evidence.  He has made findings that he was entitled to.

15. If as seems to be the case here on the materials  before  the  Tribunal
    the judge was entitled to come to the  conclusions  that  he  did  then
    submissions made by the Appellant amount to no more than  disagreement.
    Consequently it is necessary to look at  the  decision.   Part  of  the
    submissions made by Mr Karnik are that the judge erred in  his  finding
    that the Appellant was an organiser of the  protests.   The  judge  has
    analysed evidence that was before him.   The  judge  made  findings  he
    found   undermined   the   Appellant's   credibility   due   to   their
    inconsistency.  The judge heard the evidence.  These were  findings  he
    was entitled to make.  Mr Karnik submits that the judge's  findings  at
    paragraphs 40 and 41 are flawed.  I am satisfied that they are not  and
    whether a different judge would have come to a different conclusion  is
    not the issue that is before me.  The issue is whether or not the judge
    has materially erred in law and I am satisfied that in this instance he
    has not that he has made findings that he was  entitled  to  make.   In
    such  circumstances  the  submissions  amount  to  little   more   than
    disagreement.

16. For all the above reasons I am satisfied  that  there  is  no  material
    error of law disclosed in  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge.  The appeal is consequently dismissed.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge discloses  no  material  error
of law and  the  appeal  is  dismissed.   The  decision  of  the  First-tier
Tribunal Judge maintained.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris
