
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11878/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester CJC                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 21 January 2020                            |On 30 January 2020            |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PICKUP

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     H H
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                    Claimant


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Tan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Claimant: Mr S Ell, instructed by Lei Dat & Baig Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
(SI 2008/269), I make an anonymity direction.  Unless the Upper Tribunal or
a court directs otherwise, no report of these proceedings or any form of
publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the claimant.

 1. This is the appeal of the Secretary of State against  the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Ennals  promulgated  on  1  November  2019,
    allowing, on humanitarian protection  grounds,  the  claimant's  appeal
    against the decision of the Secretary of State of 6 May 2019, rejecting
    his  asylum  and  humanitarian  protection  claims  in  a   deportation
    decision.

 2. Designated Judge Woodcraft granted permission to appeal on 27  November
    2019. Although at the end of Judge Woodcraft's reasons he states,  "The
    grounds do not demonstrate any arguable error of  law  on  the  judge's
    part,"  I can only conclude that that was a typo on  Judge  Woodcraft's
    part and it is clear that the intention of Judge Woodcraft was to grant
    permission on the basis that the grounds were arguable that:

         "The appellant's father who had obtained a CSID in the  past  could
         do so again for the appellant.  It is arguable that the judge  gave
         insufficient reasons why the appellant could  not  be  assisted  by
         family members to obtain the necessary documentation.  All  grounds
         may be argued."

Error of Law

 3. For the reasons set out below I find there was an error of law  in  the
    making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal such that  it  should
    be set aside and remade in the First-tier Tribunal in  accordance  with
    the directions below.

 4. Mr Tan relies on two overlapping issues:  the findings in  relation  to
    the ability of the claimant to obtain a CSID either before or on return
    to Iraq, and the Article 3 findings set out at paragraph 23 upon  which
    the judge allowed the appeal.  In short the judge  concluded  that  the
    claimant would not be able to obtain a CSID on the basis that  he  does
    not have and was unlikely to be able to obtain one, because he does not
    have family in Baghdad who could accommodate him, did not speak Arabic,
    and there was no likely sponsor enabling him to rent  accommodation  or
    otherwise support him.

 5. The difficulty with the decision begins with  an  issue  that  was  not
    raised in the appeal grounds but is set out  in  paragraph  20  of  the
    decision.  The respondent had mistakenly accepted that  the  claimant's
    home area Basra was a contested area.  Pursuant to the country guidance
    case law extant at that time,  Basra  was  not  a  contested  area  and
    therefore there was no Article 15(c) risk. That  in  fact  remains  the
    situation following the most recent country guidance of SMO, KSP  &  IM
    (Article 15(c); identity documents) Iraq CG [2019] UKUT 00400 (IAC).

 6. It followed that the judge was proceeding on a basis having been misled
    by the respondent that the claimant would not be able to return to  his
    home area and relocation to Baghdad would have to be considered.   That
    by itself undermines the validity of the findings in paragraphs 21  and
    23 of the decision but, in any event, even without that difficulty  the
    judge simply accepts that the claimant could not get a  CSID.  However,
    it is clear from the  decision  that  the  judge  was  aware  that  the
    claimant's father and other family members had returned without him  to
    Iraq in 2017, apparently to obtain new Iraqi passports and ID cards, as
    well as to obtain treatment for their  daughter.   They  had  allegedly
    rented accommodation near the hospital some 100 Km from their home area
    Basra. It was said that the father did not believe that he could return
    to their home area because of his previous employment as an interpreter
    with British Forces.  He has been granted leave to remain in the United
    Kingdom because of that work for British Forces. However, it  is  clear
    that  the  father  and  the  family  members  did  not  experience  any
    difficulties in returning to Iraq without  documentation  and  then  in
    obtaining the necessary documentation whilst there.

 7. The judge at paragraph 17 was not persuaded even to the lower  standard
    of proof the claimant would face any serious harm on return due to  any
    association with his father.  What the judge did not consider  is  that
    the father and other family members with the documents  that  they  now
    have were obviously in a position to be able to assist the claimant  to
    obtain a CSID, either in the UK before returning to  Iraq,  or  shortly
    after arriving.  Mr Tan also pointed out that given that the father was
    able to return with  other  family  members  in  2017  and  obtain  the
    necessary documentation, he could return on a temporary basis with  the
    claimant to assist him to obtain that CSID  documentation.   The  judge
    accepted at paragraph 21 that theoretically  the  father  could  return
    with him but concluded it was not a reasonable assumption to make given
    the father's leave to remain in the UK, the reason for its grant in the
    first place, and the needs of his three siblings, two of whom  were  at
    college and another disabled in residential care.  Evidently, the judge
    did not consider a temporary return or, as stated above, the assistance
    the family could provide within the UK by helping the claimant with the
    necessary information to enable him to obtain his CSID and passport  or
    other travel document from the Iraqi Consulate in the UK.   The  recent
    country guidance has confirmed that which previous case authority held,
    that it remains possible to  obtain  the  necessary  documentation  and
    travel  documentation  from  the  Iraqi  Consulate  in  the  UK  before
    returning to Iraq.

 8. In the light of those matters, I find  that  the  judge  erred  in  the
    assessment as to whether the claimant would be able to  obtain  a  CSID
    within a reasonable time of returning to Iraq.  It is partly the  fault
    of the respondent in suggesting that he could not return  to  the  home
    area of Basra on the basis that it was a contested area and  the  judge
    was, as I  have  said  above,  misled  by  the  respondent's  decision.
    However, those findings which I find are in error of law  impinge  upon
    the finding at paragraph 23 of the decision that the judge found  there
    was a strong likelihood that returning the claimant  to  Baghdad  would
    result in his destitution within a  short  time  and  that  that  would
    amount to treatment breaching Article  3  and  warranting  a  grant  of
    humanitarian protection. That conclusion cannot be sustained given  the
    errors I have outlined above.

 9. In the circumstances no part of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal
    can be rescued and it must all be set aside.

Notice of Decision

10. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law such as to require the decision to
    be set aside.

                    I set aside the decision.










                    I remit the appeal to be decided afresh  in  the  First-
                    tier Tribunal in accordance with the directions below.

     [pic]
                  Signed


                  Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

                       Dated                 28 January 2020


Consequential Directions

 1.  The  appeal  is  remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  sitting   at
    Manchester.

 2. The appeal is to be decided afresh with no findings of fact  preserved.




 3. The estimated length of hearing is three hours.


 4. The appeal may be listed before any First-tier Tribunal Judge with  the
    exception of Judge Ennals and Judge Woodcraft.


 5. An Arabic interpreter will be required.


 6. The claimant and his father are likely to be the witnesses giving  oral
    evidence.


 7. The claimant is to ensure that  all  evidence  to  be  relied  upon  is
    contained within a single consolidated indexed and paginated bundle  of
    all  objective  and  subjective  material  updated  together  with  any
    skeleton argument and copies of all case authorities to be relied upon.
     The Tribunal will not likely accept materials submitted on the day  of
    the remitted appeal hearing.


 8. The First-tier Tribunal will give such further directions as are deemed
    appropriate.





                  Signed

                  Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

                       Dated                 28 January 2020


To the Respondent
Fee Award

I make no fee award.  Reasons: The outcome  of  the  appeal  is  yet  to  be
decided.





                  Signed

                  Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

                       Dated                 28 January 2020


