
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11003/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 4 JUNE 2019                       |On 10 June 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                 WAGNEW [K]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Sanders, instructed J D Spicer Zeb, solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant was born on 6 July 1982 and is a citizen of Ethiopia.  By
    a decision promulgated on 7  February  2019,  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    dismissed the appellant's appeal against the decision of the  Secretary
    of State dated 31 August 2018 to refuse him  international  protection.
    The appellant now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. I am satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal erred in law such that  its
    decision falls to be  set  aside.  I  notified  representatives  of  my
    decision  at  the  initial  hearing.  I  find  that   the   judge   has
    misunderstood the evidence  or  mischaracterised  it  in  a  way  which
    undermines his findings of fact. At [30], the judge wrote:

         "When questioned at his asylum interview, the  appellant  indicated
         initially that he had never been part of a political  organisation.
         What he attempted, with the interpreter's assistance, to clarify at
         a later stage was that he  meant  he  had  not  been  a  member  or
         supporter of PG7 at the time of the Kebele Community  meeting  and,
         indeed, was inspired to support  the  organisation  in  March  2015
         subsequent to the described events in January 2015. I do  not  find
         it credible that having been asked, very clearly in my view,  about
         his involvement in political or government organisations, he  would
         not have answered in the affirmative irrespective of when  and  how
         he joined the PG7 organisation. The fact that he did  not  lead  to
         beat doubt his claim that he did join  your  organisation  when  in
         Ethiopia."

 3. I assume, as do the parties, that the judge is referring  here  to  the
    asylum interview record. The questioning at that interview opens with a
    number of questions about the appellants  health  and  family  members.
    Then, at Question 13, the appellant is asked, 'Please  briefly  explain
    why you cannot return to Sudan? We will cover this further at  a  later
    stage in the interview.' The appellant replied, 'as a supporter of  PG7
    I cannot possibly return there as I could be a victim  and  that's  the
    very reason why I run away from that country to seek safety.'

 4. It is not possible to reconcile this unequivocal answer at  the  outset
    of the interview with what the  judge  says  at  [30].  The  judge  has
    misunderstood  the  documentary  evidence  and  has,  in   consequence,
    commenced his analysis of credibility by identifying  an  inconsistency
    in the appellant's evidence which did not  exist.  The  judge  was,  of
    course, required to consider all the evidence as a whole; as a  result,
    it is simply not possible to isolate any particular  finding  from  the
    tissue of the analysis. I find that the judge's analysis as a whole has
    been vitiated by his error. The grounds go  on  to  draw  attention  to
    other factual errors in the judge's analysis which Mrs  Pettersen,  who
    appeared at the initial hearing for the Secretary  of  State,  did  not
    seek to dispute. I find grounds as a whole have been made out and  that
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal should be  set  aside.  As  the
    errors lie at the heart  of  the  credibility  analysis,  none  of  the
    findings of fact shall stand. There will need to be a new  fact-finding
    hearing which  is  better  conducted  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  I
    returned the appeal to that Tribunal for it to remake the  decision  at
    or following a de novo hearing.

Notice of Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  which  was  promulgated  on  7
    February 2019 is set aside. None of the findings of factual stand.  The
    appeal is returned to the First-tier Tribunal (not  Judge  Raikes)  for
    the Tribunal to remake the decision.


Signed                              Date 5 June 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane
