
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11497/2019 (P)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Decided under rule 34                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5 August 2020                     |On 11 August 2020                    |

                                   Before
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FINCH

                                   Between
                                   K.S.H.
                        (ANONYMITY ORDER MAINTAINED)
                                                                   Appellant
                                    -and-

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

                            DECISION AND REASONS

BACKGROUND TO THE APPEAL

1.   The Appellant is a national of Iraq who is  of  Kurdish  ethnicity.  He
    arrived in the United Kingdom on 10 January 2019 and applied for asylum
    the next day.  His application was  refused  on  8  November  2019.  He
    appealed against this decision and his appeal was dismissed  by  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Austin in a decision promulgated on 5 March 2020.

2.   Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was  granted  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Simpson on 19 May 2020 and before any date could be  set
    for an error of law hearing, Field House was closed from 23 March 2020,
    due to the Covid-19 pandemic.

3.   Directions were sent out to  the  parties  on  5  June  2020  by  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Reeds inviting  them  to  make  further  submissions  in
    relation to the substance of the case and whether they considered  that
    a hearing was necessary.

4.    The Respondent replied on 14 June 2020 and the Appellant's  solicitors
    replied on 25 June 2020. Both provided further written submissions  and
    neither party asserted that it would not  be  appropriate  to  consider
    whether there had been an error of law on the papers. Therefore, I have
    proceeded to decide whether there was an error of law on the papers, as
    it is  in  the  interests  of  justice  for  there  to  be  no  further
    unnecessary delay  in  this  appeal  and  both  parties  have  provided
    detailed written submissions in relation to the issues to be decided.



ERROR OF LAW DECISION

5.   In paragraph 32 of  his  decision,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Austin
    found that the Appellant was an adult.

6.   The Appellant had been interviewed at the Midlands Intake  Unit  on  13
    January 2019 without the benefit of legal  representation.  At  section
    1.2 of the Initial Contact and Asylum Registration Questionnaire it  is
    said that his was an age assessment case and that his date of birth was
    12 March 2000. It does not appear that the  Respondent  had  undertaken
    any initial assessment of his age,  as  it  was  not  stated  that  the
    Respondent had concluded for  herself  that  the  Appellant's  physical
    appearance and demeanour very strongly suggested that he was  25  years
    old or over that age and this  was  the  test  to  be  applied  by  the
    Respondent.

7.   It also does not appear that the Respondent had referred the  Appellant
    to Hertfordshire County Council for an age assessment. The  email  from
    the local authority, was dated two days  prior  to  the  interview  and
    simply states that a brief enquiry of age was undertaken by the out  of
    hours team in which [the Appellant] was deemed to be over 18 years.  It
    also stated that, as he was deemed to be significantly  over  18  years
    old, a Full Merton was not required.

8.   The letter and unaccompanied minors checklist which was  also  provided
    by the local authority did not provide any  detailed  reasons  for  the
    conclusion reached but  merely  stated  that  from  visual  and  verbal
    assessment he was assessed to be over 18 years old. His description  on
    the form  also  concentrates  on  his  physical  characteristics.  This
    assessment clearly was not Merton compliant. In addition, it deemed his
    date of birth to be I June 2002.

9.   In paragraph 32 of  his  decision,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Austin
    noted that the age assessment was not Merton  compliant.   However,  he
    did  not  consider  whether  the  decision  that  the   Appellant   was
    significantly over the age of 18 was sustainable when the Appellant had
    given his date of birth as 1 June 2002  and  the  local  authority  had
    recorded his date of birth as 1 June 2000.  In addition, when assessing
    the Appellant's age, First-tier Tribunal Judge Austin took into account
    the dates of birth which appeared on his initial contact  questionnaire
    and his asylum interview when these did not represent the date of birth
    given by the Appellant but that assigned to him. The assigned  date  of
    birth would also have been the one used by the NHS. In addition, in his
    asylum interview the Appellant asserted that his true date of birth was
    I June 2002.

10.  The Judge also asserted that the checklist completed  by  Hertfordshire
    County Council stated that the Appellant had stated that  he  had  left
    Iraq in 2014 at the age of 15.  In  fact,  what  was  recorded  in  the
    checklist is that the Appellant stated that the Appellant said that  he
    left Iraq in 2014 when IS came to his village and he went to Iraq.

11.  Taken in its  totality,  the  evidence  before  the  Judge  as  to  the
    Appellant's true age was inconclusive,  including  the  fact  that  the
    Respondent's letter, dated 11 January  2019,  asserted  that  a  Merton
    compliant age assessment had been carried out.

12.  As a consequence, First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Austin  was  required  to
    assess the Appellant's age to ensure  that  the  Appellant  was  not  a
    vulnerable witness whose vulnerability needed to be factored  into  the
    manner in which the hearing was conducted and the substance of his case
    decided upon.

13.  The Respondent  submits  that  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Austin  was
    correct to rely on the ratio of the decision in Rawofi (age  assessment
    - standard of proof) Afghanistan  [2012]  UKUT  197  but  his  decision
    relied on the appropriate approach in an  asylum  appeal  and  did  not
    relate to appeals relating to Humanitarian :Protection and breaches  of
    Article 3 of the European Convention on Human Rights, which  were  also
    relevant in the Appellant's  appeal.  In  addition,  before  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Austin  could  lawfully  assess  the  substance  of  the
    Appellant's asylum claim, he had to decide whether he was dealing  with
    a vulnerable appellant.

14.  In relation to the second ground of  appeal,  in  section  4.1  of  his
    Initial Contact interview the Appellant clearly stated that  he  feared
    persecution by ISIS and in his asylum interview he  said  that  he  had
    fled from Iraq after ISIS had raised his home village and that  he  now
    feared the Shia militia. He was questioned about his religion, but  his
    answers were in the context of a more generalised fear of return. First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Austin  appears  to  mischaracterise  his  original
    basis for fearing return to Iraq in paragraph 36 of  his  decision  and
    this undermines his adverse credibility finding in paragraph 37 of  his
    decision.

15.  In addition, in paragraph 41 of his decision First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Austin found that the Appellant was a Kurd from the Kurdistan  area  of
    Iraq.  There was no basis for such a finding in the evidence  given  by
    the Appellant. At most, he had said that his mother was from there  but
    that she could not return there after her marriage and that he did  not
    know any relatives there. In addition, the Respondent had not  asserted
    that the Appellant was  from  Kurdistan  in  her  decision  letter  and
    accepted that he was Kurdish and had previously lived in Mosul.

16.  For all of these reasons, First-tier Tribunal Judge  Austin's  decision
    contained material errors of law.



DECISION

(1)  The Appellant's appeal is allowed

(2)  First-tier Tribunal Judge Austin's decision is set aside.

(3)  The appeal is remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  de  novo
    hearing before a First-tier Judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judges
    Austin or Simpson.

    Nadine Finch
Signed   Date 5 August 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Finch

