

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/11669/2016
      PA/11698/2016
      PA/11699/2016
      PA/11703/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 4 September 2017                       |On 6  September 2017             |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEKI?



                                   Between
                                     FBS
                                    MOAB
                                    DOABA
                                    NAABI
                            (anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:      Mr A Seelhoff, of Seelhoff Solicitors
For the Respondent:  Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


      1. The  first  appellant  is  the  mother  of  the  second  and  third
         appellants and the sister of the fourth.  Their dates of birth  are
         26 August 1976, 11 August 1999,  6  April  1991  and  2  July  1980
         respectively. They are  all  Yemeni  nationals  and  challenge  the
         determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge Maxwell dismissing their
         joint appeal for protection. The determination was  promulgated  on
         27 January 2017 following a hearing at Harmondsworth on 19 November
         2016.  It is accepted by the respondent that the appellants  cannot
         be returned to Yemen but she took  the  view  that  they  could  be
         returned to the United  Arab  Emirates  where  all  but  the  first
         appellant had been born and where they had previously resided.


      2. The grounds maintain that the judge erred in his application of  MA
         (Ethiopia) [2009] EWCA Civ 289, that he failed to make findings  of
         fact on relevant matters and that he erred in his assessment of the
         expert evidence. Permission to  appeal  was  initially  refused  by
         Judge Grimmett on 12 May 2017  but  granted  on  renewal  by  Upper
         Tribunal Judge Taylor on 19 July 2017.    An additional  ground  of
         appeal was added by letter on 8 August  2017;  this  was  that  the
         judge erred in proceeding on the basis that a theoretical right  to
         acquire a right of residence in a third country was relevant to the
         determination of refugee status or the entitlement to  humanitarian
         protection.



      3. At the hearing on 4 September 2017, I heard  submissions  from  the
         parties. For the appellants, Mr Seelhoff submitted that  this  case
         could be distinguished from MA because in the latter the  appellant
         did have nationality but had not applied  for  a  passport  whereas
         here there was no right to citizenship.  He  submitted  that  there
         were limited findings of fact and  there  had  been  a  fundamental
         error in the analysis of the third country position.



      4. In response, Mr Wilding agreed that the  appellants  could  not  be
         returned to Yemen but submitted that the respondent did not  accept
         the evidence regarding the arrest warrant. He  submitted  that  the
         judge had failed to make any credibility findings. The respondent's
         case  was  that  the  appellants   would   be   entitled   to   UAE
         nationality/residence through their mother/grandmother. Whilst  the
         judge found that was speculative (at  paragraph  32),  he  did  not
         explain why he reached that conclusion and the burden  was  on  the
         appellants to show that they could not make a  claim  through  that
         connection. He submitted that the making  of  such  an  application
         would not be placing the appellants at risk.



      5. In a brief reply, Mr Seelhoff submitted that  credibility  findings
         were lacking in the determination and the entire matter  should  be
         re-heard and decided afresh.



      6. The judge correctly identified the issue  before  him  as  being  a
         question of whether the appellants would be able to return  to  the
         UAE but then failed to make a reasoned and clear finding  on  that.
         He skirts around the matter at paragraph 32  of  the  determination
         but, as submitted by Mr Wilding, gives no explanation  for  why  he
         considered it speculative to expect the appellants  to  rely  on  a
         familial link to return to the UAE.  He  referred  to  the  alleged
         arrest warrants at paragraph 24 but makes no findings on  these  or
         on whether they would be enforced in the UAE or whether they  would
         impact upon the ability of  the  appellants  to  approach  the  UAE
         authorities in the UK. Nor are any findings  made  on  whether  the
         appellants would  be  able  to  obtain  employment  and  for  their
         employers to act as sponsors thereby entitling them to residence.



      7. Both parties were in agreement that the  determination  was  flawed
         owing to an absence of findings on material matters  and  I  concur
         with that. The matter has to be re-heard and all issues  will  need
         to be determined afresh.


      8. Decision


      9. The First-tier  Tribunal  made  material  errors  of  law  and  the
         decision is set aside. It shall be re-made by another judge of that
         Tribunal following a further hearing at a date to be arranged.



     10. Anonymity



     11. I continue the anonymity order made by the First-tier Tribunal.

    Signed





       Upper Tribunal Judge

       Date: 4 September 2017
