





Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/11294/2016

                             THE IMMIGRATION ACT

|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 12th June 2017                         |On 27th June 2017                 |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCCLURE

                                   Between

                                      AM

                         (AnoNYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT



                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Thirumaney of Shervins solicitors

For the Respondent:    Ms Ahmed, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a  citizen  of  Turkey.   Having  considered  all  the
    circumstances, as an anonymity direction was made previously, I make an
    anonymity direction.

 2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge G Clarke promulgated on 23rd January  2017  whereby  the
    judge dismissed the Appellant's appeal  against  the  decision  of  the
    Respondent to refuse him asylum humanitarian protection  or  relief  on
    the grounds of Articles 2 and 3 of the ECHR.

 3. By a decision of 4th April 2017 Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Kebede  granted
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  The permission is  granted
    in the following terms: -

    The Grounds assert that the judge failed to  undertake  a  proper  risk
    assessment on the basis of the  accepted  findings  made  by  the  Home
    Office in the appellant's brother's case. Whilst the judge arguably did
    take account of the findings made by the respondent in the  appellant's
    brother's case, a further matter now arises in  that  the  respondent's
    adverse findings in the appellant's  brother's  case  have  since  been
    overturned by the Tribunal which then allowed his appeal. Although  the
    decision allowing the appeal post-dated the appellant's appeal and  was
    therefore not a matter before Judge Clarke or a matter  that  he  could
    possibly have taken into account, and therefore no criticism  could  be
    made of his findings at the time in that  respect,  the  fact  that  he
    relied upon adverse findings made by the respondent  which  have  since
    been undermined give rise to an  issue  of  fairness  and  thus  merits
    further consideration. Accordingly I am prepared to grant permission.

 4. Thus the case appeared before me to decide whether there was  an  error
    of law in the original decision.

    Basic outline of the facts

 5. The appellant is a Muslim Kurd from Gaziantep in Turkey, where he lived
    with his parents, his younger sister and older brother.

 6. The appellant has made a number of claims which were  rejected  by  the
    judge The appellant claimed to be a supporter of the BDP and  allegedly
    assisted his father, who was also a supporter of the BDP, to take  food
    to terrorists in the mountains.  The  appellant  claimed  that  he  was
    arrested on 21 March 2013 at Newroz  celebrations.  The  appellant  was
    arrested again on 1 May 2013 for taking part in workers celebrations in
    Gaziantep. During the course of his arrest and detention the  appellant
    claimed to have been mistreated.

 7. On 18 May 2013 the appellant left Turkey. It appears that the appellant
    had sought to claim asylum in Austria on 16 May  2013.  Thereafter  the
    appellant claims to have arrived in the United Kingdom on 25  May  2013
    and claimed asylum here on 19 June 2013.

 8. The appellant's brother had left Turkey on 8 October 2013. He had  made
    similar claims to the appellant but  also  claimed  that  he  had  been
    arrested and detained between May and August 2013. The family home  had
    been raided in August 2013 whilst  the  authorities  were  seeking  the
    brother.

 9. In considering the appellant's circumstances the judge had rejected all
    of the claims by the appellant to have been arrested and detained.  The
    judge in a very careful examination of the appellant's account is given
    valid reasons for finding that the account was  not  credible  and  for
    rejecting the account.

10. The judge in dealing with the matter considered the brother's  evidence
    both at paragraphs 63 and 64 and at paragraph 99 of  the  decision.  In
    assessing the brothers evidence the judge has noted not  only  that  it
    was accepted that the brother was a low-level supporter of the BDP  but
    also that at  that  stage  the  respondent  did  not  accept  that  the
    appellant's  brother  was  otherwise  of  adverse   interest   to   the
    authorities.

11. The judge goes on thereafter to note that  the  appellant  on  his  own
    account after having been detained and mistreated  merely  returned  to
    school to finish his school term. The judge  was  satisfied  that  such
    were not the actions of a person that was in  fear  of  his  life.  The
    judge found that the appellant would not be  of  any  interest  to  the
    authorities and would not be under surveillance by or of  any  interest
    to the authorities.

12. The essence of the challenge laid by the appellant is that the findings
    having been made in the brother's own appeal that the brother has  been
    involved with the BDP; has been arrested; has been mistreated;  and  is
    therefore of interest to the authorities, impacts upon the approach  to
    be taken with regard to the appellant.

13. The judge has given valid reasons for coming to the conclusions that he
    did with regard to the personal circumstances of the appellant. He  has
    given valid reasons for finding that the appellant's account of  having
    been involved with the BDP were not credible. He is  also  given  valid
    reasons for  coming  to  the  conclusion  that  the  appellant  account
    otherwise of having been arrested and detained were not credible  also.
    In themselves none of  those  actions  arise  from  or  relate  to  the
    appellant's brother and/or the  appellant's  brother's  involvement  in
    politics.

14. Having considered the circumstances the judge has fully  justified  the
    conclusions of fact with regard to the  appellant  some  circumstances.
    There is nothing on the facts as presented all the issues raised  which
    undermines those conclusions.

15. The issue arises as to whether  or  not  by  reason  of  the  brother's
    involvement the authorities would result in the authorities  having  an
    interest in the appellant. In part the  appellant's  representative  is
    seeking to rely upon the current country guidance cases.

16. The current country guidance with regard to Turkey is set  out  in  the
    cases of IA Turkey CG (2003) UKIAT 00034 and IK  (Returnees  -  records
    -IFA) Turkey CG 2004  UKIAT  00312.  From  those  cases  the  following
    material parts of the judgement: -



      IA 2003 UKIAT 00034 paragraph 46 :-

      ....

      The following are the factors which inexhaustively we consider to be
    material in  giving rise to potential suspicion in the minds of the
    authorities concerning a      particular claimant.

      ...

      f) Whether the appellant has family connections with a separatist
    organisation such  as KADEK or HADEP or DEHAP.....



    IK (Returnees -Records-IFA) Turkey CG 2004 UKIAT 00312
    Conclusions in IK at paragraph 133


       8. The escalation of the violence following the  ending  of  the  PKK
       ceasefire reinforces our view that the risk to a Kurdish returnee  of
       ill treatment by the authorities may be greater if his home  area  is
       in an area of conflict in Turkey than it would be elsewhere, for  the
       reasons described in paragraphs 90 and 116.
       9. The  Turkish  Government  is  taking  action  in  legislative  and
       structural terms to address the human rights problems that present  a
       serious obstacle to its membership of the EU. It has  made  its  zero
       tolerance policy towards torture clear. However the use of torture is
       long and deep-seated in the security forces and it will take time and
       continued  and  determined  effort  to  bring  it  under  control  in
       practice. It is premature to conclude that the long established  view
       of the Tribunal concerning the potential risk of torture in detention
       as per A Turkey requires material revision on the  present  evidence.
       However the situation will require review as further evidence becomes
       available. For the time being as in  the  past,  each  case  must  be
       assessed on its own merits from the individual's own history and  the
       relevant risk factors as described in paragraph 46 of A (Turkey)


       10.  Many  of  the   individual   risk   factors   described   in   A
       (Turkey)comprise in themselves a broad spectrum of variable potential
       risk that requires careful evaluation on the specific facts  of  each
       appeal as a whole. The factors  described  in  A  (Turkey)  were  not
       intended as a simplistic checklist and should not be used as such.
       11. A young, fit, unmarried person, leaving his home area and seeking
       unofficial employment in a  big  city,  may  not  feel  the  need  to
       register with the local Mukhtar, at least at the outset. Many do not.
       However, given the range of basic activities for which a  certificate
       of residence is needed, and which depend upon such  registration,  we
       conclude that it would in most normal circumstances be  unduly  harsh
       to expect a person to live without appropriate registration  for  any
       material time, as a requirement for avoiding persecution.  This  does
       not necessarily preclude the viability of internal relocation for the
       reasons described in paragraph 133.13 below.
       12. The proper course  in  assessing  the  risk  for  a  returnee  is
       normally to decide first whether  he  has  a  well  founded  fear  of
       persecution in his home area based upon a case  sensitive  assessment
       of the facts in the context  of  an  analysis  of  the  risk  factors
       described in A (Turkey). If he does not then he is unlikely to be  at
       any real risk anywhere in Turkey.




17. The issued raised is that as part of the appellant's case the  position
    of the appellant's brother has to be assessed. Initially the  challenge
    would be that in assessing the appellant and whether the appellant  was
    at risk the judge's approach to the brother's evidence has been brought
    into question by the subsequent findings of fact made in the  brother's
    case.

18. In essence the appellant's brother's case as accepted by the respondent
    included an acceptance that the brother was a  low-level  supporter  of
    the BDP, Baris Ve Demokrasi Partisi .

19. The country guidance cases do not refer to the BDP but  in  April  2014
    the BDP merged with the HDP/Hadep.

20. Since the appellant's decision, the appellant's brother's case has been
    heard and determined. In deciding the brothers case whilst there were a
    number of credibility  issues  the  judge  still  found  the  brother's
    account credible that he had been arrested and mistreated in  the  past
    and that he was suspected of involvement  in  anti-government  politics
    including possibly with the PKK.

21. The issue to be determined is whether or not the fact that the  brother
    has now been found credible brings into question the  findings  by  the
    judge in the present proceedings. In that regard I would draw attention
    to the cases of TK (Georgia) 2004 UKIAT 00149 and Ocampo 2006 EWCA  Civ
    1276. Whilst in some senses the cases are  clearly  distinguishable  in
    that each of the cases involved a previous decision  were  findings  of
    fact were made on whether or not those findings of  fact  were  binding
    upon and later Tribunal. Clearly in the present case the decision under
    question is a later decision and what impact that has upon  a  previous
    decision made upon the evidence before it.

22. However the case is clearly set down that even in respect  of  previous
    decisions judges are entitled to look at the evidence before  them  and
    to decide cases upon the basis of the evidence  that  is  before  them.
    That is exactly what the judge has done in the  present  situation.  He
    has given valid reasons for coming to the conclusion that he has on the
    basis of the evidence that was before him. The  fact  that  a  Tribunal
    subsequently was either provided with more cogent  evidence  or  better
    presented evidence does not mean that the findings of fact by the judge
    on the day are undermined by the subsequent findings.

23. The judge has properly given reasons for his conclusions on the  facts.
    He  considered  even  taking  account  of   the   brother's   political
    involvement that that would not impact upon the appellant. The  country
    guidance case makes clear as set out above that the  criteria  set  out
    are not merely a set of  tick  list  criteria  but  would  have  to  be
    considered in context. That is exactly what the judge has done  in  the
    present case.

24. The judge clearly has considered the  fact  that  the  appellant  after
    allegedly being arrested and detained but merely  returned  to  school.
    The judge has pointed out inconsistencies in  the  appellant's  account
    and given valid reasons for finding that the appellant's account is not
    credible. Even on the brothers  account  the  subsequent  raid  at  the
    family home did not  disclose  that  there  was  any  interest  in  the
    appellant merely in the brother. The judge was entitled to act upon the
    evidence that was before him and has fully  justified  the  conclusions
    reached. Accordingly there is no error of law in the decision.

25. It may  mean  that  in  consequence  of  the  subsequent  decision  the
    appellant may have to apply again to the respondent  seeking  to  claim
    that he would now be at risk by reason of the fact that his brother has
    been found to have been arrested and detained and has been found to  be
    suspected by  the  authorities  is  involved  in  opposition  politics.
    However that does not bring into question the findings of fact made  by
    the present judge.

26. The judge has acted upon the evidence that was before  him.  The  judge
    has given valid reasons for finding that the appellant's account of his
    personal arrest, detention and mistreatment was not credible  and  that
    his claims to have been  involved  in  politics  with  his  father  was
    similarly not credible.

27. The judge has given valid reasons for the conclusions reached.  On  the
    basis of the evidence presented the judge was entitled to come to those
    conclusions. Accordingly there is no error of law in the decision.

Notice of Decision


28. I dismiss the appeal to the Upper Tribunal and uphold the  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal.


Signed      Date 23/6/2017



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McClure



