
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/11512/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 30 March 2017                     |On 8 May 2017                        |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between

                                     MN
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
      Appellant
                                      v

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
      Respondent

                      _________________________________

                             DECISION & REASONS
                      _________________________________


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms G. Loughran, counsel instructed by Elder Rahimi
                    solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Z. Ahmed, Home Office Presenting Officer





1.    The Appellant is a national of Afghanistan, born in 2001.  He  arrived
in the United Kingdom on 4.4.16 and  claimed  asylum.  His  application  was
refused by the Respondent in  a  decision  dated  30.9.16  and  he  appealed
against this decision. His appeal came  before  First  tier  Tribunal  Judge
Khawar for hearing on 22.11.16 and in a decision promulgated on  16.1.17  he
dismissed the appeal.

2.    An application for permission to appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  was
made in time. The grounds in support of the application  asserted  that  the
Judge  erred  materially  in  law:  (i)  in  reaching  findings   based   on
speculation rather than evidence:  at  [42]  regarding  the  fact  that  the
Appellant's uncle involved him in weapons running; (ii) in failing  to  have
regard to relevant evidence at [45]  in  relation  to  whether  or  not  his
mother was in hiding in Kabul; (iii) in failing to consider whether  it  was
reasonable for the Appellant to relocate to Kabul; (iv) in failing  to  make
a finding on a matter in  issue  viz  humanitarian  protection  and  (v)  in
failing to consider the Appellant's best  interests,  given  that  he  is  a
child.

3.    Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was  granted  by  Judge  of
the First tier Tribunal Landes in a decision dated 8.2.17 in inter alia  the
following terms:

    "2. It is arguable as set out in ground 1 that the judge speculated  in
    rejecting the appellant's account in respect of his uncle's gun-running
    but I am unclear how it is said that this is material to  the  ultimate
    result; I infer from the judge's acceptance of the appellant's  account
    of being beaten by the uncle and his discussion of relocation that  the
    judge accepted in any event that the appellant would be at risk in  his
    home area. However, it is arguable as set out  at  ground  3  that  the
    judge erred in failing to consider whether it was reasonable to  expect
    the appellant to relocate to Kabul; he simply found that the  appellant
    would be safe in Kabul ...

    3. It is arguable that the judge erred as averred at ground 4...

    4. ...I do not restrict the grounds that may be argued."

Hearing

4.    At the hearing I heard  submissions  from  the  parties.  Ms  Loughran
sought to rely on her grounds of appeal. She  submitted  as  per  Ground  1,
that the Judge had erred in that his  findings  were  both  speculative  and
material as to whether or not the Appellant's uncle was a gun runner,  which
is relevant to  his  reach  to  the  Appellant  in  any  place  of  internal
relocation and the risk in respect of links to the Taliban.  In  respect  of
Ground 2, she submitted  that  the  Judge  failed  to  have  regard  to  the
relevant evidence as to how the Appellant's mother is  living  and  this  is
relevant to whether he  would  have  been  able  to  find  her  and  whether
internal relocation is reasonable. She further submitted that the fact  that
there was no finding as to the best interests of the Appellant is  not  just
relevant to Article 8, but to his claim as a whole.

5.    In response, Ms Ahmed drew my  attention  to  [42]  and  [43]  of  the
Judge's decision. Whilst the  grounds  seek  to  argue  that  the  Judge  is
speculating it was  open  to  him  not  to  accept  his  evidence  that  the
Appellant's uncle involved him in gun running. However,  she  accepted  that
it  was  "rather  odd"  that  the  Judge  accepts  everything  else  in  the
Appellant's account, albeit he does provide reasons  for  his  findings.  In
respect of return, the Judge specifically found that the Appellant's  mother
is working in Kabul; she has not  been  found  by  the  uncle  and  he  gave
reasons for his finding. With  regards  to  the  issue  of  return  and  the
background information, the Judge referred to the refusal at  [28]-[36]  and
endorsed the objective information relied upon by  the  decision  maker.  Ms
Ahmed accepted that the Judge does not engage with  the  skeleton  argument.
She was content for me to find that the Judge had erred  materially  in  law
in his decision.

6.    I indicated to the parties that I found the First tier Tribunal  Judge
had erred materially in law, for the reasons  set  out  in  the  grounds  of
appeal and for the following reasons:

    (i)    The reason the Judge did not accept the Appellant's evidence  as
    to gun running is because his mother reported his uncle to  the  police
    after his uncle was violent towards the Appellant, his brothers and his
    mother and the Judge found at [42] that, had they in fact been involved
    in gun running, the police would have  investigated  the  whole  family
    rather than release the uncle within a week, having treated  the  issue
    as domestic violence. I accept Ms Loughran's submissions, based on  [7]
    and [8] of her grounds of  appeal,  that  it  was  speculation  on  the
    Judge's part to conclude that it would follow from  police  involvement
    in a domestic incident that they would discover and/or investigate  the
    Appellant's uncle's gun running, absent any evidence  that  the  Afghan
    police force would operate in this way and that this  is  not  how  the
    police would operate in the UK. It was further the Appellant's evidence
    that his brother had been caught by the authorities but his  uncle  had
    been able to get him released and this was because  of  corruption  and
    the payment of a  bribe,  which  was  corroborated  by  the  background
    evidence;

    (ii)   In respect of Ground 2 and the Judge's finding at [45] that  the
    Appellant's mother was not in hiding because "she has to  have  contact
    with the outside world in order to provide her services as a  baker"  I
    accept the point made by Ms Loughran at [11] of the grounds of  appeal,
    that it was the Appellant's evidence that people brought their bread to
    his mother, she would bake it and they would collect it, thus the  fact
    that she has contact with the outside world is  not  inconsistent  with
    the Appellant's claim that she was in hiding, in that she  did  not  go
    out.

    (iii)  I further find that there is merit in Ground 3 of the grounds of
    appeal in  that  the  Judge  did  not  consider  whether  it  would  be
    reasonable for the Appellant to relocate to Kabul, without facing undue
    hardship, particularly bearing in mind  that  he  would  be  joining  a
    household headed by his mother;

    (iv)   The Judge further erred in failing to go on to consider, in  the
    alternative, whether humanitarian protection was merited by  reason  of
    indiscriminate violence in Kabul due to the security  and  humanitarian
    conditions there cf. Ground 4;

    (v)    With regard to Ground 5, despite the  fact  that  the  Appellant
    remains a minor, there was erroneously no consideration by the Judge of
    his statutory duty pursuant to section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship &
    Immigration Act 2009 as to whether removal of the Appellant would be in
    his best interests cf. AA Afghanistan [2012] UKAIT 00016 (IAC)  at[32]-
    [33] and ST (Sri Lanka) [2013] UKAIT 00292 (IAC) at [16].

7.    I indicated to the parties that I would re-make the decision in  light
of the Judge's findings of fact,  except  that  relating  to  the  issue  of
whether or not the Appellant had been involved by his uncle in gun  running,
which was infected by error of law. The parties were content to proceed  and
I gave  Ms  Ahmed  time  to  consider  the  Appellant's  bundle,  which  had
previously been served in support  of  the  appeal  before  the  First  tier
Tribunal.

8.     The  Appellant's  statements  were  deemed  to  be  adopted  and  the
Appellant was not called to give evidence. The issue that I was required  to
determine was whether or not it would be unduly harsh for the  Appellant  to
relocate within Afghanistan,  given  that  the  First  tier  Tribunal  Judge
accepted there would be a risk to him on return to his home area of Parwan.

9.    I firstly heard submissions from Ms  Ahmed,  who  submitted  that,  in
respect of credibility, she sought to rely on the  refusal  decision,  which
accepted the fact that the Appellant was mistreated by  his  uncle  but  did
not accept that his mother reported the uncle  to  the  authorities.  Whilst
credibility was raised in the refusal  decision  she  appreciated  that  the
findings of First tier Tribunal Judge had  been  preserved  except  the  one
issue at [41]-[43].

10.   Ms Ahmed further sought to rely upon the decision  in  AA  Afghanistan
[2012] UKAIT 00016 (IAC) at [89]. The  Appellant  is  in  contact  with  his
mother, she has some financial income and his uncle does not  seem  to  have
located the mother, which are relevant factors the Respondent seeks to  rely
upon. She submitted that it cannot be shown that there is a risk  on  return
to the Appellant, given that his mother is living in Kabul  without  current
threats. She drew my attention to [28]-[36] of the refusal  decision,  which
sets out the background information the  Respondent  is  relying  upon.  She
submitted that Article 15C of  the  Qualification  Directive  needed  to  be
considered in light of the  judgment  in  Elgafaji  v  Staatssecretaris  van
Justitie (Directive 2004/83/EC) Case C-465/07. Ms Ahmed  relied  upon  [28]-
[36] of the refusal decision regarding internal relocation.


11.   Ms Loughran sought to rely upon her skeleton argument dated  21.11.16,
prepared for the  First  tier  Tribunal  hearing.  She  submitted  that,  in
respect of the Appellant's credibility, this had been accepted by the  First
tier Tribunal Judge and his findings  had  been  preserved  except  for  the
issue as to whether or not the Appellant's uncle had been involved  in  gun-
running. She submitted that the Appellant's account  was  commensurate  with
his age.

The provenance of the link between the Taliban and the Appellant's uncle  is
at page 9 of his witness statement at [16]  that  his  mother  and  brothers
told him that his uncle was receiving guns from  the  Taliban.  Ms  Loughran
submitted that the Appellant would be at risk in his home  area,  given  the
fact he was at  risk  from  his  uncle  before  cf  paragraph  339K  of  the
Immigration Rules. She drew  my  attention  to  the  Country  Information  &
Guidance in respect of Women fearing gender based  violence  dated  February
2016 and updated in December 2016, at [2.44]-[2.45] which provides that  the
police are unwilling and/or unable to provide protection against victims  of
Domestic Violence. She submitted  that  this  would  apply  equally  to  the
Appellant as a child. [3.1.3] of the Country Information & Guidance  on  the
security situation applies equally to gender violence, which  is  at  [8.3].
and [8.4] of the  new  guidance,  which  is  almost  identical.  At  [8.3.2]
domestic violence is not classified as a crime  under  the  penal  code  and
this would apply equally to a child if not more so.  Ms  Loughran  submitted
that clearly the Appellant would be at risk from his uncle in his home  area
and there would be no sufficiency of protection.

12.   In respect of internal relocation, Ms  Loughran  submitted  that  this
would not be reasonable. The Appellant's mother was living on her  own  with
the Appellant's three sisters. The Home Office  guidance  makes  clear  that
single and unaccompanied women are at risk.  The  Appellant's  mother  would
effectively  be  his  protector.  Even  if  there  was  no  risk  from   the
Appellant's uncle in Kabul, there would be huge restrictions on the way  the
Appellant's mother can conduct herself. It would  be  unreasonable  for  the
Appellant to live in Kabul with his mother in  these  conditions  and  given
the levels of indiscriminate violence. In respect  of  the  decision  in  AA
(Afghanistan)  (op  cit)  there  was  a  distinction  between  attended  and
unattended children and the fact that the Appellant would be attended  by  a
lone unaccompanied woman mean that he is unattended cf. [33].

13.   I allowed the appeal on asylum grounds and announced  my  decision  at
the hearing. I now give my reasons.

Decision

14.   I find, in light of the Judge's preserved findings of fact,  that  the
Appellant has a well-founded  fear  of  persecution  in  his  home  area  of
Parwan, at the hands of his uncle.  I  further  find  that  the  Appellant's
account of his uncle being involved in gun running  at  the  behest  of  the
Taliban to be credible, given the consistency in his account at  his  asylum
interview, in his witness statement and in  his  oral  evidence  before  the
First tier Tribunal.  It  is  also  plausible  that  the  Appellant's  uncle
avoided problems with the police by the payment of bribes and  was  able  to
secure the release of the Appellant's brother by this method,  in  light  of
the background evidence attesting to the corruption of police.

15.   The issue then is  whether  it  would  be  reasonable  to  expect  the
Appellant  to  internally  relocate  within  Afghanistan.  In  her  skeleton
argument, Ms Loughran set out a number of heads of claim viz  (i)  he  would
be suspected of supporting the  Taliban,  given  that  he  was  involved  in
delivering weapons on behalf of his uncle, who  received  weapons  from  the
Taliban and he cannot be expected to lie about this cf. HJ (Iran)  [2011]  1
AC 596 at  [21]-[22]  and  in  light  of  UNHCR's  opinion  that  "civilians
suspected of supporting  AGEs  may  be  in  need  of  international  refugee
protection on the grounds of (imputed) political opinion;" (ii) he would  be
at risk as an unattended young person cf. AA Afghanistan [2012] UKAIT  00016
(IAC) at [93](ii) given that his mother, as a lone woman/head  of  household
cannot provide him  with  protection,  thus  he  should  be  treated  as  an
unattended child or at risk as a child with no  male  support  network.  She
submitted that it would plainly not  be  reasonable  for  the  Appellant  to
internally relocate given his young age [16]; the absence of a male  support
network;  the  high  levels  of  violence  in  Kabul  and  the  humanitarian
situation there. Ms Loughran  submitted,  in  the  alternative,  that  there
would be a serious and individual threat to his life or person by reason  of
indiscriminate violence. Ms Ahmed's  position  was  that  it  would  not  be
unreasonable for the Appellant to relocate to Kabul given  that  his  mother
is there, the Appellant is in contact with her and she has some  income  and
has not been located by his uncle.

16.   Whilst it cannot be ruled out that  the  Appellant's  uncle  would  be
able to trace him to Kabul, through his connections with the Taliban,  there
is no evidence that he would have the ability so to do and I  consider  that
the risk in this respect is remote and not established,  even  applying  the
lower standard of proof. I also  take  into  account  that  the  Appellant's
uncle has not, as yet, located his mother and sisters since  they  relocated
to Kabul.

17.   Whilst it is the case  that  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  AA  Afghanistan
[2012]  UKAIT  00016  (IAC)  draw  a  distinction  between  accompanied  and
unaccompanied children, the presumption based on the facts before  them,  is
that  accompanied  children  would  have  a  family  to  return  to  in  the
conventional sense ie a father and mother plus siblings.  Whilst  the  issue
of single female headed households was not  considered  in  that  case,  the
Respondent accepts that it would be unduly harsh to expect a  single  female
or single female headed household to internally relocate cf. Country  Policy
& Information note regarding women fearing gender based  violence,  December
2016 at 2.53, 2.54 & 6.31-6.35 which refers to the difficulties  encountered
by single women and cultural prohibitions on women working outside the  home
or going out unaccompanied, which I find is consistent with the  Appellant's
account of the manner in which his mother is obliged to live in  Kabul.  The
Respondent's  Country  Information  &   Guidance   on   the   security   and
humanitarian situation, July 2016 provides inter alia:

    "3.1.4 Whilst return or relocation  to  Kabul  is  not  considered,  in
    general, to be  unsafe  or  unreasonable,  decision  makers  must  take
    account of the city's current humanitarian and security  situation.  It
    is unreasonable to expect lone women and female heads of  household  to
    relocate internally in the city."

18.   Consequently, if it is unreasonable to expect a lone woman  or  female
head of household to relocate internally in Kabul, it cannot  be  reasonable
to expect the Appellant, who is still a child,  to  relocate  internally  to
Kabul in order to join a  single  female  headed  household.  The  situation
would be different if he were an adult, but  he  is  not  and  the  date  of
assessment is the date of hearing. Whilst I take into account the fact  that
the Appellant could be reunited with his mother and sisters, the purpose  of
internal relocation is to find  a  place  of  safety,  where  protection  is
available. It is clear from the background  evidence  that  the  Appellant's
mother would be unable to provide him with  protection  because  she  is  in
need of protection herself and the Afghan State in its current  position  is
unable to provide it.

19.   It is also the case from the judgment of  their  Lordships  in  Januzi
[2006] UKHL 5 that socio-economic factors, the conditions  in  the  proposed
place of relocation and whether "the  quality  of  the  internal  protection
fails to meet basic norms  of  civil,  political  and  socio-economic  human
rights" are material considerations in deciding whether it would  be  unduly
harsh  to  expect  an  Appellant  to  internally  relocate.  The  background
evidence contained  within  the  Appellant's  bundle  and  the  Respondent's
country information guidance make clear that there has been a  deterioration
in the security situation: see eg section 6 of  the  Country  Information  &
Guidance  on  the  security   and   humanitarian   situation,   July   2016.
Consideration is given to the specific impact  on  women  and  children  and
6.3.1. provides inter alia:

    6.3.1. Having examined the third report of the UN Secretary-General  on
    children  and  armed  conflict  in  Afghanistan  (Reporting  period   1
    September 2010 to 31 December 2014), the UN Security Council's  Working
    Group on Children and Armed Conflict expressed its grave  concern  over
    the 'deteriorating situation of children affected by  the  conflict  in
    Afghanistan, particularly the significant increase in child casualties,
    the  continuing  recruitment  and  use  of  children  in  violation  of
    applicable international law, as well as attacks on hospitals,  schools
    and  the  military  use  of  schools,  particularly  affecting   girls'
    education, by all parties to the conflict.' Covering  the  period  from
    January to December 2015, the Report of  the  UN  Secretary-General  on
    children   and   armed   conflict    noted    that    'Children    were
    disproportionately   affected   by   the   intensifying   conflict   in
    Afghanistan..."

20.   I have concluded, in light of  the  evidence  and  on  the  particular
facts, that it  would  be  unreasonable  and  unduly  harsh  to  expect  the
Appellant to relocate to Kabul or within Afghanistan generally.

21.   I find an error of law in the decision of First  tier  Tribunal  Judge
Khawar. I substitute a decision allowing the appeal on the  basis  that  the
Appellant has a well-founded fear of persecution in Afghanistan and is  thus
entitled to refugee status.


Rebecca Chapman

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman                      1 May 2017
