
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/11922/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House via Skype     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 2nd February 2021               |On 23rd February 2021              |
|                                   |                                   |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     FD
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M Fazli, of Counsel, instructed by Cassady's
Solicitors

Interpretation:
Mr Ghorani in the Dari Language


                            DECISION AND REASONS
Introduction


    1. The claimant is a citizen of Afghanistan born in 1996. She  came  to
       the UK in October 2017 and claimed asylum in  the  same  month.  The
       claim was refused on 4th May 2018. She appealed and her  appeal  was
       dismissed on all grounds by First-tier Tribunal Judge Shore on  28th
       July 2018. She made further  representations  to  the  Secretary  of
       State on 21st June 2019, and these were refused in a decision of the
       Secretary of State  dated  22nd  November  2019  which  nevertheless
       accepted that she had made a valid fresh claim  and  therefore  that
       she was entitled to  a  second  appeal.   The  claimant  lodged  her
       appeal, which was allowed on asylum grounds, under Article 15(c)  of
       the Qualification Directive  and  on  Article  8  ECHR  grounds  but
       dismissed under Article 3 ECHR in a decision of First-tier  Tribunal
       Judge Mill promulgated on 19th February 2020.

    2. Permission to appeal was granted and I  found  that  the  First-tier
       Tribunal had erred in law for the reasons set  out  in  my  decision
       appended to this decision as  Annex  A.  I  substituted  a  decision
       dismissing  the  asylum  appeal,  and  preserved  the  findings   at
       paragraphs 32 to 36 of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal which
       I found lead to the dismissal of the asylum claim based on a claimed
       risk of an honour killing/ forced marriage which were said  to  come
       from the Taliban, her  father  and  brother.  I  also  preserve  the
       findings about the claimant's mental health problems  at  paragraphs
       18 to 26 and the new documentation, at paragraphs 27 to 31, to which
       no challenge was made. This remaking  hearing  is  therefore  solely
       concerned with the humanitarian protection and human rights appeals.



    3. The hearing was held at a remote Skype for Business hearing in light
       of the need to reduce the transmission of the Covid-19 virus, and in
       light of this being found to be  acceptable  by  both  parties,  and
       being a means by  which  the  appeal  could  be  fairly  and  justly
       determined. There were no  significant  issues  of  connectivity  or
       audibility with the hearing.

    4. The claimant is a vulnerable adult as there is credible  psychiatric
       evidence that she has a diagnosis  of  schizoaffective  disorder  (a
       diagnosis that has symptoms of both  schizophrenia  and  depression)
       and it is noted that she takes  anti-psychotic  and  anti-depressant
       medication. The hearing was conducted so as to ensure that she  felt
       as comfortable as possible with the proceedings. Mr Fazli asked that
       the claimant be given appropriate breaks when needed, and Mr Diwnycz
       reminded the claimant of this possibility prior to cross-examination
       and she asked for, and was given, a ten minute break at  that  stage
       as she said she felt a bit dizzy. She confirmed that she was feeling
       better at the start  of  the  cross-examination.  The  claimant  was
       reminded by me that she should alert me if she needed anything;  and
       I explained that if she did not understand any question  she  should
       say so and it would be rephrased, and that she was entitled  to  say
       that she did not know the answer to any question  if  that  was  the
       truth.

    5. The claimant confirmed that she understood the interpreter, although
       it was noted by Mr Fazli that he was a Dari speaker from Iran rather
       than Afghanistan. Mr Fazli confirmed that he is a  Dari  speaker  of
       Afghan origin, but he did not alert me to any  misunderstandings  on
       the claimant's part due to  the  interpreter's  origins  despite  my
       indicating that he should do  this  if  he  felt  that  this  was  a
       problem.

Evidence & Submissions - Remaking

    6. The evidence of the claimant from her statement of 10th January 2020
       and oral evidence to the Upper Tribunal on the issues of her  health
       and situation if returned to Afghanistan is in summary as follows.

    7. The claimant would prefer to stay in the  UK  because  she  believes
       that she gets better medical care and people are less judgmental  in
       the UK than in Afghanistan. She says that her mental health problems
       mean that she suffers from  insomnia,  and  is  very  suspicious  of
       people which makes it difficult to  go  out  and  see  and  talk  to
       people.  She feels that  her  diagnosis  and  medication  after  her
       period in hospital in 2018 have helped her feel a  bit  better.  She
       continues to receive medication in the UK (she  said  currently  she
       takes just two types of medication quetiapine and senna).  She  said
       that she did not  like  the  group  talking  therapy  that  she  was
       referred to by her GP at the Waterloo Centre, so  stopped  attending
       as she did not like the idea that people in her community might know
       about her issues. She remembered that she had thoughts about hurting
       herself in January 2020 but did not act upon those thoughts. She had
       those thoughts because she was afraid of return to Afghanistan.  She
       last spoke to her GP during lockdown, about 7 or 8 months ago, about
       changing her medication dosage.

    8. She is afraid that her mental health might  be  getting  worse,  and
       wishes to stay in the UK with the family she has  here  who  support
       her and keep her safe. She believes that she will commit suicide  if
       she is removed to Afghanistan as she feels she would have no one  to
       protect  her  in  Afghanistan.  She  says  that  the  mental  health
       treatment facilities in Afghanistan are very poor and would not give
       her proper help.  She believes that if returned to  Afghanistan  she
       would be a lone woman living without any family to protect her.  She
       could not  live  in  Kabul  because  of  the  problems  she  has  in
       Afghanistan. She cannot live with her family as they  did  not  keep
       her as part of the family or she would not have ended up in the  UK.
       She does not know where she would  live  if  she  were  returned  to
       Afghanistan. She was not certain if there were family homes  in  the
       two places she had lived in Afghanistan prior to coming to the UK in
       the Balkh district, but she thought there  had  been  prior  to  her
       mother's death. She thought her mother had lived separately from her
       father and brothers prior to her death, and had a maternal uncle who
       helped her.

    9. The claimant has produced a death certificate for  her  mother,  MD,
       with a translation, who is said to have died of  heart  disease  and
       Covid-19 on 11th June 2020 in the district of Balkh, in a town  20km
       from the provincial capital of Mazar-e Sharif.  She  says  a  friend
       called Susan helped her obtain this certificate from Afghanistan  by
       contacting the hospital where her mother died,  and  that  this  had
       taken place around 24th January  2021  when  she  had  received  the
       letter from the Tribunal about the hearing date. It seems  that  her
       cousin's family had known about her mother's death for some time but
       had kept the news from her until then.  The  death  certificate  was
       sent to her as an attachment via WhatsApp. She said she had not  had
       contact with her mother for a long time prior to her death  in  June
       2020. It was put to her by Mr Diwnycz that different  ages  for  her
       mother appeared in the psychiatric report of Dr  Singh  and  on  the
       death certificate, so she would have either been 50 (as per  the  Dr
       Singh report) or 60 (as per the death certificate)  when  she  died.
       The claimant said she did not know how old her mother was, or  which
       was correct, and she had given approximate ages for her  parents  to
       the doctor.

   10. Throughout the evidence the claimant was unable to give dates as she
       said she could not remember them.

   11. An updating  psychiatric  report  is  provided  from  Dr  Latifi,  a
       consultant forensic psychiatrist, who has interviewed the  appellant
       remotely in Dari. I find Dr  Latifi  is  an  appropriate  expert  to
       provide a psychiatric report, and that  he  has  complied  with  the
       requirements of Tribunal and confirmed his duty to the court. He  is
       also an Afghan citizen, and has made recent trips to Afghanistan  so
       is able to comment on the provision for  those  with  mental  health
       problems in Afghanistan from his own  observation  as  well  as  the
       country of origin materials. His conclusions, in short summary,  are
       that most mentally ill patients are cared for by their  families  in
       Afghanistan as the psychiatric and mental health services  are  very
       limited and inadequate. He  confirms  the  claimant's  diagnosis  of
       schizoaffective disorder, and finds that the claimant's present risk
       of self-harm is  low  to  moderate,  with  her  currently  reporting
       fleeting suicidal thoughts but denying any current plan or intent to
       harm herself or others.

   12. Mr Diwnycz relied upon  the  reasons  for  refusal  letter  of  22nd
       November 2019 and made  oral  submissions.  It  is  argued  for  the
       Secretary of State, in summary, as follows. It is  argued  that  the
       country guidance cases and country of  origin  materials  show  that
       there is no Article 15(c) risk for the claimant  as  a  returnee  to
       Afghanistan. It is submitted that the situation  in  the  claimant's
       home province of Balkh/ Mazar-e-Sharif is stable.  The  claimant  is
       educated and has family so she can return safely to her home in that
       district and live with them. She could also obtain a  grant  through
       the assisted voluntary return programme if she returned  voluntarily
       to Afghanistan. It is not considered that country  conditions  would
       make it a breach of Articles 2 or 3 ECHR to return to Afghanistan.

   13. It is also not considered to be the case that return to  Afghanistan
       would be a breach of Article 3 ECHR due  to  the  claimant's  mental
       health problems.  There  is  country  of  origin  material,  and  in
       particular the CPIN Medical Issues Afghanistan published in November
       2020, that shows that there is both public (free care  funded  by  a
       German  charity) and  private  psychiatric  hospital  (in  and  out-
       patient) care in Kabul, and medication to  treat  schizophrenia  and
       depression. CBT is also available in Kabul if  needed.  It  is  also
       considered relevant that the claimant will have family  support  for
       her mental health problems. It was submitted that I should  be  wary
       of finding the death certificate a reliable  document,  particularly
       as it had not been provided to the Secretary of State in advance  of
       the hearing. The age of the claimant's mother differed significantly
       from that the claimant had given to Dr Singh, and the  claimant  was
       unable to explain the difference, although Mr Diwnycz accepted  that
       her mental health problems may be relevant to this inability. It  is
       not accepted that return to Afghanistan will lead to the  claimant's
       death or to suffering due to her health problems.

   14. Mr Diwnycz noted the country guidance  case  DH  (Particular  Social
       Group: Mental Health) Afghanistan [2020] UKUT 223, but  argued  that
       the factual scenario in that case was very different and here  there
       was nothing that would bring  this  claimant  to  the  attention  of
       potential persecutors as a result of her mental health condition  so
       as to result in her having a well founded fear of persecution.

   15. Mr Fazli submitted for the claimant that she should not be  returned
       to Afghanistan in light of her mental health problems, as this would
       cause her to be at  suicide  risk  and  lead  to  her  psychological
       deterioration, and thus be a breach of Articleb3 ECHR. He  submitted
       that the psychiatric evidence shows that the claimant  suffers  from
       schizophrenia, PTSD, depression, auditory hallucinations,  self-harm
       and suicidal ideation. He relied upon the reports of Dr Singh and Dr
       Latifi, who has experience of the state of  mental  health  care  in
       Afghanistan. I raised with Mr Fazli the fact that Dr Latifi had  not
       been told the starting point of  this  hearing  would  be  that  the
       claimant's history of persecution from the Taliban/ her male  family
       members was not believed, so this meant his report did  not  address
       the fact that I  would  be  starting  from  the  position  that  the
       claimant had potentially supportive family in Afghanistan. Mr  Fazli
       did not disagree that this was the position. I also asked  Mr  Fazli
       to take me to any element of Dr Latifi's report  which  stated  that
       the claimant  could  not  get  GP  type  services  and  her  current
       medication, or the modified medication Dr Latifi recommended if  she
       were returned to Afghanistan.  Mr  Fazli  accepted  that  there  was
       nothing in the report about these matters.

   16. Mr Fazli submitted that the claimant's return would also be a breach
       of Article 8 ECHR because she would have very significant  obstacles
       to integration on return to  Afghanistan  as  a  woman  with  mental
       health problems, and in the context of the lack of  support  if  her
       mental health deteriorated. It would be very hard for  the  claimant
       to start afresh in Afghanistan given her  mental  health  frailties.
       This was a case where there were exceptional circumstances, and thus
       where the appeal should be  allowed  on  this  basis  if  not  under
       Article 3 ECHR.

   17. At the end of the hearing I reserved my determination.

           Conclusions - Remaking

   18. This is a second appeal and so the starting point would normally  be
       the previous decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Shore.  Judge
       Shore did not find that the claimant's claim to be at real  risk  of
       serious harm in Afghanistan from the Taliban  and  her  conservative
       family, for promoting women's rights, or that she was at risk  of  a
       forced marriage, was credible, and I have preserved the findings  of
       the second First-tier Tribunal that her  protection  claim  on  this
       basis did not succeed in light of the new evidence she produced.

   19. The parties did not make submissions before me in  relation  to  the
       humanitarian protection appeal, however it is to  be  determined  by
       reference to paragraph 339C of the Immigration Rules which  in  turn
       makes reference to The Refugee or Person in  Need  of  International
       (Qualification)  Regulations  2006.  I  must  consider  whether  the
       claimant could safely live in her home district of Balkh  which  is,
       according to the country of origin materials, one of the safer areas
       of Afghanistan. The test is one of whether it is shown that there is
       a serious and individual threat to a civilian's life  by  reason  of
       indiscriminate violence or internal armed conflict. I find there  is
       no evidence before me of such a risk in this  area.  Further  Afghan
       country guidance in AK (Article 15(c)) [2012] UKUT 163 at  para  245
       found it was not made out that  there  was  an  Article  15(c)  risk
       travelling from Kabul to other major towns in Afghanistan. As such I
       find that there is no evidence that for  the  claimant  there  is  a
       qualifying risk  from  indiscriminate  violence  or  internal  armed
       conflict  if  she  is  returned  to  Afghanistan  entitling  her  to
       humanitarian protection.

   20. There was no medical evidence before the first  First-tier  Tribunal
       Judge, Judge Shore, so the Article 3 ECHR "medical" claim is  to  be
       determined on the evidence before the  second  First-tier  Tribunal,
       the findings from which I  have  preserved.  In  short  summary  the
       accepted medical evidence is that she has a history of mental health
       problems which appears to start in 2011 when she tried  to  cut  her
       throat, leaving her with scars, when she would have  been  15  years
       old. In 2013 she was diagnosed as suffering from schizophrenia,  and
       whilst living in Afghanistan, and she  was  sent  for  treatment  in
       India. She was admitted to hospital in Greece due to mental  illness
       on route to the UK in 2017. Her significant active medical  problems
       according to her GP are hypothyroidism and  schizophrenia.  She  was
       detained in a psychiatric in-patient unit between January  2018  and
       February 2018 and  diagnosed  as  having  schizoaffective  disorder,
       depressed type, and was started on antipsychotic medication and anti-
       depressant medication.  A  preserved  finding  from  the  First-tier
       Tribunal is that the  nature  of  her  illness  means  that  she  is
       sometimes delusional, and has provided delusional  evidence  to  her
       GP, for instance concerning being married and having children.  From
       the most recent psychiatric report of Dr Latifi it is clear that the
       impact of her illness is that the claimant  suffers  from  insomnia,
       feels paranoid and cannot trust people and therefore prefers  to  be
       alone. She reports that the  medication  stops  her  hearing  voices
       however, and that she is willing to take that medication.

   21. The reports of the two consultant  psychiatrists,  Dr  Singh  (dated
       22nd January 2020) and Dr Latifi (dated 29th January 2021),  confirm
       that  the  appellant  continues  to  suffer   from   schizoaffective
       disorder, and so she  has  depressive  symptoms  including  suicidal
       thoughts. In his report of 22nd January 2020 Dr Singh  records  that
       at that time the claimant did not however harbour any intent or plan
       to end her life, although she had often thought about ending it.  Dr
       Singh's view is that if the claimant were to be suffering  a  period
       of psychological distress or severe depression at  the  prospect  of
       her having to return to Afghanistan then the  risk  of  suicide  and
       significant self-harm is likely to increase. The  preserved  finding
       of the First-tier Tribunal is that there is however no real risk  of
       suicide if the claimant is returned to Afghanistan as  a  result  of
       her mental health diagnosis. The evidence  from  the  report  of  Dr
       Latifi with respect to the issue  of  self-harm  is  not  materially
       different from that of Dr Singh. The claimant tells Dr  Latifi  that
       although her mother has now passed away that her relationships  with
       her cousins are protective factors against her taking her  on  life.
       Dr Latifi concludes that the claimant's present risk of self-harm is
       low to moderate, with  her  currently  reporting  fleeting  suicidal
       thoughts but denying any current plan or intent to harm  herself  or
       others.  Considering all of the evidence before me I find no  reason
       to depart from the finding of the First-tier Tribunal, that there is
       no real risk of the claimant attempting suicide or  self-harming  if
       the claimant is removed to Afghanistan.

   22. It is undoubtedly the case, and documented  in  some  detail  by  Dr
       Latifi in his report, that the mental health services of Afghanistan
       are generally extremely poor and provide inadequately for those with
       such ill-health. However, there is no evidence before  me  that  the
       claimant requires, or is likely within a reasonable period  of  time
       to require, in-patient care. She has had her schizophrenia diagnosis
       since 2013, and since her period of in-patient care  in  the  UK  in
       2018 has been prescribed appropriate medication for  schizoaffective
       disorder. She does not wish to have cognitive behavioural therapy in
       a group, and there is no evidence before me that she wants or  needs
       to have any talking therapies. She is currently supported by her  GP
       who is able to monitor and fine tune her  medication.  There  is  no
       evidence before me that the claimant cannot access GP type  services
       and the anti-psychotic and anti-depressant medication, or equivalent
       medication to that which she currently takes, to manage  her  mental
       health condition in Afghanistan. I do not  find  therefore,  on  the
       evidence before me, that the claimant  would  be  at  real  risk  of
       serious harm as a result of not receiving the medical care in  terms
       of medication and/or the  support  with  that  medication  that  she
       requires.

   23. Mr Diwnycz has drawn my attention to the country  guidance  case  DH
       (Particular Social Group: Mental Health) Afghanistan but as  he  has
       argued the manifestation of this claimant's mental health  condition
       is not such, on the evidence before me, that it would  lead  her  to
       come into conflict with cultural norms in Afghanistan and  thus  put
       her in danger of a real risk of  serious  harm  for  reason  of  her
       diagnosis. The evidence that she gave before me was that her  mental
       health meant that she did not like to mix with people as she  became
       worried about them (which also reflects what she said to Dr Latifi).
       I have preserved from the  First-tier  Tribunal  a  conclusion  that
       sometimes she may misrepresent facts, for instance  saying  she  was
       married with children when she is not,  however there is no evidence
       that as a result of her mental health diagnosis that  she  would  do
       anything  potentially  provocative  such  as  behave  in  a   sexual
       disinhibited fashion, or remove her  clothing,  or  abuse  drugs  or
       alcohol, and indeed in respect to this last matter it is recorded in
       the report of Dr Latifi that she  does  not  use  illegal  drugs  or
       alcohol. So, although if it were known to others outside her  family
       that the claimant  had  mental  health  problems  she  might  suffer
       discrimination or a lack of appropriate understanding I do not  find
       this would amount a real risk of serious harm.

   24. I now turn to the  issue  of  family  support,  which  clearly  this
       claimant would be very  likely  to  require,  given  her  vulnerable
       mental health, if returned to Afghanistan. It is a preserved finding
       from the First-tier Tribunal that the claimant's family pose her  no
       threat, and it is recorded in the report of Dr  Singh  that  in  the
       past they have sent her for mental health treatment to India.

   25. In the report of Dr Singh the claimant is recorded  as  saying  that
       she sometimes spoke to her mother, and that it was  her  mother  and
       maternal uncle who arranged her journey from Afghanistan to the  UK.
       Before me she gave evidence that she had not been in touch with  her
       mother for a long time, and that  her  UK  relatives  had  seemingly
       hidden her mother's death from her until  very  recently.  She  said
       that her mother had lived with a maternal uncle separately from  her
       father. The claimant has produced a death certificate for her mother
       in a bundle of documents submitted on 1st  February  2021,  the  day
       before this hearing. As Mr Diwnycz has  submitted  the  original  of
       this document is not available to us. It is sadly possible that  the
       claimant's mother has died of a combination of  Covid-19  and  heart
       problems, however her  age  as  recorded  on  the  document  differs
       significantly from that given to Dr Singh by the claimant. Dr  Singh
       records that the claimant told him her mother was 50  years  old  in
       January 2020, whereas the death certificate records that she was  60
       years old in June 2020. It is the case that the claimant was  unable
       in oral evidence before me to give evidence on dates and time in all
       contexts however, and that Dr Singh also found  her  to  be  a  poor
       historian, and concluded that  poverty  of  speech  is  one  of  the
       symptoms of schizo-affective disorder. I note that the claimant told
       Dr Latifi that her mother had died when she saw him in January  2021
       for the appointment prior to  his  preparation  of  the  psychiatric
       report, when explaining  that  she  had  been  a  protective  factor
       against taking her own life in the past. I note  that  the  claimant
       says that the death certificate was sent to her via  WhatsApp  by  a
       friend called Susan. I  note  that  in  her  witness  statement  she
       explains that this person is an ex-class mate  from  university  who
       also sent the certificate about her voluntary  work  and  university
       studies in Afghanistan. These documents  have  been  found,  on  the
       lower civil  standard  of  proof  to  be  genuine.  Ultimately  when
       weighing all the evidence I find that the death certificate  of  the
       claimant's mother  should  also  be  given  some  weight,  and  when
       considering all of the evidence  find  that  the  claimant's  mother
       sadly passed away in June 2020.

   26. It remains the case however that the claimant has given evidence  of
       having a father, two brothers and a maternal uncle  in  Afghanistan,
       and that there is no evidence that any of  these  people  would  not
       assist her by providing her with a home and support. She is provided
       with accommodation and support (and helped with medical  matters  as
       recorded in the GP notes) in the UK by her second cousin, a  British
       citizen, Ms NO, who gave evidence before the First-tier Tribunal  in
       June 2018, but not before the First-tier Tribunal in  February  2020
       or before me. In June 2018 NO's mother was also said to be living in
       Afghanistan. Although there was no mention of  whether  NO's  mother
       remains there before me I find that other extended family, including
       female family, are present in Afghanistan at the current time.

   27. I find that it is open to the claimant to return to  live  with  her
       father and siblings in the Balkh district of Afghanistan where  they
       reside, as they have been found to pose no  threat  to  her  in  the
       preserved findings of the First-tier Tribunal with  respect  to  her
       protection claim, or in the alternative to live with other  extended
       family such as her maternal uncle who lives in the same district, or
       with the family of Ms NO, who has supported her in all ways  in  the
       UK, or possibly with her university  friend  Susan,  with  whom  she
       clearly still has contact, and her family. As such I find that there
       is no  Article  3  ECHR  risk  of  serious  harm  arising  from  the
       claimant's mental health problems or from a lack of necessary family
       support as  a  result  of  the  vulnerabilities  her  mental  health
       problems give her.

   28. I finally turn to the issue of Article 8 ECHR, firstly by  reference
       to the Article 8 ECHR Immigration Rules at paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi).
       The claimant suffers from a serious mental health condition  and  in
       whichever country she lives this will limit  her  private  life  and
       ability to integrate  within  society.  However,  I  find  that  the
       claimant will not be more seriously prejudiced  in  her  ability  to
       integrate by  being  in  Afghanistan  rather  than  in  the  UK.  In
       Afghanistan she has the ability to communicate fluently  in  one  of
       the national languages, and extended family  and  old  friends,  the
       lack of which makes integration more difficult in the UK. In the  UK
       she may however encounter more sympathy and  understanding  for  her
       mental health condition in the wider public.  There is no  evidence,
       as recorded above, before me that she will not be able to obtain the
       medication and medical supervision of that medication  she  requires
       in Afghanistan. The claimant is a relatively well-educated woman.  I
       have preserved the findings that she studied  for  the  first  three
       semesters of a medical degree at Aria University in the  Faculty  of
       Medicine) and has done some volunteer work distributed  leaflets  to
       Afghan women about contraception, birth control and  sexual  health.
       She may be able to do similar work in the future. She has family and
       friends in Afghanistan, and I have found there is no  evidence  that
       they will not be willing to provide accommodation and support her if
       she is not able to earn sufficiently to  provide  these  things  for
       herself. Further her family in Afghanistan have shown an ability  to
       accept and understand her condition as a medical one by sending  her
       for treatment abroad to India in the past, and have relations in the
       UK who have been supporting her  directly,  taking  her  into  their
       family home. On the totality of evidence before me  I  do  not  find
       that  the  claimant  would  have  very  significant   obstacles   to
       integration on return to Afghanistan.

   29. I also do not find that  her  removal  to  Afghanistan  would  be  a
       disproportionate interference with her right to respect for  private
       life under Article 8 ECHR. All of the claimant's residence in the UK
       has been unlawful and so her private life ties in the UK,  including
       those with her cousin, can only  be  given  little  weight  applying
       s.117B(4) of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002.  I
       find that there is nothing else  that  weighs  against  her  removal
       beyond the fact of general levels of  discrimination  against  those
       with  mental  health  conditions  in  Afghanistan.  When   all   the
       circumstances of this case (particularly the lack of  evidence  that
       her family will not support her family and her mental  health  needs
       will not be met) are considered I find that the public  interest  in
       the removal of the claimant as a person  who  does  not  qualify  to
       remain either in accordance with the UK's international  obligations
       or  the  Immigration  Rules  makes  her  removal  to  Afghanistan  a
       proportionate interference with her Article 8 ECHR ties to the UK  .




Decision:

   1. The making of the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
      making of an error on a point of law.

   2. I set aside the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  allowing  the
      appeal on  humanitarian  protection  and  human  rights  grounds,  and
      substitute a decision dismissing the asylum appeal.

   3.  I  remake  the  appeal  by  dismissing  it  on  asylum,  humanitarian
      protection and human rights grounds.






Signed:     Fiona Lindsley                      Date:  9th February 2021
Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley

Annex A: Error of Law Decision

                            DECISION AND REASONS

    Introduction

    1. The claimant is a citizen of Afghanistan born in 1996. She  came  to
       the UK in October 2017, and claimed asylum in the  same  month.  The
       claim was refused on 4th May 2018. She appealed and her  appeal  was
       dismissed on all grounds by First-tier Tribunal Judge Shore on  28th
       July 2018. She made further  representations  to  the  Secretary  of
       State on 21st June 2019, and these were refused in a decision of the
       respondent dated 22nd November 2019 which nevertheless accepted that
       she had made a valid fresh claim and therefore  was  entitled  to  a
       second appeal.  The claimant lodged  her  appeal,  which  was  oddly
       allowed on asylum grounds, under Article 15(c) of the  Qualification
       Directive and on Article 8 ECHR grounds but dismissed under  Article
       3 ECHR in a decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Mill  promulgated
       on 19th February 2020.

    2. Permission to appeal was granted on all grounds to the Secretary  of
       State by First-tier Tribunal Judge Foudy on the 11th May 2020 on the
       basis that it was arguable that the appeal had been allowed  on  two
       mutually exclusive grounds (asylum and humanitarian protection)  and
       whilst this might be a slip it is arguably unclear from the decision
       whether there are findings on asylum grounds as opposed to simply on
       humanitarian protection grounds. It is also  found  to  be  arguable
       that there were no proper reasons given for the finding of  risk  on
       return to Afghanistan.

    3. The matter came  before  me  to  determine  whether  the  First-tier
       Tribunal had erred in law. The hearing was held at  a  remote  Skype
       for Business hearing in light of the need to reduce the transmission
       of the Covid-19 virus, and in  light  of  this  being  found  to  be
       acceptable by both parties, and being a means by  which  the  appeal
       could be fairly and justly determined.  There  were  no  significant
       issues of connectivity or audibility with the hearing,  although  Ms
       Isherwood lost use of her camera part way through  the  hearing  but
       confirmed that she was happy to proceed without the video element as
       her audio was still working.

    4. At the start of the hearing I asked Mr  Fazli  whether  he  accepted
       that there was an  error  in  allowing  the  appeal  on  asylum  and
       humanitarian protection grounds. It was agreed by both parties  that
       the Notice of Decision ought to  have  read  the  asylum  appeal  is
       dismissed; the humanitarian protection appeal  is  allowed  and  the
       human rights appeal is allowed as this would be consistent with  the
       reasons sections of the decision.





Submissions - Error of Law

    5. In grounds of appeal and in oral submissions from Ms Isherwood it is
       argued for the Secretary of State, in summary, as follows.

    6.  It is argued that the First-tier Tribunal errs in law  in  allowing
       the appeal on asylum and humanitarian protection  grounds  which  is
       clearly a legal error  as  they  are  mutually  exclusive  outcomes.
       Further there are no findings to show that  the  Refugee  Convention
       claim is well found, particularly  there  is  no  Convention  reason
       which justifies this grant. It is argued that it was a slip  of  the
       pen to allow the appeal on this basis, particularly as from the body
       of the decision at paragraphs 40-53 it is clear that the  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge did  intend  to  allow  the  matter  on  humanitarian
       protection grounds, and these are mutually exclusive outcomes.

    7. Ms Isherwood submitted that the starting point  should  be  that  in
       determining the asylum appeal the claimant had been found not to  be
       a party to a forced marriage; not to be at risk  from  the  Taliban;
       not to be at risk from her father and brothers; and not to have been
       prevented from going into education by her family. It was  therefore
       unclear why the First-tier Tribunal had treated the  claimant  as  a
       lone woman when determining the humanitarian  protection  and  human
       rights appeals when she had a family in Afghanistan. In this context
       it is argued that the First-tier Tribunal secondly erred in  law  by
       failing to provide adequate  reasons  for  allowing  the  appeal  on
       humanitarian protection grounds. It is argued  that  the  First-tier
       Tribunal  found  negative  societal  attitudes  and   discrimination
       against those with mental health problems wrongly to be of  a  level
       which amounted to persecution at paragraphs 37 -39 of the  decision.
       The findings in this section that the claimant's mental health would
       decline are  entirely  speculative.  There  is  also  a  failure  to
       consider that she has managed to travel to  the  UK,  and  had  been
       independent and studied at university in Afghanistan.

    8. Thirdly, it is argued that the First-tier Tribunal erred in  law  by
       finding that the claimant cannot relocate to Kabul,  and  so  is  at
       Article 15(c) risk on return. There is no reasoning as  to  why  she
       cannot go to her family in her home in Mazar-e Sharif.  It  was  not
       sufficient to find that the country guidance case of AS  (Safety  of
       Kabul) Afghanistan CG [2018] UKUT 00118  had been  remitted  to  the
       Upper Tribunal to be remade due to an error. The claimant  would  be
       able to return to her family so she is not an IDP, as is implied  at
       one point,  and she is educated, has lived  previously  with  mental
       health problems in Afghanistan since her diagnosis in 2013, and  has
       been independent so it would not be unduly harsh for her relocate to
       Kabul in any case.

    9. Fourthly, it is argued that the First-tier Tribunal erred in law  by
       allowing the appeal on Article  8  ECHR  grounds  because  there  is
       insufficient evidence to show she could meet the asylum/humanitarian
       evidential thresholds and this test would require a higher  standard
       of proof, namely the balance  of  probabilities.  Again,  the  wrong
       facts have been applied as she would not be returning to Afghanistan
       as a lone woman, but would have  family,  and  has  previously  been
       independent and shown personal fortitude by travelling alone to  the
       UK. She would clearly be able to reintegrate  into  her  country  of
       birth and culture, and the reasoning set  out  in  the  decision  is
       wholly inadequate. Whilst it is accepted that she has mental  health
       problems there is no reasoning or evidence showing  that  she  would
       not be able to obtain the treatment she  needs  in  her  country  of
       origin.

   10. Mr Fazli argues that it is rightly found  at  paragraph  16  of  the
       decision those with mental health problems can properly be seen as a
       social group in Afghanistan as there is country of  origin  evidence
       that persons with mental health  disabilities  are  subject  to  ill
       treatment or discrimination. He argued that it was therefore  proper
       to  find  that  the  claimant  would   suffer   discrimination   and
       victimisation if returned to Afghanistan on account of her  accepted
       mental health diagnosis, particularly as it  is  found  she  suffers
       from schizoaffective disorder  and  needs  antipsychotic  and  anti-
       depressive drugs, as set out at paragraph 19 of the decision, and at
       paragraph 38 of the decision that  she  would  not  gain  access  to
       treatment in Afghanistan without the assistance of  her  cousin.  Mr
       Fazli submitted that it had been properly found that Kabul  and  the
       claimant's home area were not safe, and that  she  would  have  very
       significant  obstacles  to  integration.  Mr  Fazli  was  unable  to
       identify for me where  the  First-tier  Tribunal  reasoned  why  the
       claimant could not return to her family in  Mazar-e-Sharif  and  why
       she could not get care and medical treatment in Afghanistan however.



           Conclusions - Error of Law

   11. The First-tier Tribunal sets out the correct tests for allowing  the
       appeal  in  relation  to  asylum  and  humanitarian  protection   at
       paragraphs 4 and 5 at the start of the decision. It has been agreed,
       as set out above, that the decision  section  of  the  determination
       contained errors and that to be consistent  with  the  body  of  the
       decision it should have read: appeal dismissed  on  asylum  grounds;
       appeal allowed on humanitarian protection grounds and  human  rights
       grounds.

   12. It is noted that the claimant is a vulnerable adult as there  is  an
       independent psychiatric report giving a diagnosis of schizoaffective
       disorder (a finding that has  symptoms  of  both  schizophrenia  and
       depression) and it is noted that she takes anti-psychotic and  anti-
       depressant medication. The First-tier Tribunal undertakes a  careful
       analysis of the medical evidence and concludes that there is no real
       risk of suicide, and finds that her mental health has had a historic
       impact on her ability to give evidence in written and oral forms for
       her asylum claim, although it was  found  she  was  well  enough  to
       participate in the hearing, as  set  out  at  paragraph  26  of  the
       decision.

   13. This is a second appeal and so the starting point  is  the  previous
       decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Shore.  Judge  Shore  did  not
       find that the claimant's claim to be at real risk of serious harm in
       Afghanistan from  the  Taliban  and  her  conservative  family,  for
       promoting women's rights, or that  she  was  at  risk  of  a  forced
       marriage, was credible. Her new claim introduces more evidence about
       her mental health showing that she is psychotic and delusional;  and
       documentary evidence about her studies  and  witness  evidence  from
       Afghanistan.

   14. The First-tier Tribunal reaches conclusions, set out  at  paragraphs
       32 to 36 of the decision,  that  were  unarguably  open  to  it  and
       properly reasoned that the claimant's claims to be at real  risk  of
       serious harm or honour killing from her father and brother, who were
       said by the claimant to be religious fanatics, and the  Taliban  and
       to be at real risk of a forced marriage were not  made  out  to  the
       lower civil standard of proof. I find that this is the  disposal  of
       the asylum appeal, and the Secretary of  State  has  rightly  argued
       that it was an error of law, possibly by way of a slip of  the  pen,
       to allow the appeal on asylum grounds,  and  find  that  this  error
       should be corrected by changing the decision so that the  appeal  on
       asylum grounds is dismissed.

   15. The First-tier Tribunal then  turns  to  the  determination  of  the
       humanitarian protection appeal by reference to Article 15(c) of  the
       Qualification Directive. It is firstly considered whether she  could
       return to her home area of Mazar-e Sharif, which is found  to  be  a
       large city and one of the safer areas of Afghanistan.  It  is  found
       at paragraph 39 of the decision that the claimant  would  be  highly
       vulnerable because she is suffering from long-term psychotic  mental
       illness which means that she misrepresents facts, and that she would
       not be able to work (it having been found  that  her  previous  work
       history was as a volunteer in a leaflet programme - paragraph 36  of
       the decision). It is found that  she would be able to  find  support
       from her mother in Mazar-e Sharif on return to Afghanistan,  but  as
       she would be returned to Kabul there would be no safe route for  her
       to travel to her home area, and so she would be  unable  to  arrange
       travel to her mother, particularly as her  mental  health  would  be
       likely  to  be  decline  rapidly  without  treatment.  I  find  this
       reasoning to be unlawfully insufficient. There is no reasoning as to
       why she is not returning to her whole  family,  as  her  father  and
       brothers have been found not to pose any threat to her. There is  no
       reasoning as to why her family could not assist her in returning  to
       Mazar-e Sharif from Kabul, or as to why it would be unsafe  for  her
       to travel from Kabul to Mazar-e Sharif, or why she would be  without
       treatment in the form of medication for her mental  health  problems
       at this stage. The Afghan country guidance of AK  (Article  15(c  ))
       [2012] UKUT 163 at para 245 found it was not made out that there was
       Article 15(c ) risk travelling.

   16. The First-tier Tribunal then considered whether the  claimant  would
       be able to live in Kabul. Consideration is given to the state of the
       country guidance on the safety of Kabul (at that point  remitted  by
       the Court of Appeal for remaking), and the EASO report of June  2019
       and the UNHRC Guidelines of August 2018, and the  respondent's  CPIN
       of July 2019. The  question for the First-tier Tribunal was  whether
       the claimant would be able to live without Article 15(c )  risks  in
       Kabul. This test is one of whether it  is  shown  that  there  is  a
       serious and individual threat to a  civilian's  life  by  reason  of
       indiscriminate violence or internal armed  conflict.   I  find  that
       there  was  a  failure  to  look  at   the   claimant's   individual
       circumstances (as found by the First-tier Tribunal) and  apply  them
       to the country of origin materials and  reach  conclusions  on  this
       matter: in particular it was not considered that  she  is  a  person
       with family to whom she can turn for support and not a  lone  woman;
       she is educated and has worked as a volunteer; and she has lived  in
       Afghanistan with mental illness between 2013 and 2017.  There  is  a
       failure to reason why she would not  get  sufficient  mental  health
       support with reference to the country of  origin  materials  in  the
       context of having family support.

   17. The appeal was also allowed on Article 8 ECHR grounds, on the  basis
       that  the  claimant  would  have  very  significant   obstacles   to
       integration. This decision likewise  errs  in  law  for  failure  to
       consider relevant matters and to  reason  the  outcome.  It  is  not
       explained why the claimant would get inadequate medical treatment in
       Afghanistan with reference to country of origin  materials,  or  why
       her care needs would not be met if she has no difficulties with  her
       family. It is again wrongly found that she would be a lone woman  if
       returned to Afghanistan. Whilst there is country of origin  evidence
       of general discrimination against those with mental health  problems
       in Afghanistan this is insufficient to say that  in  the  particular
       circumstances  of  the  claimant  having  education,  experience  of
       voluntary work and apparent family support that  she  would  not  be
       able to integrate in society.

   18. I substitute a decision dismissing the asylum  appeal  and  preserve
       the findings which I have found lead to the dismissal of the  asylum
       claim based on a risk of an honour killing/ forced marriage, said to
       come  from the Taliban, her father and brother, at paragraphs 32  to
       36 of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal. I also  preserve  the
       findings about the claimant's mental health at paragraphs 18  to  26
       and the new documentation, at paragraphs  27  to  31,  to  which  no
       challenge is made.

   19. I set aside the decisions allowing the humanitarian  protection  and
       Article 8 ECHR appeals, and  that  dismissing  the  Article  3  ECHR
       appeal. I also set aside all findings at  paragraphs  37  to  58.  I
       adjourn the  remaking  of  the  humanitarian  protection  and  human
       rights' appeals, which I find should take  place  before  the  Upper
       Tribunal. Mr Fazli said that there might be new evidence called from
       witnesses for these appeals and requested a  Dari  interpreter,  but
       confirmed that he was happy for this remaking hearing to take  place
       in a remote Skype for Business hearing.
          Decision:

   1. The making of the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
      making of an error on a point of law.

   2. I set aside the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  allowing  the
      appeal  on  humanitarian  protection  and  human  rights  grounds  and
      substitute a decision dismissing the asylum appeal.

   3. I adjourn the re-making  of  the  humanitarian  protection  and  human
      rights appeals.


   Directions

        i) The remaking hearing will consist of a remote Skype for Business
           hearing.

       ii) Any further documentary evidence relied upon should be filed and
           served ten days prior to the remaking hearing.

      iii) A Dari interpreter is requested.

       iv) The time estimate is 3 hours.






Signed:     Fiona Lindsley                   Date:  3rd November 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley


