
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
PA/11902/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                    | Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 26 July 2019                         | On 08 August 2019                  |
|                                        |                                    |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PEART

                                   Between

                                   MD B M
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Franco, of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh.  He was born  on  19  January
    1988.  He appealed against the  respondent's  decision  to  refuse  him
    asylum, humanitarian protection and on human rights  grounds  dated  19
    October 2018.

 2. In a decision promulgated on 25 April 2019, Judge  Hanley  (the  judge)
    dismissed the appeal.  He did not find the appellant to be credible and
    that he would not be at risk on return.   The  appellant's  removal  to
    Bangladesh would not engage Article 8.

 3. The grounds claim the judge failed to adequately take into account  the
    appellant's poor mental health and vulnerability which was material  as
    it had an adverse effect  upon  the  appellant's  overall  credibility.
    Further, the  judge  at  [77]-[82]  failed  to  properly  consider  the
    appellant's documentation or provide adequate reasons why the documents
    were not accepted.

 4. Judge S P J Buchanan refused permission to appeal in a  decision  dated
    28 May 2019.  He said inter alia as follows:

         "3.  The FTTJ addresses the psychiatrist's report at paragraphs  84
             and 85 of the decision.  He explains that the expert fails  to
             comply with  the  Practice  Direction  in  respect  of  expert
             evidence and 'has failed to provide a clear statement  of  his
             duty to the court'.   The  FTTJ  gives  adequate  reasons  for
             giving little weight to the evidence.  I refer to AAW  (Expert
             evidence - weight) [2015] UKUT 673 (IAC);  and  consider  that
             the FTTJ's decision accords with that decision.

         4.   As regards documents, the most cogent of reasons are given  at
             paragraph 82 for giving little weight to  them  [as  noted  at
             paragraph 78].  The  FTTJ  explains  that  the  appellant  was
             inconsistent in his evidence as regards 'key features  of  the
             documentation'.  There are adequate reasons given."

 5. The application was renewed to  the  Upper  Tribunal.   Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Stephen Smith granted permission in his decision  dated  25  June
    2019.  He said inter alia as follows:

         "1.  The judge found the appellant to be an 'evasive  witness'  and
             that he  'avoided  answering  the  question  put  to  him'  on
             occasions.  That being so,  it  is  arguable  that  the  judge
             failed to have proper regard to the medical evidence  -  which
             was dismissed in brisk terms at [84], towards the end  of  the
             judge's operative credibility analysis - which said  that  the
             appellant  found  it  difficult  to  understand   and   answer
             questions, and that he struggled  to  provide  meaningful  and
             coherent  answers.   See  Dr  Pennybacker's  report  at   [5].
             Although the judge rightly observed that that report  did  not
             comply with the letter of the  Practice  Direction  concerning
             expert reports, the report concluded with  a  statement  which
             made clear that the report's conclusions were the author's own
             professional  opinions.   The   remaining   medical   evidence
             outlined the appellant's admission to a  psychiatric  hospital
             in Bangladesh, and his referral  for  NHS  treatment  for  his
             mental  health  conditions  in  this   country.    Given   the
             significance   the   judge   ascribed   to   the   appellant's
             'evasiveness', arguably it was a material error of law not  to
             consider the impact of the appellant's mental  health  on  his
             ability to give a coherent and clear account.

         2.    The  criticisms  concerning  the  judge's  analysis  of   the
             documents provided by the appellant have less merit.  However,
             I grant permission on all grounds."



Submissions on Error of Law

 6. The representatives drew my attention to a  psychiatric  report  before
    the judge dated  5  February  2019.   It  is  at  pages  45-46  of  the
    appellant's bundle with additional medical evidence at pages  47-50  of
    the bundle.  At page 46, Dr Pennybacker consultant psychiatrist said at
    [5] "...... in my opinion he is not fit to provide oral evidence in  an
    asylum interview or a court of law".

 7. The asylum interview had already taken place prior to Dr  Pennybacker's
    report.

 8. Mr Tarlow conceded an error on the part of  the  judge  notwithstanding
    that neither the appellant's Counsel Mr Mold or the Presenting  Officer
    drew the report to the  attention  of  the  judge.   See  [85]  of  the
    decision.

Conclusion on Error of Law

 9. Notwithstanding that the report regarding the  appellant's  fitness  to
    give evidence was not drawn to his attention, the judge was obliged  to
    take account of the  same.   Notwithstanding  that  the  appellant  was
    tendered by Counsel, the judge was obliged to raise  with  the  parties
    the appellant's fitness to give oral evidence given what Dr Pennybacker
    had to  say.   In  such  circumstances,  it  was  irrelevant  that  the
    consultant psychiatrist had not complied with the Practice Direction.

Decision

10. The judge materially erred.  His decision is  set  aside  and  will  be
    remade in the First-tier  following  a  de  novo  hearing.   Mr  Franco
    requested and I agreed that the re-hearing would take place  at  Taylor
    House as owing to  the  appellant's  psychiatric  condition,  he  finds
    travelling to Hatton Cross from Central London onerous.


Anonymity Direction continued.



Signed                              Date 26 July 2019






Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Peart

