
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11413/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 14th January 2019                          |On 6th February 2019          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                 chinedu [a]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr G Brown of Counsel instructed by Parker Rhodes
Hickmotts
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, HOPO


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the appellant's appeal against the decision  of  Judge  Dearden
    made following a hearing at Bradford on 6th December 2017.





Background

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Zimbabwe born on 15th September 1999.  He
    arrived in the UK on 27th July 2016  on a visit visa because he was  to
    take part in a football tournament in the UK, and  claimed  asylum  two
    weeks later.

 3. The appellant's claim is based upon his  association  with  his  mother
    whom he said had had a number of difficulties with the  police  because
    of her membership of the MDC.  She had been questioned and  subject  to
    violence; the appellant believed that his mother had died as  a  result
    of  having been assaulted.  He also raised a  sur  place  claim  saying
    that in the summer of 2017 he discovered that he  had  sexual  feelings
    towards his own sex and believed that he was bisexual.

 4. The judge disbelieved the appellant's claim.  He noted that  the  death
    certificate indicated that  his  mother  had  died  of  chronic  kidney
    disease and there was no evidence to establish that she had  died  from
    trauma.  He observed that the appellant had left the country on a valid
    visa and on his own passport. He did not accept that the appellant  had
    been able to do so because his mother  had  changed  his  name  shortly
    before he departed. There was no documentary evidence of  such  a  name
    change.

 5. The appellant had given discrepant evidence in relation to  whether  he
    himself had had  any  difficulties.   The  judge  applied  the  country
    guidance case of CM [2013] UKUT 00059 which  held  that  as  a  general
    matter there was significantly less politically motivated  violence  in
    Zimbabwe compared to the  situation  considered  in  RN  and  that  the
    evidence did not show that as a general matter the return of  a  failed
    asylum seeker from the UK, having no  significant  MDC  profile,  would
    result in that person facing a  real  risk  of  having  to  demonstrate
    loyalty to ZANU-PF.

 6. Although the appellant said he had no relatives in Zimbabwe, the  judge
    concluded that he could set himself up in Harare or Bulawayo.   He  was
    now an adult, and educated, and he could rebuild his life there.

 7. So far as the appellant's claim to bisexuality was concerned the  judge
    noted that the author of the letter from  Yorkshire  MESMAC,  a  sexual
    health organisation was not present to give evidence and in  any  event
    the claim had not been made until  November  2017,  very  late  in  the
    process.

 8. At paragraph 32 the judge wrote:

         "In the alternative and without prejudice of the aforegoing even if
         the appellant's assertion as to  his  bisexuality  is  true  it  is
         apparent (following HJ (Iran)) that the  appellant  has  been  very
         discreet in his dealings with MESMAC since the summer of 2017.   He
         has had a one to one support session and been to a private  meeting
         of people who identify as LGBT.  He has  therefore  chosen  of  his
         volition whilst in this country to be discreet  rather  than  overt
         and open about his sexuality.  If he wished to do so in a free  and
         liberal country like the United Kingdom the  appellant  could  have
         been open and overt about his bisexuality but he has chosen not  to
         do that because he chooses to be a private person and because he is
         not even sure of his own feelings  rather  than  because  he  fears
         persecution in the UK if he is openly and overtly bisexual.  If  he
         is discerning and discreet in private  in  his  dealings  with  his
         sexual feelings in the UK where there is no  chance  of  him  being
         persecuted, then in my conclusion he would choose to behave in  the
         same way in Zimbabwe."

 9. He applied the country guidance case of LZ [2011] UKUT 00487 which held
    that there was no general risk to gays and lesbians and that there  was
    a gay scene in Zimbabwe, within limitations.   He  declined  to  depart
    from the country guidance and dismissed the appeal.

The Grounds of Application

10. The appellant sought permission to appeal on three grounds.

11. First the judge had made a factual mistake in that  the  appellant  had
    produced evidence of the name change at E2 and E3 of  the  respondent's
    bundle.  He clearly has a different name to his mother.

12. Second, the judge failed  to  adequately  engage  with  the  impact  of
    political change in Zimbabwe.

13. Third, the judge had not given proper reasons for considering that  the
    claim of bisexuality was merely an attempt to bolster his case.  It was
    understandable  that  the  appellant  would  only  have  realised   his
    sexuality whilst in the UK given the  deeply  homophobic  attitudes  in
    Zimbabwe.  Furthermore the judge  had  misunderstood  the  evidence  in
    relation to discretion.  The appellant had attended one to one sessions
    for support which was in fact indicative of a person being  open  about
    their sexuality.

14. Permission to appeal was granted by Deputy Upper Tribunal  Judge  Saini
    on 26th February 2018 for the reasons stated in the grounds.

Submissions

15. Mr Brown submitted that the judge had made a factual error in  relation
    to the name change.  He made no  further  submissions  in  relation  to
    ground 2 but said that the judge's consideration of the bisexual  claim
    was not properly reasoned.  He had not explored the consequences of the
    appellant's late realisation of his bisexuality.  There was  no  proper
    basis upon which he could have concluded that the appellant  would  act
    discreetly on a return to Zimbabwe.

16. Mr Diwnycz submitted that the decision was wholly sustainable and  that
    the judge had properly dealt with the evidence which was before him.

Consideration of Whether there is a Material Error of Law

17. I am not persuaded that the  judge  erred  in  law  for  the  following
    reasons.

18. First, in relation to the name change, although it is apparent from the
    documents in the respondent's bundle that the appellant had a different
    name from his mother, that is not evidence, as the  appellant  claimed,
    that the name was changed fairly shortly before he left  Zimbabwe.   In
    any event the point is immaterial.  On the judge's sustainable findings
    the appellant's mother died from kidney disease  and  not  from  trauma
    associated with having been beaten as a consequence of her support  for
    the MDC.

19. There is no possible error in the judge applying  the country  guidance
    case of CM, which held that the situation  in  Zimbabwe  was  now  much
    improved. There was no reason to believe that the appellant would be at
    risk on return on account of any imputed political opinion.

20. So far as the claim to bisexuality is concerned, it is not quite  clear
    whether, on the evidence before the judge, the  appellant  had  decided
    that he was in fact bisexual.  He had had a single one to  one  support
    session and had been to a private meeting of  people  who  identify  as
    LGBT.  He has entered into no  gay  relationships  here.   He  has  not
    entered into a gay lifestyle.  It is therefore difficult to  understand
    what else the judge could have done with the  evidence  other  than  to
    conclude that there was no real risk that he would  wish  to  enjoy  an
    overt and open gay lifestyle in Zimbabwe.

Notice of Decision

The  original  judge  did  not  err  in  law.   His  decision  stands.   The
appellant's appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


[pic]
Signed                              Date 4 February 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor
