

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                  Appeal Number:
PA/11409/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 13th September 2019                 |On 1st October 2019                   |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DEANS

                                   Between

                                     M N
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss J Todd, Latta & Co, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A Govan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This appeal is brought against a decision by Judge of the First-tier
      Tribunal J G Macdonald dismissing an appeal on protection and human
      rights grounds.  Following an earlier hearing before the Upper
      Tribunal on 20th June 2019 I found an error of law in the decision of
      the First-tier Tribunal.  My decision on the error of law, reproduced
      at paragraphs 2-12 below, was dated 10th July 2019.  The appeal was re-
      listed before me for the purpose of re-making the decision.

   2. The appellant is a national of Vietnam.  She was trafficked from
      Vietnam to Europe.  She managed to escape from the traffickers and
      make a claim for asylum in the UK.  She fears that if she returns to
      Vietnam she will be at risk from traffickers and from loan sharks, who
      have been targeting her family in Vietnam.  She is receiving treatment
      for her mental health and has suicidal thoughts.

   3. The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal had regard to the decision in
      Nguyen [2015] UKUT 00170, in which it was said that Vietnam was a
      large country and there was no more than a slight risk of a victim of
      trafficking encountering traffickers upon return there.  The judge
      referred also to an expert report prepared for the appellant by Dr
      Tran.  The judge accepted that the appellant owes money to loan sharks
      and faces a risk from them.  Because of this, and in accordance with
      the expert report, the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal concluded
      there would not be a sufficiency of protection for the appellant in
      her home area.  The judge further found that the appellant would be
      able to relocate to one of the major cities in Vietnam.  Her partner
      would be able to accompany her and together they would face neither a
      real risk of serious harm nor of destitution.

   4. Permission to appeal was granted primarily on the basis that when
      considering internal relocation the judge arguably failed to take into
      account evidence in the expert report to the effect that the appellant
      would require to return to her home area to re-register her ho khau.
      It was contended that the appellant would require to do this in order
      reasonably to relocate to a city.  Without a ho khau it was said that
      the appellant would be unable to access essential services for herself
      and her daughter.

   5. Following the grant of permission to appeal the appeal was listed for
      a hearing before Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman on 28th February 2019.
      At this hearing Mr Govan acknowledged that the Judge of the First-tier
      Tribunal erred by not addressing the evidence on registration but
      submitted that the error was not material.  Miss Todd submitted that
      the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal had not made a finding as to
      whether the appellant had any current registration or identification
      documents.  It would take up to two years for the appellant to re-
      register her ho khau and it was contended that while she was doing
      this in her home area she would be vulnerable.

   6. Judge Macleman directed that here should be a further hearing to
      consider, in particular, whether the First-tier Tribunal erred in law
      in its treatment of the evidence about identification and
      registration.  Further submissions were, however, not restricted to
      this issue.

   7. Accordingly the appeal was listed before me to decide whether an error
      of law was made on the basis of which the decision of the First-tier
      Tribunal should be set aside.

Submissions

   8. At the hearing on 20th June 2019 Miss Todd addressed me on the grounds
      of the application, all of which, she submitted, related to the issue
      of internal relocation.

   9. Mr Govan informed me that there was further evidence for the
      respondent on the issue of registration.  He agreed that the issue was
      internal relocation.  It was speculative for the expert report to say
      that traffickers would have access to records relating to
      registration, from which the appellant could be traced.  The expert
      witness was unaware that the appellant now has a partner.  The
      appellant and her partner could return to Vietnam as a couple and
      reside in the appellant's partner's home area.  The expert report
      concentrated on obtaining a permanent ho khau, or household
      registration document, but there was a possibility of obtaining a
      temporary ho khau.

  10. Miss Todd indicated that in response to the further evidence from the
      respondent and the issues arising therefrom she would seek to obtain a
      supplementary report from the expert witness for the appellant.  She
      had already obtained legal aid for this purpose.

Discussion

  11. I was satisfied that in the course of what is otherwise a clear and
      well-structured decision the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal erred in
      law by omitting to take into account in his assessment of internal
      relocation the evidence in the expert report to the effect that the
      appellant would have to return to her home area for up to two years to
      re-register for a ho khau.  This was relevant both to the issue of
      risk on return and the question of whether internal flight without a
      ho khau would be unduly harsh.  It was argued for the respondent that
      any omission by the judge in this regard was not material but to a
      significant extent this submission relies upon further evidence which
      was not before the First-tier Tribunal.  In any event, it is difficult
      to be satisfied that the omission would not have affected the outcome
      of the appeal because the judge does not appear to have directed his
      mind towards the issue and has not expressed any reasoning on it.

  12. Now that the issue had been high-lighted, each party sought to rely
      upon further evidence.   The additional evidence for the appellant, in
      the form of a supplementary expert report, was not yet available.
      Accordingly, in the interests of fairness I adjourned for a further
      hearing before the Upper Tribunal at which the further evidence might
      be considered along with submissions by each party.

Directions

  13. With my decision of 10th July 2019 I issued the following directions,
      set out at paragraphs 14-20 below.

  14. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the
      making of an error of law.


  15. The decision is set aside.

  16. The findings of the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal to the effect
      that the appellant was trafficked to Europe and is at risk in her home
      area of Vietnam are preserved.

  17. There will be a further hearing before the Upper Tribunal to re-make
      the decision in relation to identification and registration.  The re-
      making of the decision will include assessment of whether the
      appellant would face the risk of having to return to her home area for
      a period to re-register for a ho khau and whether without re-
      registering for a ho khau internal relocation would be unduly harsh.

  18. The respondent's supplementary bundle was re-submitted to the Tribunal
      on 25th June 2019 with an application under rule 15(2A).  I allow the
      supplementary bundle to be admitted as evidence.

  19. In order to allow the appellant time to obtain a supplementary expert
      report the resumed hearing will not take place until after 31st August
      2019.  The supplementary report and any accompanying evidence,
      together with an application under rule 15(2A), should be lodged with
      the Tribunal and served upon the respondent no later than 14 days
      prior to the resumed hearing.

  20. In order to preserve the positions of the parties until the decision
      is re-made a direction for anonymity is made in the following terms.
      Unless or until a court or tribunal directs otherwise, no report of
      these proceedings shall identify either directly or indirectly the
      appellant or any member of her family.  This direction applies to the
      appellant and the respondent.  Failure to comply with this direction
      may lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Resumed hearing

  21. Prior to the resumed hearing Miss Todd submitted a report, dated 19th
      August 2019, from the expert witness for the appellant, Dr Tran Thi
      Lan Anh.  She also submitted a supplementary witness statement dated
      30th August 2019 by the appellant.  At the hearing she produced a
      further letter, dated 9th September 2019, from Dr Tran in response to
      a further query Miss Todd had raised.  Mr Govan had no objection to
      the lodging of the further letter and I allowed all the additional
      evidence to be admitted.

  22. The appellant was called as a witness for the purpose of adopting her
      additional statement.  She was cross-examined by Mr Govan about her
      contact with her family.  After hearing the appellant's evidence I
      heard submissions, first from Mr Govan and then from Miss Todd.

Submissions

  23. Mr Govan submitted that the expert evidence now showed that temporary
      residence was available in Vietnam.  This would allow the appellant to
      relocate to another province, where she could obtain a temporary ho
      khau for three months.

  24. Mr Govan further submitted that there were discrepancies in the
      appellant's evidence about whether she was in contact with her family
      in Vietnam.  These arose chiefly from the question of whether the
      appellant used to contact her family by phone from the UK or they used
      to contact her.  Mr Govan maintained that the appellant was not
      forthcoming or truthful.  If the appellant had lost contact with her
      family, as she maintained, there was no evidence the appellant had
      taken any steps to trace them.  If she was in contact with her family,
      they would be able to obtain new ID documents for her.  It was for the
      appellant to show that she would not be able to ask her family to
      obtain ID documents for her and the evidence did not establish this.

  25. Miss Todd addressed me on behalf of the appellant.  She pointed out
      that the appellant was cross-examined about something she had said in
      a witness statement signed more than a year ago.  The appellant had
      established to the lower standard of proof that she had had no contact
      with her family for 18 months.  She would have to return to her home
      province to obtain identity documents.  She would need to obtain an ID
      card separately from a ho khau, though it would be easier to obtain an
      ID card if her family were able to make a proxy application for a ho
      khau for her.  However, the appellant would need to apply in person
      for an ID card.  The letter of 9th September 2019 from the expert
      witness showed that it was essential to have an ID card, which was
      needed for travelling, opening a bank account, obtaining property and
      health insurance, and other day-to-day activities.  The appellant
      would need a ho khau to obtain an ID card.  Without an ID card it
      would be unduly harsh for the appellant to relocate with her two young
      children and her partner.

Discussion

  26. I will address first the question of the appellant's contact with her
      family.  In her witness statement of 15th August 2018, and in her more
      recent statement of 30th August 2019, the appellant said that she last
      had contact with her family in February 2018, at the time of the Lunar
      New Year.  In cross-examination the appellant said that it was her
      family who contacted her at that time.  The appellant explained that
      her family had her phone number and they used to call her, each time
      from different numbers.  The appellant confirmed that her family
      phoned her and she never contacted them.  The last time they contacted
      her was at the Lunar New Year in February 2018.

  27. The appellant was then asked if he had any means of contacting her
      family apart from when they telephoned her.  The appellant replied
      that her family had changed their telephone number and even though she
      phoned back she could not contact them.  The appellant explained that
      someone living in the countryside did not have a landline.  Her family
      would buy different sim cards and replace them when they could.

  28. Mr Govan pointed out to the appellant than in her statement of 15th
      August 2018 she had written "I contacted..." when referring to her
      contact with her family in February 2018 but she was maintaining in
      cross-examination that her parents always contacted her.  The
      appellant explained than when she said she contacted her parents she
      meant she had a conversation with them, she did not mean she called
      them.  The appellant re-stated this when questioned again.

  29. The appellant was then asked how many times she had tried to contact
      her family since February 2018.  She said she had called about five
      times at two week intervals but could not get through.  It was pointed
      out to the appellant that in her witness statement she said that
      contact with her parents upset her too much.  She was asked why she
      had tried to phone them.  The appellant explained that the Lunar New
      Year is when families get together and she missed her family after
      talking to them in February 2018.  This was why she tried to call them
      five times afterwards but could not get through.  After this she was
      not missing them so much so she waited for them to contact her.

  30. The appellant was then asked about her partner.  She explained that he
      is from the same province as her and has an older brother living
      there.  The appellant gave her partner's brother her parents' phone
      number but he could not contact them.

  31. In his submission Mr Govan described the appellant as not forthcoming
      or truthful.  I disagree.  Mr Govan sought to found upon a supposed
      discrepancy as to whether the appellant used to phone her parents or
      they used to phone her.  He referred to the appellant having stated in
      her statement of 15th August 2018 "I contacted..." meaning that the
      appellant telephoned her parents, not the other way round.

  32. I note that the appellant gave both statements and her evidence at the
      hearing through an interpreter.  It is difficult for me to find that
      the phrase "I contacted..." if said in Vietnamese is different from "I
      had contact with..."  Expert evidence would be required to establish
      this distinction.  There was no such evidence and no need to provide
      it - the difference is a slight one in ordinary conversation even in
      English.  Such a small difference in the use of this verb is too
      slight to support the adverse inference on credibility on which Mr
      Govan sought to rely.

  33. There was then the question of whether the appellant ever attempted to
      phone her parents.  The appellant gave an entirely reasonable
      explanation of why she attempted to do this following the Lunar New
      Year in 2018.  I found nothing in the appellant's evidence to show
      that she was not forthcoming or not truthful.


  34. Indeed, the appellant has been found to be telling the truth both
      before the First-tier Tribunal and in relation to having been
      trafficked.  There is no reason now to make an adverse credibility
      finding on the basis of a linguistic point of very little, if any,
      practical significance.

  35. On the basis of the appellant's evidence I find not only that she has
      lost contact with her family but that she no longer has a Vietnamese
      ID card.  This finding, although not conceded by Mr Govan, was not
      challenged by him in cross-examination.

  36. At the earlier hearing before me the issues raised were both identity
      and registration but more attention was directed to the household
      registration document or ho khau.  In the light of the additional
      expert evidence greater emphasis is now placed upon the necessity of
      having an ID card.  In her supplementary letter of 9th September 1919
      the expert witness, Dr Tran, makes it clear that the ID card is the
      most important personal document in daily life in Vietnam.  It must be
      carried when travelling within the country and the police or a local
      officer can ask for it at any time.  A citizen who is not carrying an
      ID card can be fined.  The ID card is required to apply for a job and
      to rent accommodation.  An ID card is required to enter a government
      building and to apply for state health care insurance or state
      benefits.

  37. In her supplementary report of 19th August 2019 Dr Tran explains how
      an application for an ID card is made.  An application must be made in
      person at the local authority registration office in the applicant's
      place of permanent ho khau registration, i.e. the applicant's place of
      origin.  The person must produce their ho khau when applying, as well
      as their birth certificate and their previous ID document, if it is
      available.  If any of these documents are not available there may be
      long delays of months or even years in obtaining an ID card.  Dr Tran
      observes that the appellant's parents could apply for the appellant to
      be relisted on their ho khau if they still lived in the appellant's
      place of origin - this is the proxy application to which Miss Todd
      referred.  This would make it easier for the appellant to obtain an ID
      card.  I have accepted, however, that the appellant has lost contact
      with her parents and does not know their whereabouts.

  38. Dr Tran refers to the issuing of a temporary ho khau, to which Mr
      Govan referred.  It is clear though that this is not the same as an ID
      card.  Dr Tran also referred to the proposal in the Home Office report
      of September 2018 which states that the ho khau will be scrapped in
      2010 and citizens will be managed by identification numbers on a new
      online national database.  According to Dr Tran this report is
      incomplete and the proposed change is not fully understood, even
      within Vietnam.  According to the Ministry of Public Security the ho
      khau will not be abolished but the paper document will be replaced by
      an electronic national identification card containing ho khau
      registration information.

  39. The position the appellant will be in if she returns to Vietnam is
      that she will have neither a ho khau nor a registration card.  Of
      these the greater difficulty arises from not having an ID card.  The
      appellant can only obtain an ID card by applying in person in her home
      area.  Without a ho khau she faces a difficult and lengthy application
      process, during which she would be at risk from loan sharks.  If the
      appellant chooses not to return to her home area to apply, she faces
      very considerable disadvantages in attempting to carry out the normal
      activities of daily life in another part of Vietnam.  I accept Miss
      Todd's submission that these difficulties, as described by Dr Tran,
      would be so significant as to render internal relocation unduly harsh,
      particularly as the appellant has two small children to provide for.
      The appellant's partner originates from the same province as her,
      where the appellant is at risk, and there is no suggestion that the
      appellant would not require an ID card of her own, even if her partner
      has one.

  40. The appellant is therefore a person in need of international
      protection.  It has not been argued before me that the risk to her
      arises for a reason recognised by the Refugee Convention, for example
      as a member of a particular social group, such as trafficked women.
      The risk to the appellant, as found by the First-tier Tribunal, is not
      of being trafficked again but arises from violence directed towards
      her family by loan sharks.  This gives rise to a real risk of serious
      harm in her home area.  Because of her lack of an ID card and the
      difficulty of obtaining one, she cannot reasonably be expected to
      relocate within Vietnam.  She is entitled to humanitarian protection
      under paragraph 339C of the Immigration Rules.

Conclusions

  41. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the
      making of an error of law.

  42. The decision is set aside.

  43. The decision is re-made by allowing the appeal.


Anonymity

At the previous hearing I made an anonymity direction pending the outcome
of the appeal.  In view of the appellant's history and family circumstances
I continue this direction in the same terms, as follows.  Unless or until a
court or tribunal directs otherwise, no report of these proceedings shall
identify either directly or indirectly the appellant or any member of her
family.  This direction applies to the appellant and to the respondent.
Failure to comply with this direction may lead to contempt of court
proceedings.



M E Deans
                           27th September 2019
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
