
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/11346/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 3 April 2019                    |On 30 April 2019                   |
|                                   |                                   |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JORDAN


                                   Between

                                ALI ALZABIDI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms G. Brown, Counsel instructed by Lei Dat & Baig,
                    Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T. Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      1. The appellant was born on 9 June 1990 in Saudi Arabia. His  parents
         were nationals of Yemen, his father working in  Saudi  Arabia.  The
         appellant, too, is a national of Yemen although he had only visited
         the country once, in 2008. He has  spent  all  his  life  in  Saudi
         Arabia save for various visits abroad. He is married to a  national
         of Saudi Arabia and has worked  there.  It  is  accepted  that  the
         Secretary of State is, in  principle,  entitled  to  issue  removal
         directions  both  to  Saudi  Arabia,  the  country  from  which  he
         travelled to the United Kingdom and to Yemen, the  country  of  his
         nationality.

      2. By a decision made on 12 September 2018,  the  Secretary  of  State
         responded to the appellant's application for asylum based upon  his
         twin claims to have a well-founded fear  of  persecution  in  Saudi
         Arabia as well as a generalised fear of return to Yemen.

      3. It is as well to point out at this stage that the appellant is  not
         entitled to refugee status if there is a single country to which he
         might lawfully be returned without fear of persecution  or  serious
         harm. Hence, in order to succeed, the appellant  must  establish  a
         relevant risk in each of the two countries, Saudi Arabia and Yemen.

         Saudi Arabia

      4. The appellant had claimed that, in  response  to  the  humanitarian
         situation in Yemen caused by the internal conflict  there,  he  had
         sent money to the country for the relief of suffering from his home
         in Saudi Arabia. He claimed that he had been arrested  in  February
         2018 and accused of sending the money  in  support  of  the  Houthi
         rebels. This had not been his  intention  and  the  accusation  was
         false. The money had been  collected  by  fellow  Yemeni  nationals
         living in his neighbourhood in Saudi Arabia. He claimed that he had
         been released after two days in detention  on  condition  of  daily
         reporting and that he inform upon others who were sending money  to
         Yemen.

      5. It is plainly plausible that a foreign national living and  working
         abroad would wish to  respond  to  a  humanitarian  crisis  in  his
         country of nationality  by  offering  financial  support  to  those
         collecting on behalf of his fellow nationals in need.  The  payment
         of money, in itself, would raise no inference  that  the  money  is
         destined for the benefit of a rebel  militia  or  was  otherwise  a
         political gesture unrelated to the relief of suffering.

      6. The Secretary of State rejected  the  appellant's  claim  that  the
         Saudi authorities who were prosecuting a war against the rebels (or
         were supporting the Yemeni government to do so)  would  infer  that
         payments made by the appellant were to fund the rebel cause. He did
         so relying on certain inconsistencies in the appellant's claim.  In
         addition, the respondent noted the severe restrictions that existed
         on foreign travel by residents of Saudi Arabia and, in  particular,
         a ban upon  international  travel  directed  at  those  subject  to
         ongoing investigations or those believed to have broken the law. As
         the appellant had been able to leave Saudi  Arabia  using  his  own
         passport, this was inconsistent with his claim  to  be  subject  to
         continued investigations and daily reporting.

      7. There was a considerable degree of logic in the approach adopted by
         the Secretary  of  State.  In  his  appeal  to  the  Tribunal,  the
         appellant maintained he was arrested for sending money to Yemen and
         could not therefore return to Saudi Arabia.

      8. By a determination promulgated  on  12  November  2018,  First-tier
         Tribunal Judge Foudy dismissed the appellant's appeal.   A  reading
         of the determination reveals that the judge was focusing  upon  the
         appellant  returning  to  Yemen.  Thus,  in  paragraph  1  of   the
         determination, the judge confined herself  to  his  claim  that  he
         could not return to Yemen. Similarly, in  paragraph  8,  the  judge
         refers to her having read country guidance in relation to Yemen. In
         her  findings,  however,  whilst  focusing  upon  Yemen,  she  made
         sustainable findings of fact in paragraph 17, 18, 19 and  20  about
         his claim that he was of any interest to the Saudi authorities as a
         result of his activities in  Saudi  Arabia  and  his  inability  to
         return there, having lost his employment in March 2018.  The  judge
         made reference to the Immigration and  Refugee  Board  of  Canada's
         information that non-Saudi husbands of Saudi women  can  apply  for
         permanent residence in Saudi Arabia.  She  therefore  rejected  his
         claim that he had to leave Saudi Arabia once he had lost  his  job.
         In paragraphs 25-27 of her determination, the judge returns to  the
         risk  the  appellant  faces  in  Yemen  concluding  there  was   no
         reasonable likelihood of persecution or serious harm if returned to
         the Yemen.

      9. No direct challenge is made to the fact  that  the  judge  did  not
         expressly deal with his asylum claim as it related to a  return  to
         Saudi Arabia. It is not possible for me to determine  whether  this
         was the  subject  of  any  detailed  argument  by  the  appellant's
         solicitor at the hearing. It is clear  that  the  focus  was  on  a
         return to Yemen. Nevertheless, the  judge's  findings  of  fact  in
         relation to the claim as to the events in Saudi  Arabia  are  clear
         and sustainable.

     10. In the grounds of appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal,  the  appellant's
         solicitors who acted for him at the hearing criticise  the  judge's
         comments that the appellant could have explained that his donations
         were to help the poor. The grounds go on to say:

             "However, the [judge] fails to have regard  that  there  is  a
             violent conflict in Yemen in which Saudi is  involved.  Whilst
             [the appellant] could have given an explanation  there  is  no
             reason why the authorities would have believed him  given  the
             suspicion surrounding the conflict."

     11. This misses the point of the judge's  reasoning.  It  was  for  the
         appellant to establish by credible evidence that the appellant, who
         was entirely innocent of any wrongdoing, would be  misconstrued  by
         the Saudi authorities as funding terrorism. Given the plausible and
         reasonable explanation (which must be  common  amongst  all  Yemeni
         nationals sending funds to the humanitarian crisis in  Yemen)  that
         he was seeking to help the  victims  of  the  conflict,  there  was
         nothing the appellant himself had done which  might  reasonably  be
         construed as supporting the rebel cause.

     12. This was supported by the finding of  fact  that  he  was  released
         after two days and that his passport was not confiscated and he was
         allowed to leave the country without difficulty.

     13. The grounds of appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  also  challenge  this
         finding saying that it was not clear what evidence  the  judge  was
         referring  to  when  finding  that  the  Saudi  authorities  had  a
         sophisticated  entry  and  exit  system  with  a  high   level   of
         monitoring.  This criticism is not arguable.  The Saudi authorities
         operate a system of controlling exit  (or  monitoring  it)  by  the
         grant (or refusal) of permission.  The  background  information  is
         mentioned in paragraphs 40 and 41  of  the  refusal  decision.   In
         particular, there is an extensive quotation from the United  States
         Department of State Country Report  on  Human  Rights  Yemen  2017,
         section D, Foreign Travel:

             "There are severe restrictions on  foreign  travel,  including
             for women and members of minority groups. No one may leave the
             country without an exit visa and a  passport.  The  government
             continued to impose international travel bans for  individuals
             deemed at risk of flight during ongoing legal proceedings  and
             investigations,  as  well  as  for  criminal  sentences.   The
             government reportedly confiscated passports on  occasions  for
             political reasons  and  revoked  opportunity  to  contest  the
             restriction. Most travel bans reportedly involved  individuals
             in  court  cases  relating  to  corruption,   state   security
             concerns, labour, financial, and real estate disputes."

     14. This point is  not  specifically  addressed  by  Ms  Brown  in  her
         skeleton argument for the hearing before me. Although  she  repeats
         in paragraph 11 the ground of appeal that there was no evidence  of
         a sophisticated entry and exit system on  the  part  of  the  Saudi
         authorities, her  submissions  are  directed  towards  the  judge's
         failure to have regard to the appellant's evidence that he believes
         he was let through the airport because the authorities knew he  had
         no status in Saudi Arabia  and  therefore  would  not  be  able  to
         return. This submission is not  supported  by  the  evidence  which
         makes it plain that a non-national married to a Saudi  national  is
         entitled to seek the right of residence in Saudi Arabia.  Nor  does
         it answer the fact that, if the appellant were considered to be the
         subject of reporting conditions and was under suspicion of  funding
         terrorism, the evidence pointed to  the  likelihood  of  the  Saudi
         authorities  confiscating  his  passport  or   using   their   exit
         procedures to prevent him from leaving.

     15.  Ms  Brown's  submissions  further  assert  that  the  evidence  of
         arbitrary arrest in Saudi Arabia negate the  judge's  finding  that
         the appellant could return to Saudi Arabia as he  was  entitled  to
         permanent residence there. I do not see  the  causal  link  between
         evidence of arbitrary  arrest  and  the  fact  that  the  appellant
         married to a Saudi citizen was entitled  as  a  matter  of  law  to
         residence.

     16. I am satisfied that it was open to the judge to conclude  that  the
         appellant's claim to be the object of suspicion on the part of  the
         Saudi authorities was not credible. As  a  sustainable  finding  of
         fact which cannot  now  properly  be  challenged,  this  inevitably
         results in the conclusion that any claim for asylum based on events
         in Saudi Arabia cannot succeed.

     17. For the reasons  that  I  have  stated,  it  is  possible  for  the
         appellant to be returned to Saudi Arabia without violation  of  any
         of his rights. Consequently, whether or not he is at risk elsewhere
         is  not  strictly  relevant  provided,  of  course,   the   removal
         directions are directed towards Saudi Arabia. Nevertheless, for the
         sake of providing a comprehensive  determination,  I  now  turn  to
         consideration of the risk of return to Yemen.

         Yemen

     18. In the refusal decision of 12 September 2018,  the  decision  maker
         repeated the answers given by the appellant in his  interview  that
         he could not return to Yemen as a result of "war,  the  famine  and
         poverty [and] one could  lose  his  life  once  he  is  there".  In
         responding to this claim, the Secretary of State expressly confined
         himself to the appellant  returning  to  Aden  and  made  extensive
         reference to the Country of Origin Information  Service  report  on
         Yemen of June 2017. The following were quoted:

             "Since July 2015 the situation is somewhat  improved  in  Aden
             and some other parts of southern Yemen. Levels of violence  in
             Aden do not match  those  witnessed  in  other  parts  of  the
             country. The security situation in  Aden  and  some  areas  of
             southern Yemen do not represent a general risk  under  Article
             15 (c).

             In some cases relocation to Aden and surrounding areas may  be
             feasible.  However  the  volatile  security  environment   and
             frequent violence harsh humanitarian  situation  and  lack  of
             livelihood opportunities mean this will not  be  possible  for
             many  Yemeni  citizens.  Decision-makers  must  give   careful
             consideration to the relevance and reasonableness of  internal
             relocation on a case-by-case  basis  taking  full  account  of
             individual circumstances of the particular  person,  including
             where they originate from in Yemen  and  where  they  will  be
             returning to."

     19. In further support of his conclusion, the decision-maker noted that
         the appellant was a young man with no medical conditions that would
         hinder  his  ability  to  return  to  Yemen.  He  was  educated  to
         University level. He could speak Arabic, an  official  language  of
         Yemen. He also spoke some English. He had  been  working  in  Saudi
         Arabia. He could therefore use  skills  already  acquired  to  gain
         employment.

     20. The Secretary of State  gave  further  consideration  to  the  risk
         emanating from the Houthis and those in opposition  to  the  Yemeni
         government. Given that the appellant is to return to Aden, I do not
         understand it to be argued that Yemeni citizens  are  generally  at
         risk from the Houthi rebels in areas  occupied  and  controlled  by
         government forces, supported by the Saudi authorities.  That  said,
         in paragraph 54 of the decision, the Secretary of State noted  that
         Aden still faced huge  security  challenges  including  a  risk  of
         targeted killings and the presence of militant groups  such  as  Al
         Qaeda and Daesh. However, it remained  under  the  control  of  the
         Saudi-backed government. The  background  information  went  on  to
         record that one million of those who  had  been  displaced  by  the
         conflict had returned to their areas of origin with nearly  70%  of
         those returning to Aden and to other centres of population. On this
         basis, the decision-maker concluded that the security situation  in
         Aden did not represent a general Article 15  (c)  risk  of  serious
         harm.

     21. The central  feature  of  the  appellant's  grounds  to  the  Upper
         Tribunal rests upon his claim  that  he  would  be  regarded  as  a
         northerner on return to  Yemen.  The  appellant,  himself,  was  of
         course born and bred in Saudi Arabia.  Nevertheless,  the  identity
         card found at page 29 of the appellant's bundle identifies  him  as
         originating from an area in the north.  This,  it  is  said,  would
         expose his northern ethnicity and  render  it  unsafe  for  him  to
         return to Aden.

     22. There is also a secondary  point  raised  in  paragraph  5  of  the
         grounds that the judge failed to take into account the  passage  to
         which I  have  earlier  referred  which  invites  a  case  specific
         assessment including the individual circumstances of an  appellant.
         Both the decision-maker and  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  paid
         close regard to the individual circumstances.  This  was,  in  both
         instances, a case specific assessment. The general  challenge  that
         it was not, is unfounded. Those  circumstances  would  include  the
         individual's place of origin. I reject the further claim  that  the
         security challenges in Aden and the  presence  of  militant  groups
         there would present a risk to this appellant. There  is  no  reason
         why he should be targeted (one of the circumstances which may place
         an individual at particular risk) and the general level of violence
         does not amount to placing him at risk of serious harm for the same
         reasons as advanced in the decision  letter  as  supported  by  the
         background material

     23. The crux of the appellant's challenge may properly be  assessed  by
         the consideration of two related questions: first, given  that  the
         appellant himself was born in Saudi Arabia and has spent  his  life
         there, does the evidence establish that he will  be  treated  as  a
         northerner because his parents originally came from the  north  and
         second, does the evidence establish that  there  is  a  process  of
         discrimination affecting all those persons living in a  Aden  which
         distinguishes between northerners  and  southerners  and  that  all
         those deemed to be northerners are at risk of serious harm?

     24. There is no doubt that the Houthi rebels operate in  the  north  of
         Yemen. That does not mean that all persons having a link  with  the
         north including a present or historic link  are  treated  as  being
         Houthi rebels or their supporters.  The  fact  that  the  appellant
         himself was born in Saudi Arabia and has  lived  there  ever  since
         raises no inference that he will be treated as a  Houthi  rebel  in
         Aden or, indeed, anywhere else.

     25. The appellant does not claim to have  any  personal  experience  of
         attitudes in Yemen since he has never lived there and only  visited
         once for a period of about a week in 2008. His father  passed  away
         in 2012 in Saudi Arabia. His mother and two  siblings  continue  to
         live there. In his witness statement, the appellant merely  records
         that he could not go back to Yemen because of the war; that  it  is
         impossible to live safely as a result of the  war  and  that  young
         males are being forced to  fight.  The  specific  claim  of  forced
         conscription is not advanced in the grounds or in submissions.   No
         specific  claim  is  made   that   the   appellant   would   suffer
         discrimination  and  persecution   as   a   northerner   in   Aden.
         Accordingly, in  order  to  make  good  this  claim,  it  would  be
         necessary for the appellant  to  identify  background  material  or
         expert  evidence  establishing  those  living  in  the  government-
         controlled areas of Yemen including Aden are actively  involved  in
         distinguishing those around them who originate from the  north  and
         that, once an individual is stigmatised as a northerner, he  is  at
         risk of harm.

     26. The material contained in the appellant's bundle served under cover
         of a letter dated 11 October 2018 does not make good that claim.

     27. Page 34 of the bundle identifies the  origins  of  the  Civil  War.
         President Hadi was faced with attacks by  Al  Qaeda,  a  separatist
         rising in the south, divided loyalties in the military, corruption,
         lack of food and  unemployment.  These  difficulties  prompted  the
         rising of the Houthi movement, championing  Yemen's  minority  Shia
         community.  As paragraph 2 of his witness  statement  makes  clear,
         the appellant is a Sunni Muslim.

     28. Page 46, a report dated 25 March 2018 from  Al  Jazeera,  headlines
         that hundreds of northerners were expelled from  Aden  as  regional
         divisions between north and south worsened.  Some  business  owners
         told Al Jazeera that they had  been  threatened  unless  they  left
         southern Yemen. At page 47 of the bundle the New Arab, reporting on
         8 May 2016, records  that  more  than  800  northern  Yemenis  were
         deported from Aden. It is said that  the  authorities  claim  those
         deported did not hold adequate documents. The news  came  following
         cracks in Yemen's direct peace talks  between  the  government  and
         Houthi rebels  forcing  the  United  Nations  envoy  to  revert  to
         mediating between the warring factions  in  indirect  talks.  There
         were allegations by the government that the Houthis had  gone  back
         on their word about discussing substantive issues.  Each  side  was
         accusing the other of not respecting the truce.   It  thus  appears
         that the event took place within the wider context  of  frustration
         felt about the process of truce, negotiation and  cross-allegations
         of misconduct.

     29. At page 50 of the bundle, a report dated  13  May  2016  from  Asia
         News.it reported that Yemen was moving towards partition  and  that
         thousands of northerners living in the south were being driven from
         their homes as part of a process of homogenisation  along  pre-1990
         boundaries.  This obviously refers to the  same  period  of  unrest
         mentioned in  the  preceding  paragraph,  now  some  3  years  ago.
         Similarly, page 55 is in an extract  from  Google  referring  to  a
         website which recorded that on 9 May 2016 that Yemeni officials had
         claimed that possible southern separatist  fighters  in  Aden  were
         expelling and detaining  hundreds  of  civilians  from  northern...
         [sentence complete]

     30. Ms Brown relied upon the passage at page 51 that in March 2015 pro-
         Hadi armed groups, along with members of Al Qaeda and  local  armed
         militias, seized the Central Security headquarters in Aden, as well
         as properties and businesses owned by  northerners.  Northern-owned
         shops have been looted and northerners have  been  publicly  hanged
         for allegedly belonging to or collaborating with Ansar Allah.

     31. These were the passages to which I was specifically referred in the
         oral arguments. They span a period between 2015  and  2018.  Whilst
         they clearly demonstrate that there is  a  process  by  which  some
         northern Yemenis have  been  the  subject  of  discrimination  and,
         indeed, forced removal, they fail to demonstrate that the incidents
         are widespread and continuous amounting to ethnic cleansing such as
         to put every northerner at real risk. There is little  to  identify
         the scale of discrimination.  If there were a northern community in
         Aden of only 1,000 persons, then the forced removal of 800 of  that
         community is clearly significant; much less so if the community  is
         much larger.  Then there is the context  in  which  those  removals
         took place; if they took place in the context of a general election
         where ethnicity featured heavily the risk may be  of  historic  and
         not current interest.  The event mentioned by Al Jazeera appears to
         have been directed to owners of businesses, perhaps  because  of  a
         feeling that they operate a strangle-hold on  commercial  activity,
         perhaps envy, perhaps because they create unfair  competition.   It
         is speculative to say whether this impacts upon the ordinary Yemeni
         citizen from the north.  Then there is the frequency of  events;  a
         pattern of repeated discrimination offers an insight into real risk
         whereas a single incident does not.  Inevitably, events which  took
         place many years ago offer little or limited  evidence  of  current
         risk.  On the basis of this  very  scant  material,  the  appellant
         failed to establish he would be at risk on return.

     32. In  any  event,  the  risk  to  northerners  presupposes  that  the
         appellant will be deemed to be a northerner.  This hinges upon  the
         southern community knowing of, and being influenced by,  the  entry
         in the  appellant's  identity  card.   There  is  nothing  else  to
         establish this identity.  He is a Sunni  Muslim  and  there  is  no
         evidence he has an  accent,  facial  features  or  other  means  of
         distinguishing him.  The appellant's history will be  self-evident,
         born and educated in Saudi Arabia.  His conversation about his life
         in Saudi Arabia, his marriage, his qualifications, his work and his
         Sunni religion cannot reasonably be deemed to raise  the  inference
         of his associated with the north, far less with Houthi rebels.

         Conclusion

     33. Any critical evaluation of the appellant's claim must lead  to  the
         conclusion that he has failed to establish  a  risk  on  return  to
         Saudi Arabia or to Yemen.   The  determination  of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal does not reveal a material error of law.


                                                               ANDREW JORDAN
                                                 DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE
                                                               24 April 2019
