
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11508/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester CJC                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On March 4, 2019                             |On March 7, 2019              |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                    [J A]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms G Patel, Counsel, instructed by Majad Malik
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Whilst the respondent is the appellant in these proceedings before me,
    I hereafter refer to the parties using terminology used in the First-
    tier Tribunal.  The appellant in the First-tier Tribunal will hereafter
    be referred to as "the appellant" in these proceedings, and the
    respondent will be referred to as "the respondent".

 2. The appellant, a Pakistani national,  entered  the  United  Kingdom  on
    April 9, 2017 as a visitor accompanied by her three children (Pakistani
    nationals). She made an application to remain as a spouse, but this was
    refused with an out of country right of appeal on March 8, 2018.

 3. She claimed asylum on March 29, 2018 and  the  respondent  refused  her
    application on September 21, 2018.

 4.  The  appellant  appealed  under  Section  82(1)  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 on October 1, 2018.

 5. Her appeal was heard by Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  Chambers  on
    October 29, 2018 and in a decision promulgated on November 7, 2018  the
    Judge allowed her appeal finding that the appellant and her husband had
    put forward a consistent account and she was reasonably likely to  face
    persecution due to her and her family being long-term Christians.

 6. Permission to appeal was sought on November 5, 2018 and on November 28,
    2018 Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Blundell  granted  permission  to
    appeal finding it arguable the Judge had erred by  failing  to  resolve
    either of the two questions posed by article 8(1) of the  Qualification
    Directive even though the Judge had referred to the decision of AK & SK
    (Pakistan) CG [2014] UKUT 569 (IAC).

 7. Article 8(1) of the Qualification Directive states:

          i) As part of the assessment of the application for international
             protection, Member States may determine that an  applicant  is
             not in need of international protection if in a  part  of  the
             country of origin there  is  no  well-founded  fear  of  being
             persecuted or no real risk of suffering serious harm  and  the
             applicant can reasonably be expected to stay in that  part  of
             the country.

         ii) In examining whether a part of the country  of  origin  is  in
             accordance with paragraph 1, Member States shall at  the  time
             of taking the decision on the application have regard  to  the
             general circumstances prevailing in that part of  the  country
             and to the personal circumstances of the applicant.

        iii) Paragraph 1 may apply notwithstanding technical obstacles  to
             return to the country of origin.

 8. No anonymity decision is made.

    SUBMISSIONS

 9. Mr McVeety adopted the grounds of appeal and submitted that in allowing
    the appeal the Judge had failed to make findings on  issues  raised  in
    the decision letter. Although there had been no presenting  officer  at
    the hearing it was incumbent upon the Judge to address the  content  of
    the decision letter. Whilst the Judge had  commenced  his  findings  at
    paragraph 7 of his  decision  he  submitted  that  there  had  been  no
    findings on matters raised in  the  decision  letter  anywhere  in  the
    decision and that the Judge had simply set out  the  appellant's  claim
    between paragraphs 7 and 17  as  well  as  reciting  what  the  Country
    Guidance of AK and SK said. He had misapplied the findings of that case
    in paragraph 19 of the decision when considering the likely  punishment
    for blasphemy. In order to allow the appeal,  the  Judge  had  to  find
    something more than a mere allegation of blasphemy and there had to  be
    evidence that the authorities were actively pursuing the appellant.

10. Ms Patel opposed the application and submitted that  the  decision  was
    sustainable, and the grounds of appeal were a  mere  disagreement  with
    the decision. The respondent had  not  sent  a  representative  to  the
    Tribunal and it was not the Judge's role to enter the  arena  and  pose
    questions that the respondent may have put himself. She submitted  that
    the Judge made findings open to him at paragraphs 12, 17 and 19 of  the
    decision and then considered the case against other background evidence
    and concluded that the appellant should succeed with her appeal.

11. Mr McVeety responded  arguing  the  fact  the  Judge  had  referred  to
    evidence in his decision did not mean he had engaged with it.

12. I reserved my decision.

    FINDINGS

13. In refusing the appellant's application, the respondent provided a  19-
    page decision letter albeit the protection aspect  of  the  appeal  was
    considered on pages 5-11.

14. In particular, weight was placed on the fact that the appellant's claim
    to being accused of blasphemy was based on speculation and  the  emails
    and documents provided made no reference to a blasphemy case or suggest
    threats were being made. The decision also referred to  the  fact  that
    when an application for leave to remain was lodged on  April  30,  2017
    there was no reference to her  claim  that  she  had  been  accused  of
    blasphemy.  The  decision  letter  commented  on  the  failure  by  the
    appellant to mention a ransom note that had been sent to her husband.

15. When considering her appeal, the Judge was not  assisted  by  the  fact
    there was no presenting officer. He set out  at  paragraph  3  a  brief
    summary of the decision letter and from paragraph 7 the Judge  provided
    his "Findings".

16. I accept Mr McVeety's submission that the "findings" at paragraphs 7-11
    are in general a repeat of the appellant's claim.

17. At paragraph 16 the Judge set  out  the  appellant's  fears  about  the
    security  situation  and  cross-referenced  these  concerns  with   the
    background material which suggested that the motivation  for  blasphemy
    threats may simply be spite, arise out of personal or business disputes
    or  arguments  overland  and  property.  At  paragraph  17  the   Judge
    acknowledged that the country evidence suggested that  there  had  been
    general animosity toward Christians  which  sometimes  broke  out  into
    actual persecution.

18. There is merit to Mr  McVeety's  submission  that  the  Judge  has  not
    specifically addressed the concerns raised in the respondent's decision
    letter and also found that the problems probably arose out of spite  or
    other personal reasons to do with the appellant's Christianity.

19. The Judge found there was no evidence that  blasphemy  proceedings  had
    ever been instituted and the Country Guidance decision  made  it  clear
    that an allegation of blasphemy alone was insufficient. The  Judge  was
    not convinced there were any proceedings but speculated there could  be
    proceedings. Whilst I accept the Judge has gone on in paragraph  19  to
    give additional reasons for allowing the appeal  there  were  still  no
    findings about the issues raised in the decision letter. Such  findings
    are necessary in order to consider whether return to her home  area  or
    internal relocation were possible.

20. Additionally, the findings in  relation  to  the  blasphemy  claim  are
    contrary to the approach suggested in the Country Guidance case and  no
    reasons for departing from that case were given by the Judge.

21. It is unclear from the decision whether the case was being  allowed  on
    blasphemy grounds alone or on the basis that the appellant was a single
    woman with responsibility for three children if she  were  returned  to
    Pakistan. I find there has  been  an  error  in  law  for  the  reasons
    provided in the grant of permission and for the reasons set out above.

22. Both representatives agreed at the hearing that in the event there  was
    an error that this matter should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal
    de novo.

23. I therefore remit this matter back to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  under
    section 12(1) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007.

Notice of Decision

There is an error in law.  I set aside the original decision and  remit  the
matter back  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  under  section  12  (1)  of  the
Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007.


Signed                              Date     05/03/2019


[pic]

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
