
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11341/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Columbus House, Newport              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 30th November 2018                         |On 21st December 2018         |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                                     FZA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss L Gardner of Counsel instructed by Migrant
                    Legal Project (Cardiff)
For the Respondent:    Mr C Howells, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant appeals against  a  decision  of  Judge  Loughridge  (the
    judge) of the First-tier Tribunal (the FtT) promulgated on  13th  March
    2018.

 2. The Appellant is a male citizen of Iran born 5th May 1990.  He  arrived
    in the UK on 29th April 2015 and claimed asylum.  His claim  was  based
    upon a fear of  persecution  on  the  basis  of  his  religion,  having
    converted from Islam to Christianity.

 3. The Respondent refused the claim on 20th October 2017  and  the  appeal
    was heard by the FtT on 27th February 2018.

 4. The judge heard evidence from the Appellant and Pastor Rees.  The judge
    concluded that the Appellant's account of events in Iran was untrue and
    did not accept that his  activities  in  the  UK  reflected  a  genuine
    conversion to the Christian faith.  The judge  found  at  paragraph  42
    that the  Appellant  had  carried  out  activities  in  the  UK  in  "a
    deliberate and deceitful  attempt  to  obtain  asylum  status  in  this
    country".  The judge did not regard the  evidence  of  Pastor  Rees  as
    particularly weighty, finding that his belief that the Appellant  is  a
    genuine convert to Christianity was wrong.

 5. The Appellant applied for permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal.
    Permission to appeal was initially refused by  Judge  Cruthers  of  the
    FtT.  The application was thereafter renewed, the grounds  having  been
    settled by Counsel who represented the Appellant before the FtT.

 6. In brief summary it was contended that the judge had  materially  erred
    in law by making perverse or irrational findings at paragraphs 40-42 of
    his decision.

 7. It was accepted that the judge had at paragraph 29 correctly identified
    the issue in the appeal, by stating that;

         "The appeal will therefore stand  or  fall  on  the  basis  of  the
         credibility of the Appellant's account and my assessment of whether
         he has genuinely converted to Christianity".

 8. In summary, it was submitted  that  the  judge  had  made  findings  at
    paragraph 30 of his decision accepting that the Appellant had genuinely
    converted from Islam to Christianity.  The judge had then made findings
    at paragraph 42 which were irrational and/or perverse and not  open  to
    him to make.  Those findings  were  that  the  Appellant's  account  of
    events in Iran was not true, there were material inconsistencies in his
    account identified at paragraphs 36-38 of  the  judge's  decision,  and
    that the Appellant had undertaken activities in the UK in  a  deceitful
    attempt to obtain asylum status.

 9. It was further submitted that the judge  had  erred  by  finding  three
    material inconsistencies in the Appellant's account at paragraphs 36-38
    of his decision, in that it was submitted primarily that there were  no
    inconsistencies, but if there were, they were not material and did  not
    affect the core of the Appellant's account.

10. Permission to appeal was given by Upper Tribunal Judge  Storey  in  the
    following terms;

         "It is arguable that the judge's positive findings (especially that
         at para 30) are not compatible with his eventual negative  findings
         (especially the penultimate sentence of para 42).

         The grounds disclose an arguable error of law".

11. Following the grant of permission  the  Respondent  lodged  a  response
    pursuant to rule 24 of The Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 submitting that the judge had not materially erred in law.  It was
    contended that the judge had reached conclusions which were open to him
    to make on the entirety of the evidence,  had  not  made  any  findings
    which were perverse, and did not err in finding  that  the  pastor  was
    sincere in his evidence, but had been deceived by the Appellant.

12. Directions were subsequently issued directing that there should  be  an
    oral hearing before the Upper Tribunal to ascertain whether the FtT had
    erred in law such that the decision must be set aside.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

13. At some point after  the  application  for  permission  to  appeal  was
    submitted, and before the Upper Tribunal hearing, the Appellant changed
    legal representation.  On 29th November 2018 Miss Gardner, who had  not
    appeared before the FtT, lodged an application to amend the Grounds  of
    Appeal which had been considered by Judge Storey.

14. In summary, the application was to amend the  grounds  to  include  the
    following additional grounds which had not  featured  in  the  previous
    applications for permission to appeal.

15. The first additional ground was that the judge erred by failing to take
    into account material evidence.  The Appellant had provided to the  FtT
    documentary evidence concerning his Christian  activities  in  the  UK,
    including his baptism certificate  and  letters  of  support  from  the
    various churches he attended.

16. Further, he had submitted evidence of  his  public  posts  on  Facebook
    which showed that he had been posting material publicly  online  for  a
    considerable period of time, the earliest post  recorded  was  on  12th
    March 2015.  These posts were public and it was  submitted  made  clear
    the Appellant's Christian faith.

17. Secondly, it was submitted that the judge had erred by failing to carry
    out a global credibility assessment by giving no weight to the clinical
    diagnosis of PTSD which was contained within a psychiatric report which
    was before the FtT.  At paragraph 15 of that report it was stated  that
    the  Appellant  suffered  from  avoidance,  inability  to  recall,  and
    difficulty in concentrating.  The judge had erred by  not  taking  this
    diagnosis  into  account  when   considering   credibility.    At   the
    commencement of the hearing Mr  Howells  confirmed  that  he  had  been
    served with the application to amend the grounds and had  no  objection
    to the grounds being amended as requested on behalf of the Appellant.

18. In the circumstances, I took into account that the issues raised in the
    new grounds had not been raised in the two  previous  applications  for
    permission to appeal, so it was not the case that issues raised in  the
    grounds had been refused permission to appeal.  Rather, it was the case
    that previous Counsel had not raised these grounds.  In my view it  was
    appropriate to grant the application to  amend  the  grounds.   I  then
    heard submissions from Miss Gardner.  She relied upon the new  grounds.
    I was asked to note the absence of any  reference  to  the  Appellant's
    Facebook posts in the decision of the FtT.  I was asked  to  note  that
    the dates on  some  of  the  posts  pre-dated  the  Appellant's  asylum
    interview, and expressed his Christian faith and this evidence had  not
    been considered by the judge.

19. With reference to the psychiatric report, it  was  submitted  that  the
    judge  had  erred  by  not  considering  the  diagnosis  of  PTSD  when
    considering credibility.

20.  Reliance  was  also  placed  upon  the  original  grounds  upon  which
    permission to appeal was granted by Judge Storey,  on  the  basis  that
    there was an inconsistency  in  the  findings  made  by  the  judge  at
    paragraphs 30 and 42.

21. Mr Howells submitted that there was no material error of law.   It  was
    contended that the judge had considered all evidence  before  him.   It
    was accepted that there was no reference to the Facebook posts, but  Mr
    Howells pointed out, and he had represented the Respondent  before  the
    FtT, that there was no reference to the Facebook posts  either  in  the
    Appellant's witness statement  before  the  FtT,  or  in  the  skeleton
    argument relied upon by the Appellant before the FtT.

22. I was asked to find that  the  judge  had  considered  the  psychiatric
    report and made reference to it at paragraph 39 of  his  decision.   He
    had attached some weight to the report.

23. Mr Howells submitted that there was no inconsistency when paragraphs 30
    and 42 were compared.

24. With reference  to  the  inconsistencies  in  the  Appellant's  account
    referred to by the judge at paragraphs 36-38, Mr Howells submitted that
    the judge was entitled to find inconsistencies in the account, and  the
    grounds relied upon by the Appellant before the Upper Tribunal amounted
    to a disagreement with findings properly made by the judge.

25. In response, Miss  Gardner  submitted  that  the  Facebook  posts  were
    contained in a supplementary bundle relied upon by the Appellant before
    the FtT and should have been considered.  It  was  submitted  that  the
    reference by the judge to the psychiatric report at  paragraph  39  was
    brief, and did not adequately consider the diagnosis of PTSD.

My Conclusions and Reasons

26. I deal firstly with the ground upon  which  permission  to  appeal  was
    initially  granted,  that  being  the  alleged  inconsistency   between
    paragraphs 30 and 42 of the FtT decision.

27. I find no material error of law on this issue.  I reject the submission
    made in the original grounds at 1(iii) that the judge at  paragraph  30
    accepted that the Appellant  had  genuinely  converted  from  Islam  to
    Christianity.  My view is that the  judge  did  not  accept  that.   At
    paragraph 30 the judge explained  that  in  his  view  the  Appellant's
    knowledge of the Christian faith was not a particularly weighty  issue.
    He found that the Appellant had  demonstrated  a  reasonable  level  of
    knowledge such that a genuine conversion is  a  possibility.   However,
    the judge specifically stated that he did

         "not accept that a reasonable level of knowledge of  the  Christian
         faith is a particularly strong indicator of  a  genuine  conversion
         because that is also consistent with an individual who  is  seeking
         to   obtain   asylum   status   in   this   country   by   way   of
         deceit/dishonesty, and who has put in a lot of effort to learn  the
         basic principles of Christianity in order  to  present  a  credible
         claim".

    The judge went on to state that the  issue  of  knowledge  is  of  most
    significance  in  cases  where  there  is  only  limited  knowledge  of
    Christianity, which points towards a fraudulent claim, and  found  that
    the Appellant's knowledge was sufficient to avoid that inference.

28. In my view  the  grounds  seeking  permission  to  appeal  misinterpret
    paragraph 30 and as the judge is not accepting in that  paragraph  that
    there is a genuine conversion, I find there is  no  contradiction  with
    paragraph 42, and the findings in paragraph 42 are  not  irrational  or
    perverse.

29. I find that the inconsistencies referred to at paragraphs 36-38 of  the
    judge's decision were open to the judge to make.  On  this  issue,  the
    grounds amount to a disagreement rather than display an error  of  law.
    There is a challenge to a finding made by the judge at paragraph 40, in
    that it is contended that  the  judge  erred  in  concluding  that  the
    Appellant gave the impression in answering  questions  109-111  of  the
    asylum interview, that he took the initiative in raising the  issue  of
    Christianity with an individual, which is somewhat different to what he
    said in oral evidence.  I find that this finding was open to the  judge
    to make.  In answer to question 110 in which the  Appellant  was  asked
    why he started discussing Christianity, he replied, in summary, that he
    knew the individual was a Christian, and he wanted  to  find  out  more
    about Christianity.  I find no error of law here.

30. Turning to the issues raised in the amended Grounds of Appeal, I do not
    find that the  judge  disregarded  the  fact  that  the  Appellant  had
    submitted a baptism certificate and letters of  support.   Baptism  was
    referred to in the evidence of Pastor Rees which was considered by  the
    judge and  the  judge  took  into  account  the  pastor's  evidence  as
    confirmed at paragraph  31,  which  included  the  Appellant's  regular
    attendance at church and various other activities such as  Bible  Study
    classes.

31. I do however find that the judge erred in law in  failing  to  consider
    the public Facebook posts.  There is no reference to the Facebook posts
    in the decision of the FtT.  It  is  clear  that  Facebook  posts  were
    included in the Appellant's supplementary bundle, which was before  the
    FtT,  under  the  heading  "Other  Evidence"  at  pages  56-97  of  the
    supplementary bundle.  Not all of those pages relate to Facebook posts,
    as some are photographs of the Appellant in church or outside a church.
     The post referred to in oral submissions is at page 60 of  the  bundle
    and I accept that this  was  made  on  12th  March  2015.   It  is  not
    translated so no weight can be attached to that  aspect  of  the  post,
    although it does contain the emblem of a Christian cross.

32. I accept that the Facebook posts were not specifically mentioned in the
    skeleton  argument  dated  13th  February  2018  prepared  by  previous
    Counsel, and which was before the FtT.  There is however  reference  in
    paragraph 2 of that skeleton argument to the basis of  the  Appellant's
    case being set out in his bundle of documents,  his  witness  statement
    and supplementary  bundle,  and  the  Respondent's  bundle.   Therefore
    reliance was placed upon the supplementary bundle.

33. The posts are public, and do indicate the Appellant's support  for  the
    Christian faith.  In my view it is a material legal error not  to  give
    any consideration to the possible effect of these posts.  If no  weight
    was to be given to  that  evidence,  reasons  should  have  been  given
    explaining why not.  If the judge found that evidence to be  completely
    irrelevant, reasons should have been given  to  explain  that.   It  is
    possible that those posts could put the  Appellant  at  risk  from  the
    Iranian authorities if returned, and if the judge believed  that  there
    would be no risk, again reasons should have been given.   There  is  no
    finding by the judge as to whether  the  posts  have  been  taken  into
    account  when  considering  whether  the  Appellant's   conversion   to
    Christianity is genuine.

34. In addition, in my view the judge erred in not attaching any weight  to
    the clinical diagnosis of PTSD when considering credibility.  I  accept
    that the symptoms of PTSD are explained in paragraph 15 of  the  report
    as remembering, avoidance, inability to  recall,  either  partially  or
    completely, and concentration, amongst other symptoms.  I  also  accept
    that there is no reference to the psychiatric report in the Appellant's
    skeleton argument.  It is however clear that reliance was  placed  upon
    the psychiatric report as the  judge  does  make  reference  to  it  at
    paragraph 39.  The  judge  does  not  however  make  any  reference  to
    considering whether the diagnosis  of  PTSD  would  have  any  material
    effect upon the Appellant's recollection of events in  Iran,  in  which
    the judge found inconsistencies.  The judge's finding at  paragraph  39
    was that the diagnosis was based upon the Appellant's account of events
    in Iran, and  therefore  this  does  not  indicate  that  those  events
    necessarily took place.   The  correct  approach  would  have  been  to
    consider whether it was accepted that the Appellant had  PTSD.   If  it
    was not, reasons would need to be  given  for  rejecting  the  expert's
    report.  If it  was,  then  the  effect  of  that  diagnosis  upon  the
    Appellant's account would need to be considered.  That is  not  to  say
    the psychiatric report is conclusive, but for the reasons given  above,
    I find the judge's approach to consideration of that report displays an
    error of law.

35. I therefore conclude that the decision of the  FtT,  although  prepared
    with care, contains material errors of law as described above,  and  is
    unsafe and must be set aside.  No findings are preserved.

36. Both representatives agreed that if  there  was  an  error  of  law  as
    contended by the Appellant, it would be appropriate to remit the appeal
    back to the FtT to be heard again.

37. I have considered  paragraph  7  of  the  Senior  President's  Practice
    Statements, and find that it is appropriate to remit the appeal back to
    the FtT because of the nature and extent of judicial fact-finding  that
    will be necessary in order for this decision to be re-made.

38. The parties will be advised of the time and date of the hearing in  due
    course.  The appeal is to be heard by an FtT  Judge  other  than  Judge
    Loughridge.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the FtT involved the making of an error of law such that  it
is set aside.  The appeal is allowed to the extent that it  is  remitted  to
the FtT with no findings of fact preserved.

An anonymity direction is made.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date         5th December 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The Upper Tribunal makes no fee award.  The issue  of  any  fee  award  will
need to be considered by the FtT.


Signed                              Date         5th December 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall
