
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11806/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 22 August 2019                    |On 12 September 2019                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON


                                   Between

                                  Upul [E]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr K Tobin of Counsel, instructed by Jay Visva
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State for the Home Department appeals with  permission
    against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Butler promulgated on
    26 April 2019 in which Mr [E]'s  appeal  was  allowed  on  human  right
    grounds.  For ease I continue to refer to  the  parties  as  they  were
    before the First-tier tribunal, with Mr [E] as the  Appellant  and  the
    Secretary of State as the Respondent.

 2. The  single  ground  of  appeal  is  essentially  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision was contrary to the reasoning of the Supreme  Court
    in KO (Nigeria) v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  [2018]
    UKSC 53 in that the  test  of  reasonableness  had  not  been  properly
    applied and in any event, the nature of a parent's  immigration  status
    is relevant to the context of the  question  of  reasonableness  rather
    than being wholly irrelevant to the assessment.

 3. Permission to appeal was granted by the Upper Tribunal on the basis  of
    KO (Nigeria), that the First-tier Tribunal  arguably  misconstrued  the
    reasoning in that case extending consideration to matters not  relevant
    to  the  best  interests  of  the  children  for  the   proportionality
    assessment.  There is little dispute before me between the parties that
    there are  at  least  arguable  errors  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    decision, not only in its structure in the way it has  applied  Section
    117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 by going on
    to do a proportionality exercise after finding that provision had  been
    satisfied, but also in particular in  paragraph  35,  by  the  apparent
    exclusion of the nature of  the  parents'  immigration  status  to  the
    considerations before the First-tier Tribunal in relation to whether it
    would be reasonable to expect the children to leave the United Kingdom.



 4. It is arguable that although the  precarious  nature  of  the  parent's
    immigration  status  should  not  influence  a  decision  on  the  best
    interests of the children, it is, further to KO (Nigeria), relevant  to
    the question of whether it would be  reasonable  to  expect  qualifying
    children to leave the United Kingdom; the absence of leave to remain of
    the parents being the initial reason as to why they would  be  expected
    to leave at all.  It is therefore relevant to the question that had  to
    be assessed by the First-tier Tribunal in its proper context.  However,
    whilst such an error of law may be  material  in  some  cases,  in  the
    circumstances of the present appeal,  I  do  not  find  that  it  is  a
    material error of law could have potentially affected  the  outcome  of
    the appeal. The First-tier Tribunal made significant findings  of  fact
    in relation to the best interests of the children, their background  in
    the United  Kingdom  and  lack  of  connections  with  Sri  Lanka.   In
    particular reference is given to a social circumstances report  and  to
    letters from the children themselves as part of the evidence before the
    First-tier Tribunal.

 5. In brief, the eldest child has  been  here  since  the  age  of  3,  is
    currently 17 and studying for her  A-levels  with  evidence  of  future
    plans for education in the United Kingdom.  The younger child was  born
    in the United Kingdom and is now approaching the age of 10, having been
    here all his life.  The children are clearly both settled in the  full-
    time education and the eldest child in  particular  is  at  a  critical
    stage of education for exams.  There is evidence of  a  social  network
    for both children which is appropriate to their age and  findings  that
    both struggle to speak Sinhalese.  One has not been in Sri Lanka for  a
    very long time and the other has never been to Sri Lanka.   Based  upon
    these findings, even taking into account the background context that it
    is reasonable to expect the parents to leave having no leave to  remain
    in the United Kingdom, it is not possible that the First-tier  Tribunal
    could have rationally  found  that  it  would  be  reasonable  for  the
    children to leave and return to Sri Lanka with their parents,  even  if
    the proper context is taken into account.  In this case Section 117B(6)
    of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, properly  applied,
    is satisfied on the factual findings made by the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    Any error in the approach to the legal test following KO  (Nigeria)  is
    therefore not material.  The appeal is dismissed and  the  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal stands.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of a material error of law.  As such  it  is  not  necessary  to  set
aside the decision.

The decision to allow the appeal is therefore confirmed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed        [pic]        Date     5th September 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson

