







UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11664/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House             |Decision and Reasons Promulgated on      |
|On: 30 January 2019               |On: 21 February 2019                     |

                                   Before
                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer

                                   Between
                                     S R
                          anonymity direction made

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 secretary of state for the home department

                                                                  Respondent

Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr M Murphy, counsel, instructed by Jeya & Co
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. Unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellant
      is granted anonymity. No report of these proceedings shall directly or
      indirectly identify him them or  any  member  of  their  family.  This
      direction applies both to the appellant and to the respondent. Failure
      to comply  with  this  direction  could  lead  to  contempt  of  court
      proceedings.


   2. The appellant is a national of Sri Lanka, born  on  8  July  1974.  He
      appeals with permission against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge  Graves,  dismissing  the   appellant's   appeal   against   the
      respondent's decision  to  refuse  his  protection  and  human  rights
      claims.  The decision was promulgated on 31 August 2018


      Background to the appeal


   3. The appellant, a Tamil, came to the UK  on  27  September  2009  as  a
      student. His Tier- 4 leave was extended and then varied to 27 December
      2014.


   4. On 5 March 2013 he returned to Sri Lanka for a visit. He claimed  that
      he was taken by the Karuna Group and tortured and interrogated. He was
      released three weeks later after bribes were paid  on  his  behalf  by
      family members. On 1 April 2013 he returned to the UK  using  his  own
      passport and visa.


   5. Five days before his leave to remain was due to expire, he applied for
      further leave to remain under Article 8 on the basis of  private  life
      ties in the UK. That was refused in May 2015. His claim was  certified
      as clearly unfounded under s.94(1) of the Nationality, Immigration and
      Asylum Act 2002.


   6. His appeal against that decision was dismissed  on  12  June  2016  as
      there was no valid appeal following the certification. No grounds  for
      protection under the Refugee Convention had been raised at that appeal
      [4].


   7. The appellant subsequently claimed asylum on 4 May 2017 and attended a
      screening and a substantive interview. He claimed that his life was in
      danger from the CID and  paramilitary  groups  who  had  targeted  him
      because he was compelled to help the  LTTE  by  buying  computers  and
      fixing them, which they found out through some receipts.


   8. He was detained on two occasions, the first in 2009 following a normal
      round up after a bomb blast in Colombo which  he  had  nothing  to  do
      with. The second was in 2013 when he was detained from  his  home  for
      three days because he was suspected of having connections to the LTTE.
      He claimed to have been beaten and sexually abused during  his  second
      detention. In his screening interview  he  stated  that  he  would  be
      getting documents from Sri Lanka which would take  about  a  month  to
      arrive.


   9. He stated at his asylum interview that the second  detention  was  for
      about three weeks and not three days. The first detention was  also  a
      targeted abduction because they found receipts linking him to a man in
      the LTTE and was responsible for a bomb blast. He was detained for two
      days and beaten. That was the main  reason  he  came  to  the  UK.  He
      provided a letter that stated that he had joined the BTF on 16 October
      2015. No other documents were provided [7].


  10. Judge Graves noted that  the  appellant's  bundle  contained  evidence
      relating to his mental health. In addition there was a medical  report
      and a lawyer's letter from Sri Lanka [12]. As  both  were  written  in
      English and dated mid-June 2018, she asked the appellant's counsel, Mr
      Murphy, to inform her when they had been served upon  the  respondent.
      Mr Murphy could not be sure, but it was his  understanding  that  they
      had not been served on the respondent until the appellant's bundle was
      submitted, which had been seven days prior  to  the  date  of  hearing
      [12].


  11. Mr Murphy then applied for an adjournment on two  grounds.  The  first
      related to the respondent's reliance upon Tanveer Ahmed  [2006]  UKAIT
      00439  and  how  that  coloured  the  approach  to   the   appellant's
      documentary evidence as the  respondent  had  not  addressed  the  new
      documents.


  12. He stated that it would  have  been  preferable  for  his  instructing
      solicitor to have written to  the  doctor  and  lawyer  in  Sri  Lanka
      directly, rather than  the  documents  having  been  produced  by  the
      appellant separately.


  13. The presenting officer opposed the application  for  the  adjournment.
      Judge Graves refused the application as it was for  the  appellant  to
      provide the respondent with sufficient time to examine  the  documents
      and undertake any checks, and the  respondent  did  not  seek  further
      time. Whilst counsel might have preferred that his  solicitors  obtain
      the evidence directly, they have not done so. However they had already
      had many months in which to contact those  individuals  directly,  had
      they chosen to do so. The  appellant  had  stated  that  he  would  be
      obtaining these documents as long ago as May 2017 [13].


  14. The second ground advanced related to whether the  psychiatric  report
      and medical evidence in the  bundle  had  sufficiently  addressed  the
      impact of the appellant's mental health condition on  his  memory  and
      suicide risk if he were removed. Judge Graves noted  that  the  report
      addressed both issues already. Whilst the appellant's  representatives
      might have hoped that the  psychiatrist's  comments  would  have  been
      stronger, the evidence was there and there was nothing to suggest  the
      issues had not been adequately considered [13].


  15. Although refusing the adjournment application, the Judge  stated  that
      bearing in mind the  appellant's  diagnosed  mental  health  problems,
      anonymity should be directed and he should be treated as a  vulnerable
      witness. The appeal was then put back in order to  enable  counsel  to
      discuss with the presenting officer the questions that would be put in
      cross examination and the steps to make the hearing accessible for the
      appellant.


  16. She asked that the provenance of the documents be addressed as well as
      the appellant's current medical diagnosis and any treatment  required.
      This was to be addressed in his examination in chief.


  17. At that stage, counsel informed the Tribunal that he had  received  an
      email from the psychiatrist following  contact  with  his  instructing
      solicitors that morning in which  the  psychiatrist  stated  that  the
      appellant '....is at risk of self-harm in case of  facing  torture  in
      Sri Lanka' [14]. Further,  the  psychiatrist  cannot  comment  on  the
      appellant's ability to give evidence today as "not seen recently."  It
      was noted  that  he  "cannot  cope  with  challenging  situations."  A
      photocopied business card was produced in the name of  Senior  Partner
      J.U. Shakoor' [14].


  18. At [15] the Judge stated that she observed  no  difficulties  for  the
      appellant throughout the hearing.  He  stated  in  evidence  that  the
      documents had been obtained thorough his sister  back  home  and  came
      together in the same envelope. This only arrived on the  week  of  the
      hearing; the envelope handed up had a postal date of 29 June 2018. His
      sister in the UK had told the  sister  in  Sri  Lanka  to  obtain  the
      letters [19].


  19. The appellant had not joined any other political  organisations  apart
      from BTF. When asked why he had not joined them  in  2009  or  earlier
      than 2015, he said that he had been to Heroes' Day  and  other  events
      before 2015.


  20. In her findings, Judge Graves reminded herself that the appellant  had
      been diagnosed with PTSD and generalised anxiety disorder. She  stated
      that she considered the impact of these mental health  issues  on  his
      evidence 'with great care' [24]. She noted that the  report  from  the
      consultant psychiatrist followed the assessment which lasted one  hour
      without the benefit of any medical records from the appellant's GP.


  21. She had some concerns about the report as there is  a  section  in  it
      which purports to provide background information about  the  situation
      in Sri Lanka which is beyond the remit of a psychiatric expert, unless
      they have  some  relevant  experience  or  qualifications  in  country
      reports. Such expertise had not been given, however. It was not  clear
      whether this was only a record  of  the  appellant's  account  of  the
      situation in Sri Lanka.


  22. Judge Graves further noted that there  were  comments  in  the  report
      about the degree of treatment the appellant is likely to face, but  it
      is not made clear whether this is the appellant's  perception  or  the
      opinion of the psychiatrist. There are also emotive  phrases  used  by
      the psychiatrist which did not support a finding that the  expert  had
      taken a balanced approach to  the  evidence.  There  are  also  typing
      errors and missing words. There  was  no  reference  to  the  practice
      direction and guidance for the preparation of expert  reports.  Whilst
      it is asserted that it has been made clear which facts are within  the
      expert's knowledge and which are not, she  found  that  the  assertion
      made in the statement of truth was that it is not the  approach  taken
      [25].


  23. Nor was there any consideration as to whether his mental health issues
      have an alternative cause, including the impact of the uncertainty  of
      his immigration status, or  malingering.  In  the  circumstances,  she
      attached reduced weight to the report [25].


  24. The report showed that there was no evidence  of  any  formal  thought
      disorder or any other psychotic symptoms  or  hallucinations.  It  was
      acknowledged that his concentration can  get  affected  when  he  gets
      carried away with his distressing past incidents, or is  in  stressful
      situations. He was not assessed as being unable to  give  evidence  at
      court. There was no  suggestion  that  he  was  unable  to  provide  a
      detailed account of his experiences [26].


  25. Judge Graves stated that she nevertheless bore in mind when  assessing
      credibility that the appellant has mental health problems and that his
      concentration can be affected when giving an  account  of  distressing
      incidents. He was not cross- examined on  the  treatment  he  received
      when detained and while she accepted that the hearing may have been  a
      stressful situation, he was offered breaks in which she took  care  to
      check his evidence back to ensure she had an accurate record. He  also
      had time to answer questions [26].


  26. With regard to s.8 of the 2004 Act, the appellant did not claim asylum
      on arrival, yet now maintained that his sole purpose  in  coming  here
      was not to study but to seek protection from persecution and  he  knew
      on arrival that he was at risk in Sri Lanka.  His  assertion  that  he
      experienced feelings of shame which could have affected  any  decision
      to claim asylum would have related to the second detention only and he
      did not address why he failed to claim asylum on arrival in  2009.  He
      says he knew he was wanted by the authorities [27].


  27. It was  noted  that  he  returned  to  Sri  Lanka  and  said  that  he
      experienced further persecution, but having returned  to  the  UK,  he
      still did not contact the respondent.  He  submitted  a  human  rights
      claim in which he did not raise any concerns about his safety  in  Sri
      Lanka which the Judge found would be specifically raised by  the  type
      of application he made. It was only when his appeal was dismissed  and
      further months had passed and his removal would  have  been  imminent,
      that he notified the respondent of his wish  to  claim  asylum.  These
      factors did significantly damage  his  credibility  but  were  not  by
      themselves capable of wholly undermining his credibility to defeat  an
      otherwise credible claim to asylum [27].


  28. Judge Graves found his evidence to be internally inconsistent  between
      his interviews, statement and oral evidence  at  the  hearing.  Whilst
      accepting that his mental health issues might affect  some  recall  of
      traumatic experiences, she did not  find  that  they  are  capable  of
      explaining the many inconsistencies or issues in the  plausibility  or
      credibility of his account.


  29. She set out in detail the  evidence  that  the  appellant  relied  on,
      including his work in a computer shop when he  inadvertently  provided
      computers to the LTTE without realising [29]. With regard to the first
      detention, he told the psychiatrist that he was beaten on his arms and
      legs and kicked on his chest. He gave a different account when he gave
      his oral evidence. Whilst she  accepted  that  these  will  have  been
      distressing incidents to relate, she would expect the appellant to  be
      able to give a consistent  account  of  how  he  was  harmed  and  any
      injuries sustained [34].


  30. At [36] she found that the appellant had not established why he  would
      be targeted, given that his involvement was at best that he  had  sold
      some computer parts to a man some 11 years ago, but he  had  no  other
      connections with the LTTE. If indeed he was wanted on bail  and  there
      was a warrant for his arrest, he did not address how he  was  able  to
      leave Sri Lanka on his own passport in 2009 and 2013 without problems.




  31. She found his account to be internally  inconsistent.  When  asked  to
      address issues at interview and at hearing,  she  found  his  evidence
      vague and it shifted and changed depending on the questions asked. She
      did not find him to be a credible witness, even taking account of  the
      impact of any mental health problems [37].


  32. Large parts of his account rely upon  information  or  news  from  his
      sister, with whom he lives in the UK. She, however, did  not  come  to
      court to give  oral  evidence,  or  even  provide  a  statement.  Such
      evidence would have been accessible and available. Whilst  a  lack  of
      evidence is not evidence in itself, the failure to obtain  it  can  go
      towards any assessment of  credibility  as  well  as  to  whether  the
      appellant has  discharged  the  burden  of  proof.  Nor  was  there  a
      statement from his mother, the person who has had first  hand  contact
      with the authorities when they came looking for the appellant, or from
      any other family members in Sri Lanka [37].


  33. She had regard to his interview, where he  stated  that  when  he  was
      released in 2009 he was given a letter from the police station to show
      to anyone who stopped him. When asked about that at  the  hearing,  he
      denied being given any document when he was released. He attempted  to
      explain the inconsistency, stating that it was his uncle who gave  him
      the letter and not the authorities.  However,  even  then,  the  Judge
      found his evidence to be further  vague,  and  incredible  about  that
      letter. Given that he claimed it was a letter that should be shown  if
      he were arrested, it was clearly important, yet he did  not  take  the
      time to read it or ask someone to help him to read it [38].


  34. He did not know what it related to and so would not  be  able  to  say
      whether it was a letter confirming his innocence of all charges, or  a
      letter confirming that there were charges against  him  for  terrorism
      and bail conditions that prevented him from leaving the  country.  She
      found that it was not plausible that he would not have tried  to  find
      out what it said, in the context of his fear of imminent  arrest,  and
      as he was making plans to  escape  the  country,  where  he  might  be
      stopped or questioned at the airport. It was reasonable to expect  him
      to have wondered what the letter actually said and to  be  able,  when
      asked to remember if he took it with him to the  airport,  as  clearly
      such a letter might have prevented his  arrest  at  the  airport  when
      attempting to leave [38].


  35. With regard to joining the BTF in 2015, the Judge noted  that  he  had
      not been politically active in the UK. His friends told him he  should
      join BTF rather than any personal motivation about politics.  She  did
      not believe that his  attendance  at  Heroes'  Day  in  the  UK  would
      generate a specific profile. Such  events  are  attended  by  a  large
      number  of  Tamils  and  any  political  activities   post-dated   his
      detention.


  36. She assessed the appellant's documents in the light  of  her  findings
      about his credibility  and  also  separately,  having  regard  to  the
      approach in Tanveer Ahmed. [40]


  37. At the first interview he told the  respondent  he  would  be  getting
      documents from Sri Lanka about the incident dates. These would take  a
      month to arrive.  Five  months  later,  by  the  date  of  the  second
      interview, these documents had not materialised.  The  documents  from
      Sri Lanka were finally  produced  in  his  bundle  before  his  appeal
      hearing, one year and two months later, and they were not sent to  the
      respondent directly.


  38. There were only therefore seen  by  the  presenting  officer  the  day
      before the hearing [40]. She bore in mind that the respondent had  had
      no time to consider those documents or consider  whether  the  sources
      are reliable. Nor was there any statement or "real evidence" about how
      they were obtained, or why they took so long to obtain  and  send.  He
      vaguely claimed that his sister  "did  it  all."  They  were  obtained
      through the appellant and his family yet when asked, he had not spoken
      to or had any direct contact at all with  the  doctor  who  wrote  the
      report or with the lawyer who was apparently working on  his  case  in
      2013. He vaguely stated that his sister  did  it  all.  There  was  no
      statement to confirm this from his sister, or his mother, or  brother,
      all of whom still live in Sri  Lanka  and  who  were  responsible  for
      obtaining these documents [40].


  39. The letter from the lawyer stated that it was not  the  appellant  but
      his mother who was the client. Judge Graves  found  it  reasonable  to
      expect the appellant or his mother to have made some enquiries of  him
      about getting any charges dropped or  finding  out  what  the  charges
      were, if any. His reply did not address why his uncle would  not  have
      intervened before  2013  if  indeed  the  family  were  being  visited
      regularly by the authorities looking for the appellant [41].


  40. On his account, the appellant had no real information about the  LTTE,
      the extent of his involvement beyond selling some computer  parts.  He
      did not have any useful information to give the  authorities  and  was
      released in 2009 and had been out of the country for years [41].


  41. Judge Graves also noted that at interview, he made  no  mention  of  a
      lawyer having been instructed in Sri Lanka to obtain his  release  (it
      was his sister who arranged his release) and it  was  the  authorities
      for the Karuna group who contacted his family to tell  them  where  he
      was. Yet, the lawyer's letter states that his family searched for  him
      and  contacted  various  army  camps.  She  would  have  expected  the
      appellant to have had a conversation with  his  sister  here,  or  his
      other family members in Sri Lanka, at some point over  the  last  five
      years to learn how he was released and who was involved, and  that  he
      would have mentioned that his mother had a  lawyer  who  had  valuable
      information [42].


  42. She approached documents purporting to be from official  sources  when
      submitted at the eleventh hour with "considerable caution." The letter
      from the purported lawyer does  not  provide  any  evidence  that  the
      person is a lawyer, such as a bar or roll number, or  a  copy  of  any
      relevant legal  qualification  or  licence  to  practice  law.  It  is
      reasonable to expect a lawyer to be aware that such evidence might  be
      required. She was "mindful"  of  serious  concerns  raised  about  the
      reliability  of  such  last  minute  letters  from  lawyers  with   no
      supporting  evidence  as  to  their  provenance.  Those  concerns  are
      reflected in decisions  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  such  as  YV  (Fresh
      Credibility Evidence) Sri Lanka [2004] UKIAT 00124.


  43. She considered his account of political activism  in  the  UK.  Whilst
      accepting that he has been involved with the BTF to some  extent,  she
      did not find that his involvement is any  more  than  low  level;  she
      found that he has  not  established  any  real  political  profile  or
      motivations or that he would be politically active on  return  to  Sri
      Lanka. She did not believe that he has a political profile  sufficient
      to attract the attention of the authorities  or  paramilitary  groups.
      She therefore did not find that he would act in such a way  on  return
      so as to place himself at risk [44].


  44. She considered the appellant's case against the guidance given  in  GJ
      and Others [2013] UKUT 00319. She did not accept that he has or  would
      be perceived to have a significant or indeed any real role in diaspora
      activities, nor that such activities would be perceived to be with the
      aim of destabilising the government or that they would  have  come  to
      the attention of the authorities. Nor did she find that  he  has  ever
      been arrested, or that there is a warrant for his arrest, or  that  he
      is wanted by the Sri Lankan authorities for any reason [45]. There are
      no grounds  to  believe  that  he  is  at  risk  of  serious  harm  or
      mistreatment [46].


  45. In granting the appellant permission to appeal, Upper  Tribunal  Judge
      Kamara stated that it is arguable that the Judge's refusal to  adjourn
      the appeal to allow  the  appellant  to  obtain  further  evidence  to
      address deficiencies in his evidence was erroneous, all  the  more  so
      when those  same  deficiencies  were  relied  upon  to  reach  adverse
      findings.


  46. Mr Murphy stated that when he perused the papers, it was  apparent  to
      him that the information that emanated from the appellant's lawyer  in
      Sri Lanka lacked the ability to defend  the  charge  of  contamination
      between him and that solicitor, in that it could be  alleged  that  he
      had falsified the information.


  47. The Court of Appeal indicated that where a solicitor in the UK and  an
      appellant's solicitor in his  home  country  liaise  with  each  other
      directly and independently of the "actual appellant", and  his  lawyer
      confirms that the authorities previously detained  the  appellant  and
      are still interested in  him,  such  evidence  can  constitute  strong
      corroboration of the appellant's stance of adverse interest  from  the
      authorities.


  48. The Tribunal held in GJ that perhaps of greatest significance was  the
      fact that there was a letter from the magistrate of the relevant court
      to the Controller of  Immigration  and  Emigration  stating  that  the
      appellant is in the UK and that he is to be arrested on his return  to
      Sri Lanka. In the  absence  of  a  sufficient  reason  for  concluding
      otherwise, the inescapable conclusion to be drawn from this material -
      received independently it is to be stressed by two  lawyers  from  the
      magistrates' court on separate  occasions  -  the  appellant  will  be
      arrested on his return to Sri Lanka as a result of links with the LTTE
      and their activities.


  49. The  Tribunal  held  that  without  an  adequate  explanation,  it  is
      difficult to understand how the appellant  in  that  case  could  have
      falsified a letter from the magistrate of the relevant  court  to  the
      Controller of Immigration  and  Emigration  ordering  the  appellant's
      arrest which he then placed in the court  records  so  that  it  could
      later be retrieved by two separate lawyers. At the  very  least,  this
      feature of the evidence required detailed analysis and explanation.


  50. Mr Murphy referred to the decision in Nwaigwe (Adjournment - Fairness)
      [2014] UKUT 00418. Where  an  adjournment  refusal  is  challenged  on
      fairness grounds it is important to recognise that  the  question  for
      the Upper Tribunal is not whether the FTT  acted  reasonably.  Rather,
      the test to be applied is that of fairness: was there any  deprivation
      of the affected party's right to a fair hearing?


  51. He also referred to SH (Afghanistan) v SSHD [2011] EWCA  Civ  1284  at
      [13]. When considering whether the Immigration  Judge  ought  to  have
      granted an adjournment, the test was not irrationality. The  test  was
      not whether the decision was properly open to him  or  was  Wendesbury
      unreasonable or perverse. The test and the sole test  was  whether  it
      was unfair.


  52. Although it was  understandable  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  held
      against the appellant the fact that he had had ample  time  to  obtain
      the evidence that counsel on his behalf deemed to be crucial  for  the
      purpose of the appeal, this will  not  be  the  first  case  in  which
      counsel takes a view that something essential should be  done  at  the
      court door. In the appellant's renewed grounds seeking permission from
      the Upper Tribunal, Mr Murphy submitted that the  issue  becomes  what
      approach should the Judge adopt in terms of granting latitude  to  the
      appellant. The Court of Appeal  has  ruled  contrary  to  an  approach
      suggesting that such latitude should be restricted and that the  delay
      by the appellant himself should outweigh his right to a fair  hearing.
      Notwithstanding the Tribunal's sense of frustration the Tribunal  must
      always yield to the party's right to a fair hearing.


  53. Mr Murphy also submitted that it was apparent to him that  there  were
      deficiencies in the psychiatric report. He  identified  those  at  the
      outset of the hearing. The Judge herself then identified even  further
      deficiencies in the report. That amplified the pressing  need  for  an
      adjournment on that basis.


  54. The eventual outcome was that the Judge on the one  hand  refused  the
      application to adjourn as the report was sufficient for the purpose of
      the appellant's appeal but later, in her  determination,  went  on  to
      criticise the deficiencies in the report. It was  those  issues  which
      counsel identified to be of crucial importance in his case.


  55. Whilst she accepted that the  appellant  has  "mental  health  issues"
      [25], it was essential for her to know the effect that removal and the
      prospect of living in Sri Lanka would have on the appellant.  That  is
      particularly so having regard to the country guidance decision on this
      issue in GJ. He referred to [28] where the Judge stated that she might
      accept that his mental health  issues  might  affect  some  recall  of
      traumatic experiences.


  56. She directed herself that the appellant's mental health issues  cannot
      explain the discrepancies in his account. He submitted that it is  not
      possible to determine whether the discrepancies can  be  explained  by
      his mental health issues without first reaching a clear conclusion  as
      to the state of such mental health issues, particularly as to  whether
      the appellant was suffering from PTSD. She made credibility  findings,
      even taking into account the impact  of  any  mental  health  problems
      [37].


  57. It was necessary for her to make clear findings as to  whether  he  in
      fact was suffering from PTSD, because if he was, and relying upon  GJ,
      he could still succeed in his appeal albeit not on asylum grounds.


  58. Mr Murphy referred to GJ, at [45-46]. His resources in Sri  Lanka  are
      sparse and limited to the cities. The issue was whether returning  the
      appellant to Sri Lanka would comply with the  UK's  obligations  under
      Article 3 of the Human Rights Convention. The  Judge  did  not  accept
      that the medical evidence reaches the high threshold for a  breach  of
      Article 3, but it was not clear  whether  she  accepted  that  he  was
      suffering from PTSD.


  59. He submitted that the Judge misdirected herself at  [36].  She  stated
      that if the appellant was wanted, he would not have  got  through  the
      airport on his own passport. However, he explained that the person who
      helped him get through the airport was a customs officer (Q 162 of his
      interview). He referred to  GJ,  supra,  at  [392].  There  the  Upper
      Tribunal held that given the substantial sum paid to the agent and the
      evidence before them on pervasive bribery and corruption in Sri Lanka,
      applying the lower standard, they accept that element of his  account.
      In that case the appellant's uncle arranged the agent and paid for his
      services.


  60. Mr Melvin, on behalf of the respondent, submitted that the  Judge  has
      properly considered the adjournment request and  rejected  it  on  the
      basis that the appellant had ample time to  produce  any  evidence  on
      which he sought to rely.


  61. With respect to the request to obtain  further  psychiatric  evidence,
      the Judge found that there was nothing to suggest that the  issues  of
      memory and suicide risk had  not  been  adequately  addressed  in  the
      previous reports.


  62. He submitted that it would be "irrational"  for  the  Tribunal  to  be
      required  to  adjourn  a  hearing  to  obtain  evidence   that   could
      potentially assist the appellant. This appellant was  treated  by  the
      Tribunal as a vulnerable witness on account of  his  diagnosed  mental
      health problems. Psychiatric evidence has been addressed by the  Judge
      from [24] of the decision. She found  that  the  expert  used  emotive
      phrases. This was not indicative of taking a balanced approach to  the
      evidence.


  63. She referred to the  appellant  as  not  suffering  from  any  thought
      disorder or other psychotic symptoms  and  no  evidence  of  cognitive
      deficit.


  64. The various inconsistencies in the  evidence  were  detailed  and  the
      finding that the appellant's account is without  credibility,  despite
      medical problems, is sustainable.


      Assessment


  65. The appellant had over a year to produce documents, and in  particular
      from the alleged lawyer in Sri Lanka.


  66.  Counsel  representing   the   appellant   contended   that   in   the
      circumstances,  fairness  required  that  the   appellant   be   given
      "latitude" to obtain 'a lawyer to lawyer correspondence'  relating  to
      the letter produced in evidence at page 9.


  67. In that respect,  Judge  Graves  stated  that  the  letter  from  "the
      purported lawyer" did not provide evidence that he is a  lawyer,  such
      as a bar or roll number, or a copy of any relevant legal qualification
      or licence to practice law. It was reasonable to expect a lawyer to be
      aware that such  evidence  might  be  required.  She  was  accordingly
      critical of attempts to raise last minute letters from lawyers without
      any provenance.


  68. She also noted at [43] that the decision  in  YV,  "interestingly  ...
      related to the very same Mr Rajagulendra and there is nothing in  that
      decision to suggest that the Upper Tribunal found him to be a reliable
      source".


  69. She assessed the letter on the basis that it was not the appellant but
      his mother who was his client. She noted that if indeed a  lawyer  had
      been instructed, it is reasonable to expect that the appellant or  his
      mother would have made some inquiries of him about getting any charges
      dropped or finding out what charges there are, if any [41].


  70. Nor did the appellant  make  any  mention  of  a  lawyer  having  been
      instructed in Sri Lanka to obtain his release.  She  referred  to  the
      appellant's statement that it was his sister who arranged his  release
      and that it was the authorities or the Karuna Group who contacted  his
      family to tell them where he was. However, the  lawyer's  letter  says
      his family searched for him and contacted various  army  camps.  Judge
      Graves stated that she would have expected the appellant to have had a
      conversation with his sister here, or his other family members in  Sri
      Lanka, over the past five years to discover how he  was  released  and
      who was involved, and that he would have mentioned that his mother had
      a lawyer who had valuable information.


  71. It is in that context that she assessed  documents  purporting  to  be
      from official sources when submitted at the  eleventh  hour.  She  has
      also referred to and set out  the  shortcomings  in  his  letter.  She
      stated that she assessed the documents in the light  of  her  concerns
      about the appellant's credibility and did not place much  weight  upon
      them.


  72. The appellant also sought to adjourn his appeal  in  order  to  obtain
      further medical evidence from the psychiatrist concerning  his  mental
      state if he was returned to Sri Lanka. In that respect it is contended
      that the Judge failed to make a clear finding as  to  his  psychiatric
      condition and in particular, whether he was suffering from PTSD.


  73. As submitted by Mr Murphy, when considering whether or not to grant an
      adjournment, the test was not whether it was  Wednesbury  unreasonable
      or perverse, or irrational but  the  sole  test  was  whether  it  was
      unfair. Regard must be had to the overriding objective.


  74. It is noted by Judge Graves at [13] that Mr Murphy informed  her  that
      it would have been preferable for his instructing solicitor  to  write
      to the doctor and  lawyer  in  Sri  Lanka  directly  rather  than  the
      documents having been  obtained  by  the  appellant  separately.   The
      presenting officer opposed any adjournment.


  75. In refusing  the  application  Judge  Graves  stated  that  there  was
      evidence in the appellant's bundle relating to his mental  health  and
      additionally a medical report and the lawyer's letter from Sri  Lanka.
      Both were written in English and dated mid- June 2018.  It  turns  out
      that they had only been served on the respondent with the  appellant's
      bundle which was sent seven days before the date of hearing.


  76. The issue as to whether the psychiatric report and medical evidence in
      the bundle sufficiently addressed the impact of the appellant's mental
      health condition on his memory and suicide risk if  he  were  removed,
      was considered by the Judge. She found that both issues  were  already
      addressed. Whilst the appellant's  representatives  might  have  hoped
      that the psychiatrist's comment would have been stronger, the evidence
      was there and there was nothing to suggest that  the  issues  had  not
      been adequately considered [13].


  77. Further, there was no evidence from the appellant's solicitors  as  to
      why lawyer to lawyer correspondence had not  been  properly  obtained,
      including evidence as to the provenance surrounding the  obtaining  of
      the documents put before the Tribunal. The appellant has  stated  that
      he would be obtaining these documents as long ago as May 2017 - [13].


  78. Mr Murphy submitted that it  is  not  possible  to  determine  if  the
      discrepancies can be explained by his "mental health  issues"  without
      first reaching a clear conclusion as  to  the  state  of  such  mental
      health issues, particularly as to whether he was suffering from PTSD.


  79. Judge Graves did bear in mind that the appellant  had  been  diagnosed
      with PTSD and generalised anxiety disorder by Dr Hussain. However, she
      found that that report was prepared following a  one  hour  assessment
      without the benefit of medical records from the  appellant's  GP.  She
      was also critical of the use of emotive phrases and comments, as  well
      as typing errors and missing words. She was entitled to attach reduced
      weight to the report.


  80. She noted that the  appellant  was  not  suffering  from  any  thought
      disorder or other psychotic symptoms, and there was no evidence of any
      cognitive deficit. She  was  aware  that  his  concentration  can  get
      affected when he gets carried away with distressing past incidents  or
      stressful situations.  She  bore  this  in  mind  when  assessing  his
      credibility.


  81. The appellant was not cross-examined on the treatment he received when
      detained. Whilst she  accepted  that  the  hearing  may  have  been  a
      stressful situation, he was offered breaks and she took care to  check
      his evidence back to ensure she had an accurate record.  He  also  had
      time to answer questions.


  82. Whilst his mental health issues might affect some recall of  traumatic
      experience, she did not find that they are capable of  explaining  the
      many inconsistencies or issues or the plausibility and credibility  of
      his account [28].  Nor did she accept  that  the  appellant's  medical
      evidence reaches the high threshold for a breach under Article 3


  83. She has moreover adopted the Presidential Guidance: The appellant  was
      given breaks. She considered  the  impact  of  his  condition  on  his
      evidence.  She  made  credibility  findings  in  the  light  of  those
      considerations.


  84. In assessing his evidence she also found that the  appellant  was  not
      clear as to whether or not there were conditions  on  his  release  in
      2009 which he was expected to abide by.  It  was  not  contended  that
      there  were  any  reporting  conditions  or  any  limitations  on  his
      movements. She noted that at some point in the years that followed, it
      was reasonable that he would have asked his uncle if he  had  breached
      his bail conditions as this would inform him whether he was likely  to
      be arrested on return. He was allowed to obtain a visa and  leave  the
      country [32].


  85. There was no evidence to suggest that the appellant was considered for
      prosecution or that an arrest warrant was issued against him.


  86. Judge Graves has  undertaken  a  detailed  assessment  and  has  given
      sustainable  reasons  for  her  findings.   Having   regard   to   the
      circumstances as a whole, the decision to refuse  an  adjournment  was
      not unfair.


      Notice of Decision


      The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making  of
      an error on a point of law. The decision shall accordingly stand.


      Anonymity direction continued.






      Signed  Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer       12 February 2019


