

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11844/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice Centre |Decision & Reasons Promulgated          |
|On 27th August 2019                      |On 4th September 2019                   |
|                                         |                                        |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER

                                   Between


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                                     AM
                           (anonymity order made)

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Tan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:     Ms Faryl, instructed by GMIAU


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
   (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal  or  a
   Court directs otherwise, no report of these proceedings or  any  form  of
   publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify  the  appellant
   in this determination  identified  as  AM.  This  direction  applies  to,
   amongst others, all parties. Any failure to comply  with  this  direction
   could give rise to contempt of court proceedings




         1. In a decision promulgated on 8 August  2018  I  set  aside  the
            decision of First-tier Tribunal judge Alis: who had allowed the
            appeal by AM against a decision of the respondent refusing  his
            international protection claim. At the time it was  anticipated
            that the Upper Tribunal would hear and determine other  appeals
            as a Country Guidance; the resumed hearing of this  appeal  was
            adjourned pending the outcome of the Country Guidance Cases.


         2. The Country Guidance Panel, with the  agreement  of  the  SSHD,
            concluded that the situation in Sudan was too fluid  for  there
            to be a meaningful decision reached and therefore  declined  to
            reach a Country Guidance decision; extant CG  case  law  to  be
            followed.

         3.  Before  me,  given  the  concession  by  the  SSHD,   Mr   Tan
            acknowledged that he would have difficulty identifying  reasons
            why the extant CG case law should  not  be  followed  for  this
            appeal. Although not conceding the appeal he did not pursue it.

         4. In the circumstances I am  satisfied  that  the  appeal  by  AM
            against the decision of the SSHD to refuse him asylum is to  be
            allowed.



          Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

     I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

    I re-make the decision in the appeal by AM against the decision of  the
    SSHD refusing his international protection claim allowing it.



    Anonymity

    I continue/ the anonymity order (pursuant to rule 14  of  the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).



                                    Date 27th August 2019
[pic]


Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
