
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11054/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 1 March 2021                      |On 9 March 2021                      |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between

                                I A H (Iraq)
                           [ANONYMITY ORDER MADE]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr Alex Coyte, case worker with Fountain Solicitors
For the respondent:    Ms Alexandra Everett, a Senior Home Office
Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Anonymity order

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) The Tribunal has ORDERED that no one shall publish  or  reveal
the name or address of I A H  who is the subject  of  these  proceedings  or
publish or reveal any information which would  be  likely  to  lead  to  the
identification of him or of any member of  his  family  in  connection  with
these proceedings.

Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise  to  contempt  of
court proceedings.



Decision and reasons

 1. The appellant appeals with permission from the decision of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal dismissing his appeal against the  respondent's  decision
    on 25 October  2019  to  refuse  him  refugee  status  under  the  1951
    Convention, humanitarian protection, or leave to remain in  the  United
    Kingdom on human rights grounds. The appellant is a citizen of Iraq.

Background

 2. The appellant was born in Iraq in 1988, in the IKR. When he was 9 years
    old, he became infected with polio and has a  withered  left  leg,  and
    also scoliosis, as well as considerable  ongoing  pain  which  requires
    management.  There is no suggestion in the evidence before me that this
    appellant is experiencing post-polio syndrome, which can  lead  to  new
    weakness and loss of function, many years after the original infection.



 3. There are considerable divergences in the appellant's core account  and
    in his  account  of  his  journey.   The  persecution  element  of  the
    appellant's account was that in 2006, 2014, and 2015  while  living  in
    Iraq, he was beaten by members of the Braima Rwt family, who  are  said
    to have links to the Patriotic Union of  Kurdistan  (PUK)  and  that  a
    blood feud exists between the Braima Rwt  family  and  the  appellant's
    family.   The appellant also claimed to  fear  the  Kurdish  Democratic
    Party (KDP) because  he took photographs of the KDP building in Zharawa
    which had been the subject of an arson attack.    The arson attack  did
    occur, according to country materials.

 4. In August 2016, the appellant left Iraq by plane, or perhaps  on  foot,
    travelling to Turkey, where he spent a week  before  travelling  on  to
    Italy by boat.  In Italy, he was arrested and fingerprinted, but he did
    not claim asylum.  He met some fellow Iraqis in  Italy,  and  they  all
    travelled on to Calais together.

 5. The appellant made  multiple  attempts  to  enter  the  United  Kingdom
    clandestinely in a lorry.  The respondent's records show  that  he  was
    caught trying to board a lorry in Dunkirk on 26 and 30 September  2016,
    and served with a form IS 151A.  On both occasions, the lorry  driver's
    previous stop before Dunkirk was in Belgium.  In  one  version  of  his
    account, the appellant said that he was caught twice in France and  was
    returned to Iraq, which he left again in November 2016.

 6.  On  7  December  2016,  the  appellant  entered  the  United   Kingdom
    clandestinely in a lorry,  was  discovered  in  Thurrock,  and  claimed
    asylum promptly when detained there.

 7. The Secretary of State considered  his application with reference to  N
    v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2005] UKHL 31 but was not
    satisfied that the  appellant  could  bring  himself  within  paragraph
    276ADE of the Immigration Rules HC  395  (as  amended),  nor  that  his
    circumstances met the high Article 3 ECHR test.



First-tier Tribunal decision

 8. The First-tier Judge heard the appellant's oral evidence  and  rejected
    the core account entirely.  The First-tier Judge found that all of  the
    appellant's account lacked  credibility,  save  for  his  national  and
    ethnic origin and his polio and scoliosis disability.

 9. The First-tier Judge's decision does not engage with a  country  expert
    report of 19 March 2020  which  was  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
    prepared by Dr Rebwar Fatah of Middle East  Consultancy  Services,  nor
    with detailed medical evidence in the appellant's bundle as the effects
    of his polio and scoliosis disabilities and the pain he experiences.

10. The First-tier Judge dismissed the appeal, finding that  the  appellant
    was agile and energetic, despite his disability, that he had been  able
    to try to get on lorries on several occasions, and could return to Iraq
    the same way.  The First-tier Judge disbelieved the appellant's account
    of his brothers having rejected him, of his leaving school early and of
    disability-related harassment and attacks when he lived in Iraq.

11. The  appellant appealed to the Upper Tribunal.

Permission to appeal

12. Ground 1 of the appellant's grounds argued that  the  First-tier  Judge
    had  failed  to  make  a  properly  reasoned  decision   on   paragraph
    276ADE(1)(vi).   He contended  that,  the  judge  having  accepted  the
    existence of the appellant's polio/scoliosis disability, the First-tier
    Judge's factual findings were inconsistent with the medical evidence in
    the  appellant's  bundle,  and  with  Dr  Fatah's  report  as  to   the
    difficulties for disabled persons in Iraq, both as to social  exclusion
    (including rejection by their families), and lack  of  employment,  and
    the evidence regarding the inability of the appellant's mother, who has
    her own health problems, to assist him on return.

13. On 2 October 2020, Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor  granted  limited
    permission to appeal, on that ground alone, in the following terms:

         "1.  It is arguable that the First-tier Tribunal did not adequately
         address  the  paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)  issue  in  light   of   the
         appellant's particular circumstances.


         2.   Having regard to the judge's decision as a  whole,  grounds  2
         and 3 are unarguable.  ...  "


Rule 24 Reply

14. On 19 October 2020, the respondent's Rule 24 Reply was as follows:

         "...3.   The respondent considers that  permission  to  appeal  has
         been granted on a very limited basis on an alleged failure  by  the
         First-tier Judge to consider the appellant's claim  in  respect  of
         paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of the Immigration Rules.


         4.   The respondent respectfully submits that it would appear  that
         the only factors the appellant identified in respect of [paragraph]
         276ADE(1)(vi) at the appeal were those related to his asylum claim,
         which the judge has comprehensively dismissed (and  upheld  by  the
         [Upper Tribunal] in  the  permission  grant)  and  the  appellant's
         disability, which the judge has considered at paragraph 30  of  the
         determination.


         5.   As such the respondent respectfully submits that there  is  no
         material error of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal."


15. That is the basis on which this appeal came before the Upper Tribunal.

Upper Tribunal hearing

16. At the Upper Tribunal hearing, Ms Everett accepted that  there  was  in
    the decision no  analysis  of  the  medical  evidence  or  the  country
    evidence.  She sought to persuade me that the  appeal,  if  set  aside,
    should be remade on the narrow basis of the effect of  these  documents
    on the assessment of whether there would be very significant  obstacles
    to reintegration in Iraq if the appellant were to be returned now.

17. Ms Everett argued that the appellant's disability, with  which  he  had
    been living since he was 9  years  old,  would  not  now  constitute  a
    significant obstacle to reintegration.

18. I did not find it necessary to call on Mr Coyte for the appellant.

Analysis

19. As to  paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi),  the  appellant's  case  is  that  the
    conditions in which he would have to live on return, and  the  lack  of
    familial support from his brothers and his mother, would amount to very
    significant obstacles, given his polio disability.  Dr  Fatah's  report
    sets out international NGO materials about the  treatment  of  disabled
    individuals in Iraq: see in particular [98]-[99] and [102].

20. I note that the respondent's decision was taken before the decision  of
    the Supreme Court in AM (Zimbabwe) v Secretary of State  for  the  Home
    Department [2020] UKSC 17 which replaced the test in N v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2005] UKHL 31 with the Paposhvili  test.
    That change may be relevant when considering the  medical  evidence  in
    this appeal, although as the appellant's polio disability seems  stable
    at present, perhaps not.

21. In QC (verification of documents; Mibanga duty) [2021] UKUT  33  (IAC),
    the Upper Tribunal reminded judges that:

         "The Mibanga duty


          (2)     Credibility is not necessarily an essential component of a
         successful claim to be in need of international  protection.  Where
         credibility has a role  to  play,  its  relevance  to  the  overall
         outcome will vary, depending on the nature of the case.  What  that
         relevance is to a particular claim needs  to  be  established  with
         some care by the judicial fact-finder. It is only once this is done
         that the practical application of the "Mibanga  duty"  to  consider
         credibility "in the round" can be understood  (Francois  Mibanga  v
         Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2005] EWCA  Civ  367).
         The significance of a piece of evidence that emanates from a  third
         party source may well depend upon what is at stake in terms of  the
         individual's credibility.


         (3)  What the case law reveals is that the judicial fact-finder has
         a duty to make his or her decision by reference to all the relevant
         evidence and needs to show in their decision that  they  have  done
         so.  The actual way in which the fact-finder goes about  this  task
         is a matter for them.  As has been pointed out, one  has  to  start
         somewhere.  At the end of the day,  what  matters  is  whether  the
         decision contains legally adequate reasons for  the  outcome.   The
         greater the apparent cogency and relevance of a particular piece of
         evidence, the greater is the need for the judicial  fact-finder  to
         show that they have had due regard to that evidence;  and,  if  the
         fact-finder's overall conclusion is contrary to the apparent thrust
         of that evidence, the greater is  the  need  to  explain  why  that
         evidence has not brought about a different outcome."


22. I bear in mind the narrow circumstances in which it is  appropriate  to
    interfere with a finding of fact by a First-tier Judge  who  has  heard
    the parties give oral evidence: see AA (Nigeria) v Secretary  of  State
    for the Home Department [2020] EWCA Civ 1296 and R (Iran)  &  Others  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2005] EWCA Civ 982 at  [90]
    in the judgment of Lord Justice Brooke, with whom Lord Justice Chadwick
    and Lord Justice Maurice Kay agreed.

23. It seems to me from reading the expert evidence of Dr Fatah  that  much
    of the international material which he quotes in his  report  could  be
    regarded as corroborative of parts of the  appellant's  evidence  which
    the First-tier Judge found to lack credibility.    There  is  also  the
    failure to evaluate the medical  evidence  as  to  the  extent  of  the
    difficulties which the appellant experiences.

24. In failing to engage with Dr Fatah's report, or to examine properly the
    medical evidence about the appellant's  current  physical  difficulties
    arising from his polio disability and scoliosis, the  First-tier  Judge
    failed to carry out his Mibanga duty to reach conclusions of  fact  and
    credibility on the basis of all the evidence before him, and  not  just
    the  appellant's  unsatisfactory  oral  and  written  accounts  of  his
    history. I am not satisfied that the First-tier  Judge's  reasoning  is
    legally adequate.

25. For all of the above  reasons,  it  is  necessary  to  set  aside  this
    decision in its entirety and remit it to the  First-tier  Tribunal  for
    rehearing afresh.

26. The only findings to be preserved are that the appellant  has  a  polio
    disability (including scoliosis) and  is  an  Iraqi  Kurd.   All  other
    findings of fact and credibility are set aside.

DECISION

27. For the foregoing reasons, my decision is as follows:


    The making of the previous decision involved the making of an error  on
    a point of law.


    I set aside the previous decision.  The decision in this appeal will be
    remade in the First-tier Tribunal on a date to be fixed.




Signed   Judith AJC Gleeson                           Date:      1 March
2021
         Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson
