
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11600/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Centre                               |                                     |
|On 26 APRIL 2019                     |On 3 JULY 2019                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                 SHARON [K]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Holmes, instructed by Greater Manchester
Immigration
For the Respondent:    Mr Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant was born on 1 November 1988 and is a  female  citizen  of
    Uganda. She appealed to the First-tier Tribunal against the decision of
    the Secretary of State dated 14 September 2018 to refuse to  grant  her
    international  protection.  The  First-tier  Tribunal,  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 29 November 2018, dismissed the  appeal.  The  appellant
    now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The appellant claims that she is a lesbian. The judge did  not  believe
    her account including her  claim  that  she  had  been  in  a  same-sex
    relationship when at school in Uganda. The judge found that  she  would
    not face any real risk as a gay  woman  in  Uganda  nor  would  she  be
    perceived by third parties as a gay woman.

 3. I shall deal first with the matters raised not in the  grounds  but  by
    Judge Bludell, who granted permission to appeal. At [4], he writes that
    'I consider  it  strongly  arguable  that  [the  judge]  ...  erred  by
    inverting  the  standard  of  proof.  The  question  was  whether   the
    appellant's account was reasonably likely to be true,  not  whether  it
    was reasonably likely to be untrue.'

 4. Judge Blundell is here referring to the  decision  at  [53],  [54]  and
    [56]. I shall deal with [56] below at [8]. The judge's findings in  the
    remaining paragraphs are, I acknowledge, poorly  expressed.  The  judge
    found it 'reasonably likely that [the appellant  and  her  partner,  J]
    would both have tried leave Uganda' and that it was 'reasonably  likely
    that the appellant would have applied for a Visa for herself and  J  to
    come to the UK if their lives were at risk.' The appellant  argues  now
    that these findings are not only speculative but,  in  effect,  reverse
    the burden of proof. Mr Bates, who appeared for the Secretary of  State
    before the Upper Tribunal, submitted that the judge  had  not  reversed
    the burden of proof (which he had stated correctly at [6]) and that the
    appellant was complaining of matters of form, rather than substance.  I
    agree. I do not find that the judge has  carried  out  the  credibility
    analysis by seeking to determine whether the  appellant's  account  was
    reasonably likely to be untrue. The problem lies only in the convoluted
    form of expression, not in the substance of the findings.  Indeed,  his
    findings would not have been controversial had he expressed them in the
    negative, that is, finding that it was not reasonably likely  that  the
    appellant would have travelled to the United Kingdom without J and that
    it was not reasonably likely the appellant would have  delayed  leaving
    Uganda after the grant of her visa. It is not for the Upper Tribunal to
    clarify or explain the First-tier Tribunal's decision but  I  find  the
    meaning of the judge's analysis  is  tolerably  clear  to  any  reader,
    including the appellant.

 5. The grounds challenge the judge's credibility analysis.  The  appellant
    had claimed that both the school and her father had found out that  she
    was in a same-sex  relationship  at  school.  The  appellant  had  been
    expelled from school but had continued to live at home with her father.
    The judge found [47] that the 'fact the appellant lived with her father
    two years  persuades  me  he  did  not  find  out  about  the  same-sex
    relationship the appellant was involved in.' The appellant claims  that
    she was never asked for an explanation as to why her  father,  who  did
    not prove of her relationship, had allowed her to carry  on  living  at
    home. Had she been asked, the appellant would have told the judge  that
    she believed her father considered that he could control her  behaviour
    if she was living at home.

 6. I find that it would have been helpful if  the  judge  had  raised  his
    concerns regarding the appellant continuing to  live  at  her  father's
    home in the course of the hearing. The question does not appear to have
    arisen previously,  including  in  the  refusal  letter.  However,  the
    question is whether the judge's error, if amounts to such, was material
    to the outcome of the appeal. That the appellant was living at father's
    home forms part of the background of the remainder of her  account.  In
    October 2016, the appellant claimed that the  father  had  visited  her
    (after they had ceased living in the same  house)  with  two  policemen
    from whom the appellant had managed to make her escape. That visit  was
    prompted by the appellants partner's brother having seen photographs of
    the appellant and her partner on the  partner's  telephone  in  October
    2016. The appellant's relationship with her partner (J) had started  in
    October 2015. The chronology is important;  I  do  not  find  that  the
    judge's assumption that the appellant had lived with her father  for  a
    period after she had been expelled from school allegedly on account  of
    her lesbianism necessarily undermines the remainder of the  appellant's
    account or contributed to the judge finding that the appellant was  not
    a reliable witness. The judge does not  say  that  he  disbelieved  the
    appellant's claim that she had lived with her father only he claim that
    the father knew about  her  lesbian  affair  at  school.  The  father's
    knowledge or lack of  it  are  wholly  unconnected  to  the  subsequent
    difficulties (arising from the photograph) which the  appellant  claims
    she experienced. Moreover, the judge's finding at [47] did not lead him
    to find that subsequent events  in  the  appellant's  account  did  not
    occur. To that extent, the effect of the judge's finding  was  entirely
    neutral as regards the outcome of his credibility analysis.  It  is  an
    observation which can be removed from the  analysis  without  affecting
    the judge's remaining findings in any way.

 7. At [54], the judge  found  that  it  was  reasonably  likely  that  the
    appellant would have left as soon as she obtained her visa to travel to
    the United Kingdom. The fact that the appellant delayed for 20 days was
    found by the judge to undermine her credibility. Again,  the  appellant
    submits that, had she been asked, she would have provided a reason  for
    her delay. However, I  find  of  the  judge  made  a  finding  of  fact
    available to him on the evidence. The appellant claimed her life was in
    danger; her written and oral evidence should have provided a  full  and
    detailed chronology of events.

 8. At [56], the judge observed that the appellant  claimed  that  she  had
    paid an agent to complete her visa application form.  The  judge  noted
    that the form contained some correct details as well as  mistakes.  The
    judge was not 'persuaded that the appellant paid an agent who  inputted
    some correct and some incorrect details into the application form.' The
    judge found that it was reasonably likely that the information  in  the
    visa application form is correct that the  appellant  had  been  living
    with her husband in Uganda before she left, as stated in the form.  The
    appellant claims at this point was never  put  to  the  her  in  cross-
    examination.  The  explanation  now  provided  is  that,  although  the
    appellant had given some information to the  agent  by  telephone,  the
    agent had also 'invented other information.' That  explanation  is  not
    materially different from the evidence upon which the  judge  made  his
    finding. If the contents of the form were wholly the invention  of  the
    agent, then it is highly unlikely that the form  would  have  contained
    any accurate details; it follows that the appellant must have  provided
    some accurate information to  the  agent.  The  judge  simply  did  not
    believe that the agent had invented some of the details. I do not  find
    that the judge acted unfairly as asserted in the grounds  or  that  his
    findings are wrong in law.

 9. At  [60],  the  judge  considered  a  letter  from  Philip  Jones,  who
    facilitates an LGBT asylum support group. The  appellant  had  attended
    the group since September 2018. She had entered the United  Kingdom  in
    October 2017. The judge found that the delay in the appellant attending
    LGBT events indicated that she had 'visited the  group  to  support  an
    asylum claim that is not true.' Once  again,  the  appellant  complains
    this point was never put to her in cross-examination. The appellant now
    claims that she moved around  the  country  and  therefore  was  in  no
    position to attend the group earlier. The judge's  point  is  that  the
    appellant had not been involved in any LGBT activities anywhere in  the
    United Kingdom for a  year  after  her  arrival.  That  was  a  finding
    available to the judge on  the  evidence  before  him.  Viewed  in  the
    context of all the remaining evidence,  is  not  unreasonable  for  the
    judge to find that the appellant had  attended  the  group  only  after
    making her claim for asylum and only with a view to lending support  to
    that claim.

10. Grounds three and four are, as Judge Blundell  observed,  nothing  more
    than a disagreement with findings which were available to the judge  on
    the  evidence  which  was  before  the  Tribunal.   The   grounds   are
    consequently without merit.

11. In the circumstances, this appeal is dismissed.



Notice of Decision

    This appeal is dismissed.






Signed                              Date 2 JUNE 2019


Upper Tribunal Judge Lane

