
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11084/2019 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided Under Rule 34                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 28th August 2020                           |On 2nd September 2020         |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON

                                   Between

                                     MS
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADe)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent




                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. Directions  were  issued  by  the  Upper  Tribunal  on  16  April  2020
    indicating  the  provisional  view,  in  light  of  the  need  to  take
    precautions  against  the  spread  of  Covid-19  and   the   overriding
    objective, that this case was suitable to determine whether  there  was
    an error of law in  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  and  if  so,
    whether that decision should be set aside, without a hearing.

 2. The Appellant conditionally opposes the determination of  these  issues
    on the papers  if  the  Respondent  opposes  the  appeal,  but  if  the
    Respondent concedes that there is a material error of law such that the
    First-Tier Tribunal's decision should be set  aside  in  its  entirety,
    then the Appellant is content for the issues to be  decided  without  a
    hearing.  A determination of the error of law issues without a  hearing
    is opposed on the  basis  on  the  basis  that  although  there  is  no
    intention to call evidence on the  Appellant's  behalf  as  to  whether
    there was an error of law below, a decision  on  the  papers  would  be
    contrary to the overriding objective because the Appellant  would  not,
    through his Counsel, be able to  fully  participate  in  the  decision-
    making process of his appeal.  A number of authorities are  then  cited
    in support of the importance of oral argument and it is  said  that  to
    deny the  Appellant  the  opportunity  of  influencing  the  Tribunal's
    decision by  oral  argument  would  deny  him  access  to  a  'central'
    component of the legal system in England and  Wales  meaning  that  his
    case would not have been dealt with fairly or justly.  Finally, on  the
    Appellant's behalf, submissions are made about  correspondence  between
    ILPA and the President of the Upper Tribunal and that making a decision
    without a hearing risks a Judge making an erroneous decision.

 3. The Respondent has made no submissions as to whether the error  of  law
    stage of this appeal could or should be determined on the papers,  such
    that there has  been  no  objection  by  her  in  proceeding  with  the
    provisional view.  Further, despite being resent the directions with an
    inquiry as to whether the Respondent wishes to respond, there have been
    no written submissions from the Respondent as to the substance  of  the
    appeal and no rule 24 response has been filed.

 4. Whilst the Appellant has made a number of principled  objections  to  a
    determination of the error of law issues  being  determined  without  a
    hearings; these were general in nature rather than identifying anything
    specific on the facts of this case for which a hearing was required  in
    the interests of justice and all of the generic points  made  would  of
    course apply to both parties, fairness and the interests of justice not
    being relevant only to an individual or an Appellant.  The  conditional
    opposition to a  decision  without  a  hearing  unless  the  Respondent
    concedes the appeal therefore somewhat undermines those points  and  it
    is further presumed that if the Upper Tribunal were to find an error of
    law on the papers, there would also have been no objection  to  such  a
    determination without a hearing.

 5. In any event, in my view, this is a case in which it  is  suitable  for
    the issues of whether the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  materially
    erred in law and if so, whether the decision should be set aside, to be
    determined on the papers on the basis of the written submissions  made.
    This is in light of the unprecedented circumstances surrounding  Covid-
    19 and the need to take  precautions  to  prevent  the  spread  of  the
    disease; is in accordance with the overriding objective for  the  Upper
    Tribunal to deal with cases fairly and justly in rule 2(1), (2) and (4)
    of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008   and   in
    circumstances where on  the  facts;  there  are  comprehensive  written
    submissions from the Appellant and the Respondent  has  chosen  not  to
    make any written submissions; from  which,  for  the  reasons  set  out
    below, I find an error  of  law  in  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal which requires the decision to be set  aside.   This  decision
    has therefore been made under rule 34 to avoid any further delay to the
    determination of the issues.

 6. The Appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Moffatt promulgated on 14 January  2020,  in  which
    the Appellant's appeal against the decision to  refuse  his  protection
    and human rights claim dated 23 October 2019 was allowed.

 7. The Appellant is a national of Sri Lanka, born on 21  April  1988,  who
    last entered the United Kingdom in July 2009 and made an  asylum  claim
    that month; which was ultimately refused  on  25  March  2014  and  his
    appeal against refusal was dismissed on 18 February 2015 by  First-tier
    Tribunal  Judge  Callender  Smith.   The  Appellant  subsequently  made
    further submissions, the refusal of which on 23  October  2019  is  the
    subject of this appeal.  The further submissions were primarily made on
    the basis of a new psychiatric report including a  diagnosis  of  PTSD,
    severe depression and significant anxiety together  with  a  heightened
    risk of suicide and self harm; which together formed a claim  based  on
    Articles 3 and 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights.

 8. The Respondent refused the  application,  essentially  the  basis  that
    there would be appropriate medical care and family support available to
    the Appellant on return to Sri Lanka; that  there  was  no  objectively
    well-founded fear on return to Sri Lanka; that the  Appellant  did  not
    meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules for a grant of leave  to
    remain on private  life  grounds  and  there  were  no  exceptional  or
    compassionate circumstances to warrant a grant of leave to remain.

 9. Judge Moffatt dismissed the appeal in  a  decision  promulgated  on  14
    January 2020 on all  grounds.   In  summary,  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    referred to the previous Tribunal decision as the  starting  point  and
    found that the Appellant is suffering from PTSD, although concerns were
    raised as to the reliability of  some  of  the  Appellant's  claims  in
    relation to events in Sri Lanka and what he  told  the  Respondent  and
    medical practitioners at  different  times.   The  First-tier  Tribunal
    found that the Appellant did not have  a  well-founded  fear  of  being
    detained and tortured on return to Sri Lanka or of any  of  the  events
    that triggered his PTSD and the  suggestion  from  the  Appellant  that
    there is an objective foundation to  his  fear  because  the  PTSD  was
    caused by events in Sri Lanka was rejected because of what was found to
    be material inconsistencies in the Appellant's claims as  to  what  did
    happen.

10. In relation to the Appellant's suicide risk and facilities  on  return,
    the First-tier Tribunal found that there are  a  number  of  protective
    factors in place in the United Kingdom which would also be in place  in
    Sri Lanka (family and his cultural background and faith) and  that  the
    management of the Appellant's mental health to date by medication would
    also be available in Sri Lanka, even if there would be a real risk that
    adequate  therapeutic  treatment  for  PTSD  would  not  be  available.
    Overall, the First-tier Tribunal  found  that  the  Appellant's  mental
    health would not be materially worse off in Sri Lanka than it has  been
    in the United Kingdom hitherto and that there would  be  no  breach  of
    Article 3 of the European Convention on Human Rights on health grounds.



The appeal

11. The Appellant appeals on three grounds as  follows.   First,  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal materially erred in law in failing to consider,  in
    accordance with the fifth principle in J v Secretary of State  for  the
    Home Department [2005] EWCA Civ 629, as added to in  Y  (Sri  Lanka)  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2009] EWCA Civ 362, whether
    the Appellant had a genuine subjective fear on return to Sri  Lanka  in
    circumstances where it was accepted that he  suffered  from  PTSD  from
    past experiences in Sri Lanka, being the cumulative trauma of living in
    a warzone and relying only on the  absence  of  an  objective  risk  on
    return.  Secondly, that the First-tier Tribunal materially erred in law
    in finding that the Appellant would be at no greater risk of suicide in
    Sri Lanka than he currently was in the United Kingdom  because  of  the
    availability of the  same  protective  factors  but  without  expressly
    taking into account the medical evidence that the Appellant's  risk  of
    suicide would increase by removal and that a further protective  factor
    in the United Kingdom was the Appellant's hope that he would  be  given
    permission to stay here, given that  in  the  United  Kingdom  he  felt
    relatively safe compared to his fear if removed to Sri Lanka.  Thirdly,
    that the First-tier Tribunal materially erred in law  in  finding  that
    the Appellant would not be deprived of effective therapy in  Sri  Lanka
    as he had only been in receipt of medication as treatment in the United
    Kingdom and medication would be available on return;  in  circumstances
    where the First-tier Tribunal had failed to take into account  that  on
    return the Appellant's need for treatment would likely be greater  than
    it is in the United Kingdom.

12. As above, further written submissions in support  of  the  appeal  were
    received on behalf of the Appellant on 17  April  2020,  in  which  the
    original  grounds  of  appeal  were  relied  upon  with  more  detailed
    submissions in support of the same.  In relation to the first ground of
    appeal, the principles in J and Y are set out and it is submitted  that
    the First-tier Tribunal has failed to follow these and erred in finding
    that the risk  of  suicide  was  undermined  by  the  Appellant  giving
    materially different accounts of the causation of his  PTSD.   However,
    it is submitted that it was not for the Appellant to  explain  how  his
    condition was caused, that is a matter for the expert and in any event,
    any difference in the Appellant's  account  was  not  material  to  the
    question of how the PTSD was caused.  The psychiatric report  concludes
    that the Appellant's PTSD was caused  by  'the  cumulative  traumas  of
    living in a war zone' which is consistent with the background  evidence
    as to what was happening in Sri Lanka up to  2007  when  the  Appellant
    left and further, the Appellant had in any event been consistent  about
    elements of his claim, including being detained by the Sri Lankan  army
    with emotional torture.

13. In relation to the second ground of appeal,  the  Appellant  challenges
    the conclusion that there would be no greater risk of  suicide  in  Sri
    Lanka than in the United Kingdom; which  if  correct,  contradicts  the
    causal nexus between return and suicide for the purposes of the  second
    principle in J.  The First-tier Tribunal refers to  protective  factors
    being the Appellant's family and his faith and  assumes  that  as  both
    will be present in the United Kingdom and in Sri Lanka, that  the  risk
    of suicide would be the same; but in doing so, the First-tier  Tribunal
    has failed to take into  account  the  psychiatric  evidence  that  the
    Appellant's mental health was likely to deteriorate  on  removal,  such
    that those protective factors may no longer be sufficient and fails  to
    take into account a further inhibitory factor that the Appellant  feels
    relatively safe in the United Kingdom but has a significant,  at  least
    subjective fear on return.

14. In relation to the third ground of appeal, the Appellant  submits  that
    the First-tier Tribunal erred (on a similar basis to in  ground  2)  by
    failing  to  take  into  account  the  likely  deterioration   in   the
    Appellant's mental health on return to Sri Lanka such that his  current
    treatment by medication alone may no  longer  be  sufficient  and  more
    extensive treatment is likely to be needed.

Findings and reasons

 1. The main findings of the First-tier Tribunal in relation to  the  first
    ground of appeal are contained in paragraphs 41 and 42 as follows:

         "41. In J v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 629, Dyson LJ (as he then was) set
         out six principles to be considered in  relation  to  a  claim  for
         breach of Article 3 due  to  suicide  risk  on  removal.   In  this
         particular case, it is the 5th  and  6th  principles  that  are  of
         particular materiality.  The 5th principle  is  that,  in  deciding
         whether there is a real risk of a breach of Article 3 in a  suicide
         case, a question of importance is whether the applicant's  fear  of
         ill-treatment in the receiving state upon which the risk of suicide
         is said to be based, is objectively well-founded.  If the  fear  is
         not well-founded, that will tend to weigh  against  there  being  a
         real risk that removal will be in breach of Article 3.

         42. The appellant does  not  have  a  well-founded  fear  of  being
         detained and tortured on return to Sri Lanka.   He  also  does  not
         have a well-founded fear of a recurrence of any of the events  that
         triggered his PTSD.  Dr Revill submits that the 5th principle in  J
         does not tell the full  story,  as  the  applicant's  fear  has  an
         objective foundation in the sense that it is caused by PTSD arising
         from events that did take place.  However,  as  highlighted  above,
         the account which the Appellant gave to Judge  Callender  Smith  is
         materially different from that given for the purposes of the  joint
         report, and  the  appellant  has  not  been  consistent  about  the
         triggering events for his PTSD.  Of particular significance is that
         the appellant said in his previous appeal that he  had  never  been
         ill-treated during round-ups by the Army.  This is  not  consistent
         with his more recent claim that he was  threatened  with  execution
         during the one round-up that he described in the joint report."

 2. The First-tier Tribunal then moves on in paragraph 43 to  consider  the
    6th principle in J as to whether  there  are  effective  mechanisms  in
    place to reduce the risk of suicide.  There is no further consideration
    of the 5th principle in J  or  its  qualification  in  Y,  to  consider
    whether the Appellant has a subjective fear  of  return  to  Sri  Lanka
    based on past experiences.  Although neither the psychiatrist  nor,  to
    at least some extent, the Appellant put this in quite the right way  by
    the referring to the PTSD being caused by events in Sri Lanka giving an
    objective foundation to the Appellant's fear on return  as  opposed  to
    referring more clearly to subjective fear; it is an error  of  law  for
    the First-tier Tribunal to fail to go on  to  consider  the  additional
    part of the 5th principles on the facts of this case.

 3. The Appellant had previously claimed asylum on the  basis  of  a  well-
    founded fear of persecution  on  return  to  Sri  Lanka  based  on  his
    personal circumstances and country conditions  which  was  refused  and
    upheld on appeal in 2015.  That claim was not  pursued  in  the  latest
    further submissions and  appeal,  there  was  no  further  evidence  to
    support any claim that he would objectively be at risk on  return  from
    the authorities in Sri Lanka and therefore  the  previous  decision  on
    this, which is the starting point,  stands.   The  claim  made  in  the
    further submissions was focused only on the Appellant's  mental  health
    and risks on return in relation to that and suicide risk in  particular
    and given the nature of the psychiatric evidence and what is said about
    the cause of  the  Appellant's  PTSD,  this  was  expressly  and  self-
    evidently a claim based on subjective fear on return which needed to be
    determined in accordance with both J and Y.   The  First-tier  Tribunal
    simply failed to do so, which is a material error  of  law.   The  fact
    that the Appellant was found to be inconsistent about his claims as  to
    events in Sri Lanka does not adequately  address  this  point.   First,
    because no actual findings were made as to what events did or  did  not
    occur and secondly, because the psychiatric evidence  referred  to  the
    cause of PTSD as the cumulative effects of living in a war zone  rather
    than relying on one or more specific events.  In any  event,  there  is
    little by way of reasoning as to what the actual  inconsistencies  were
    and none as to how this was relevant to the current claim or the  issue
    of whether the Appellant had a subjective fear on return.

 4. The error of law found in relation to the first  ground  of  appeal  is
    sufficient to undermine the  overall  conclusions  on  the  appeal  and
    requires the decision to be set aside for that reason alone.   However,
    for completeness, I also find an error of law on the second  and  third
    grounds of appeal for the reasons given by the Appellant.  The  medical
    evidence before the First-tier Tribunal expressly dealt with the likely
    differences between the Appellant's mental health in the United Kingdom
    and its expected deterioration (with reasons given) on removal  to  Sri
    Lanka; which was not expressly taken into  account  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, with a focus only on specific parts of the report when making
    findings about  the  Appellant's  mental  health  and  availability  of
    treatment on return.  To some extent, these findings follow on from the
    earlier  failure  to  make  findings  on  whether  the  Appellant   had
    established a subjective fear on return to Sri Lanka which would  be  a
    relevant  factor,  together  with  the  evidence   contained   in   the
    psychiatric report, to consider when assessing the Appellant's relative
    mental health in the United Kingdom and on return to Sri  Lanka.   Such
    findings are required before a conclusion  can  be  reached  about  the
    availability of treatment on return, particularly where the  First-tier
    Tribunal expressly acknowledge a real risk  that  adequate  therapeutic
    treatment for PTSD (beyond the medication currently prescribed  in  the
    United Kingdom) would  not  be  available  in  Sri  Lanka.   For  these
    additional reasons, the  First-tier  Tribunal  erred  in  law  and  the
    decision is set aside in its entirety with  no  preserved  findings  of
    fact.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of a material error of law.  As such it is  necessary  to  set  aside
the decision.

I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal and remit the appeal  to
the First-tier Tribunal (Taylor House hearing centre) to be  heard  de  novo
before any Judge except Judge Monson.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed    G  Jackson                                      Date          28th
    August 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson

