
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: PA/11561/2018
                                                               PA/11563/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester CJC                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 19 July 2019                               |On 07 August 2019             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    S (1)
                                   MM (2)
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Bates, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr M Karnik, Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

      1. In these linked appeals the respondents are both Russian  nationals
         with Chechnyan ethnicity.  The first respondent ('S') is a  married
         woman and the second appellant ('MM') is an unmarried woman who  is
         S's sister-in-law, that is MM is the sister of S's husband.  S  and
         MM have both made asylum claims and for  that  reason  I  anonymise
         their names.

      2. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State for the Home Department
         ('SSHD') against the decision of First-tier Tribunal ('FtT')  Judge
         P J Holmes sent on 28 February 2019, allowing the linked appeals of
         S and MM on asylum grounds.

Background

      3. As Judge Holmes noted at [2] of his decision the background to  the
         asylum appeals of S and MM cannot be  properly  understood  without
         some reference to S's husband's circumstances.  I  shall  refer  to
         him as M.  M is also a Russian national with  Chechnyan  ethnicity.
         He applied for asylum  after  fleeing  Russia  in  June  2017.   He
         alleged that he had been abducted from the street on 1  June  2017,
         detained  at  a  security  base  by  persons  he  believed  to   be
         paramilitary guards acting on behalf of the  Chechnyan  authorities
         who tortured him and accused him of being gay.  He claimed that his
         family secured his release on 8 June 2017 by means of bribery,  but
         the authorities nevertheless came looking for  him.   He  therefore
         fled Russia.  His asylum claim  was  refused  by  the  SSHD  on  24
         September 2017 and he appealed against this decision  to  the  FtT.
         After a hearing on 8 November 2017 FtT Judge Lloyd-Smith  dismissed
         M's appeal observing that he had not established that there was any
         truth in his account.  Permission for onward appeal was refused.

      4. M and  S  rely  upon  M's  claimed,  albeit  rejected  history,  in
         Chechnya, but have added to it during the course  of  their  asylum
         interviews.  They were both  interviewed  separately  by  different
         officers.  S was interviewed in depth about her husband's claim but
         went into considerable detail as  to  events  after  her  husband's
         failure to return home.  Military men in black uniforms burst  into
         her home with guns looking for M  when  MM  was  present.   MM  was
         hospitalised as a result of the shock and distress that she  faced.
         There were then further developments because S and M's brother were
         summoned to attend a police station  where  S  was  questioned  and
         threatened.  She also explained that M's brother  was  taken  to  a
         separate room where he was tortured with  electric  shocks.   After
         this she was released and went to live in a different part  of  the
         country with MM and S's two children.  They were visited  by  local
         policemen but there was no violence until  15  December  2017  when
         there was another raid with armed and masked men.  S  sustained  an
         injury and both S and MM moved again.  They felt  unsafe  and  left
         Russia.

      5. They claimed asylum on 4 March 2018.  Their applications for asylum
         were refused in separate  decision  letters  written  by  different
         officers but both dated 18 September 2018.  The SSHD accepted  that
         S and MM are Chechnyan but did not accept their  account  that  led
         them to flee Chechnya.  This was largely  based  upon  the  adverse
         findings of fact made by Judge Lloyd-Smith when she  dismissed  M's
         appeal.  S and MM appealed their negative asylum decisions  to  the
         FtT.  The matter first came before the FtT on 30 October 2018  when
         FtT  Judge  Birrell  adjourned  the  hearing  to  enable  the  then
         appellants to obtain legal representatives.   Notwithstanding  that
         adjournment, when the  matter  next  came  before  the  FtT  on  12
         December 2018, S and MM were unrepresented.  They again applied for
         an adjournment but that application was refused  by  Judge  Holmes.
         Judge Holmes also  noted  that  there  was  no  Presenting  Officer
         available to represent the SSHD and  he  had  received  no  written
         submissions from the SSHD and therefore presumed  that  the  SSHD's
         case was based upon the decision letters in each  of  the  appeals.
         That meant  that  the  Judge  Holmes  had  the  difficult  task  of
         determining a detailed and complex asylum appeal in relation to two
         linked appellants without legal representation from either party.

      6. It is clear from the decision itself that Judge  Holmes  considered
         Judge Lloyd-Smith's decision and indeed the whole  file  pertaining
         to M.  Having done  so,  Judge  Holmes  used  that  decision  as  a
         starting point but then departed from it insofar as he accepted the
         evidence provided by S and MM that  their  respective  husband  and
         brother, M, had come to the adverse attention  of  the  authorities
         and that they too had been threatened and harmed  as  a  result  of
         that.  He therefore allowed the linked appeals on asylum grounds.

      7. The SSHD sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal  relying
         upon written grounds  of  appeal.   Both  grounds  focus  upon  the
         submission that Judge Holmes was  bound  by  the  settled  findings
         reached by Judge Lloyd-Smith.  Permission to appeal was granted  by
         FtT Judge Hodgkinson  on  2  April  2019  who  made  the  following
         observation:-

             "The grounds argue that the Judge erred by  failing  correctly
             to apply the Devaseelan Guidelines (Devaseelan v  SSHD  [2002]
             IAT 702), with reference to an earlier dismissed appeal of the
             first appellant's  husband/second  appellant's  brother,  that
             earlier appeal being based upon the  same  factual  matrix  as
             that relied upon by the current appellants as elaborated  upon
             in the grounds".

Hearing

      8. At the hearing before me Mr Bates clarified the grounds of  appeal.
         He submitted that Judge Holmes failed to give adequate reasons  for
         concluding that there were very good reasons to justify a departure
         from the findings made by Judge Lloyd-Smith.   Mr  Bates  helpfully
         took me to the decision of Judge Lloyd-Smith and  pointed  out  the
         nature and extent of  the  concerns  that  she  had  regarding  M's
         evidence.    In   particular,   there   were   concerns   regarding
         inconsistencies    within     the     interview,     discrepancies,
         implausibilities, a failure to properly explain the  absence  of  a
         summons and a failure to properly explain how M was able to  go  in
         and out of the country if he was at risk.

      9. Mr Karnik invited me to find that Judge  Holmes  had  clearly  read
         Judge Lloyd-Smith's decision and was well-aware  of  those  adverse
         findings but was entitled to depart from the findings for  the  key
         reasons provided by the judge: there were new  witnesses  who  gave
         further detailed evidence; there  was  further  country  background
         evidence which made it clear that M's account was  plausible,  and;
         the SSHD accepted that S and MM were Chechnyans whereas he did  not
         accept that M was a Chechnyan.

     10. Mr Karnik invited me to  find  that  Judge  Holmes's  approach  was
         entirely consistent with the Devaseelan principles  as  applied  in
         subsequent authorities.

Legal framework

     11. Both representatives agreed that the law is essentially settled  in
         this area.  They also agreed that Judge  Holmes  properly  directed
         himself to the Devaseelan guidelines  and  sought  to  apply  those
         guidelines in this case - see [18] and [20] of  his  decision.   At
         the hearing the parties relied upon AL (Albania) v SSHD [2019] EWCA
         Civ 950.  Since the hearing  the  relevant  authorities  have  been
         summarised in SSHD v BK (Afghanistan) [2019] EWCA Civ 1358, 30 July
         2019.  The summary at  [31-39]  is  consistent  with  the  position
         agreed by the parties before me but re-emphasises at  [43-44]  that
         every tribunal must conscientiously decide the  case  in  front  of
         them, albeit the tribunal must be alive to the  unfairness  to  the
         opposing party of having to relitigate a point on which  they  have
         previously succeeded particularly where  the  point  was  not  then
         challenged on appeal.

Discussion

     12. The key question raised in this appeal is whether Judge Holmes  has
         identified very good reasons for departing from Judge Lloyd-Smith's
         adverse credibility findings  regarding  M.   In  my  judgment  his
         reasoning must be viewed in context.  This includes the  fact  that
         Judge Holmes did not have the benefit of any legal  representation.
         It is surprising that the SSHD was  unrepresented  in  this  rather
         important case for three individuals as it turns out.  There was no
         adjournment sought from the SSHD.  This is a case that had  already
         been adjourned by the FtT and the SSHD would have been  aware  that
         it  was  in  the  system  and  it  was  due  to  be  heard   again.
         Notwithstanding the absence of  representation  it  is  clear  that
         Judge Holmes took every effort to acquaint himself with the  appeal
         proceedings relating to M.  He confirmed at  [2]  and  [8]  of  his
         decision that he had a copy of  Judge  Lloyd-Smith's  decision  and
         that he had read it.  At [19] he records that the file relating  to
         M had been put before him.  He  described  in  a  great  amount  of
         detail what that file  contained  including  23  items  of  country
         guidance.  Judge Holmes summarised the findings made by Judge Lloyd-
         Smith and noted this:-

             "The focus of the judge's decision was upon Mr  M's  interview
             records, his written and oral statements and  such  supporting
             documents as he produced (although  ultimately  little  weight
             was given to the latter).  The judge found that Mr M was not a
             reliable witness, he did  not  have  a  well-founded  fear  of
             persecution  and  there  were  no  substantial   grounds   for
             believing that he would be at risk of serious harm upon return
             to Russia."

     13. Judge Holmes also had the benefit of  three  witnesses  to  provide
         evidence before him: L, MM and M.  That is so is set out at [12] of
         his decision.   Mr  Bates  observed  that  there  was  no  detailed
         reference made to M's evidence.  Of course, in a case such as  this
         where there was no representation from the SSHD, there could be  no
         cross-examination.  Finally, when the decision is read as  a  whole
         it is undoubtedly a carefully  structured  and  extremely  detailed
         decision.  I now turn to the specific  reasons  provided  by  Judge
         Holmes for his view that the evidence might have  been  similar  in
         certain respects but could not be described as the same and in fact
         in certain material respects was  substantially  different  to  the
         evidence available to Judge Lloyd-Smith.  These come in three broad
         categories:  country  background  evidence;  witnesses;   Chechnyan
         ethnicity.

Country background evidence

     14. Judge Holmes observed the following at [20] of his decision:-

             "The present appeals do not constitute a case where (to  adopt
             the language used in Devaseelan) the second adjudicator should
             regard the  issues  as  settled  by  the  first  adjudicator's
             determination.  Not only are the  parties  different  in  this
             case, but I find a  pressing  need  to  consider  the  appeals
             before me in the light of the  degree  to  which  the  factual
             allegations on which these appeals rest may be consistent with
             up-to-date country background information.   This  is  because
             whatever might  have  been  the  situation  according  to  the
             evidence available at the time when Mr M's appeal  was  heard,
             it is clear to me that there is now an overwhelming weight  of
             evidence  from  reliable  and  impartial  sources   of   great
             authority that in Chechnya the state persecutes gay people and
             those who are perceived as being of that  orientation;  and  I
             take the view that an  integral  part  of  the  assessment  of
             credibility in these appeals would be missing if I  failed  to
             note that the country background  evidence  has  significantly
             changed since 2017, reflecting  the  growth  of  a  chorus  of
             international disapproval of the behaviour  of  the  Chechnyan
             and Russian authorities."

         Just pausing  there,  when  Judge  Holmes  said  that  the  country
         background evidence had significantly changed, it seems  that  what
         he meant is that there was more evidence describing the  prevailing
         circumstances for those who were perceived to be gay, when M claims
         to have been targeted.  That is clear from  [28]  of  his  decision
         where Judge Holmes found that Mr M's claim to have fallen  foul  of
         the  Chechnyan  authorities  in  June  2017   was   plausible   and
         substantially consistent with the country  background  evidence  he
         considered that was unavailable to Judge Lloyd-Smith.  It should be
         noted that Judge Lloyd-Smith heard the appeal in November 2017  and
         that was based upon events  that  took  place  just  a  few  months
         previously in June 2017.  Human rights reports tend to be based  on
         the annual year and many would have been unavailable to Judge Lloyd-
         Smith as at November 2017.  It is therefore unsurprising that there
         was considerable more evidence in support of M's claim by the  time
         the matter reached Judge Holmes in  December  2018.   Judge  Holmes
         summarised the country background material before him  at  [21]  to
         [23].  That can be  summarised  as  indicating  that  in  2017  the
         relevant authorities took a very dim view of anyone perceived to be
         gay and they were subjected to systemic persecution at the time.

     15. I note that part of Judge Lloyd-Smith's reasoning for rejecting M's
         account related to the apparent plausibility of  his  claims.   She
         did not accept that one text message might  lead  to  a  perception
         that a person is gay.  She did  not  accept  that  the  appellant's
         explanation for his actions which led the authorities to  the  view
         that he was gay would have been disbelieved by them.  Judge  Lloyd-
         Smith also found it  implausible  that  the  authorities  would  be
         monitoring devices.  In  order  to  fairly  determine  the  appeals
         before him, Judge Holmes  quite  properly  took  into  account  the
         updated country background evidence, unavailable  to  Judge  Lloyd-
         Smith.

Witnesses

     16. There were obviously two additional significant  witnesses  to  M's
         account: his wife and his sister.   Judge  Holmes  noted  that  the
         decision letters regarding those two witnesses did  not  deal  with
         their credibility but focused upon M's credibility.   Judge  Holmes
         heard evidence from those  two  witnesses  and  found  them  to  be
         truthful and reliable.  It is important to note that their evidence
         was not restricted to matters which gave rise to M's departure from
         Russia, but went on to deal with the consequences that  they  faced
         after his departure.   They  both  gave  evidence  that  they  were
         threatened and harmed.  That clearly was not evidence available  to
         Judge Lloyd-Smith because when she heard M's appeal those witnesses
         were not in the UK.  In those circumstances, in my judgment,  Judge
         Holmes was entitled to find as he did at [31] of his decision  that
         S and MM were truthful and reliable witnesses, notwithstanding  the
         adverse findings made against M by Judge Lloyd-Smith.

Chechnyan ethnicity

     17. Judge Holmes said this at [24]:

             "A significant feature of the present appeals is that in  each
             case the respondent's decision letter expressly  accepts  that
             the appellant is Chechnyan ... This is  in  striking  contrast
             with the position adopted by the respondent in the case of  Mr
             M ... with which Judge Lloyd-Smith seems to have concurred, or
             at least did not expressly disagree.  It is a serious  logical
             anomaly since Mr M is the second appellant's brother and there
             is no evidence to support any rational distinction between the
             respondent's findings as to their respective ethnicity."

     18. Mr Karnik made the point that as Judge Lloyd-Smith had appeared  to
         doubt M's Chechynan ethnicity, that went to the root of her adverse
         findings.  Of course, if he was not Chechnyan, what  he  claims  to
         have happened in Chechnya could not have taken place.  When this is
         viewed together with the additional evidence, that is  the  country
         background evidence and the additional witnesses evidence, there is
         ample support for Judge Holmes' decision that he should depart from
         the findings of Judge Lloyd-Smith.

Approach to Judge Lloyd-Smith's adverse credibility findings

     19. In persuasive submissions Mr Bates emphasised the nature and extent
         of the adverse credibility findings made by Judge Lloyd-Smith.   He
         emphasised that these were  not  limited  to  matters  relating  to
         implausibility or the country background evidence and  extended  to
         significant discrepancies in his evidence.  Mr  Bates  pointed  out
         that Judge Holmes did not address any of these adverse  credibility
         findings and was obliged to do so if he was going  to  depart  from
         Judge Lloyd-Smith's adverse credibility finding regarding M.

     20. Whilst I accept that Judge Holmes did not refer to each one of  the
         specific findings reached by Judge Lloyd-Smith, when Judge Holmes's
         decision is read as a whole, I am satisfied that  he  has  provided
         sufficient reasons for departing from the findings of Judge  Lloyd-
         Smith.  His reasoning is tolerably clear.  It is sufficiently clear
         that he regarded the witnesses' evidence that was not available  to
         Judge Lloyd-Smith to be significant, and perhaps  more  importantly
         to be truthful and credible.  As I  have  already  indicated,  that
         went beyond M's account, although much of it was predicated on what
         happened to M in the first place.

     21. When the three particular reasons that I have  set  out  above  are
         combined together, in my judgment Judge Holmes  has  not  erred  in
         law.   He  has  correctly  directed  himself  to   the   Devaseelan
         principles as applied in subsequent authorities.  He has  correctly
         approached Judge Lloyd-Smith's decision as the starting  point  for
         his consideration of the linked appeals and when the  reasons  that
         he has provided for departing from those  findings  are  considered
         cumulatively, they constitute very good reasons for departing  from
         those findings.

     22. It follows that the SSHD's grounds of appeal  have  not  been  made
         out.

Notice of decision

     23. The SSHD's appeal is dismissed and the decision of FtT Judge Holmes
         stands.



Direction regarding anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the respondents  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to the  respondents.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date

UTJ Plimmer   6 August 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Plimmer
