
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/11241/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons           |
|                                              |Promulgated                  |
|On 8 January 2019                             |On 23 January 2019           |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE A M BLACK


                                   Between

                                MISS A C J O
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Burrett, counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born on 25  September  1990.  She
    appealed against a decision of the respondent on 4  September  2018  to
    refuse her asylum claim on the grounds of her  sexuality.   Her  appeal
    was heard by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal C Greasley  ("the  FTTJ")
    who, in a decision  promulgated  on  25  October  2018,  dismissed  her
    appeal.

 2. Permission to appeal was granted on 15 November  2018  because  it  was
    arguable the FTTJ had erred in finding  the  appellant  had  failed  to
    provide any text messages between the appellant and her partner when it
    was said he had declined to admit such evidence at the hearing.   Hence
    the matter came before me.

 3. The appellant pursues  this  appeal  on  various  grounds  including  a
    failure to have regard to  evidence  and  guidelines  relating  to  the
    appellant's characterisation of her sexuality, failure to  have  regard
    to evidence which supported the appellant's credibility and  procedural
    unfairness in failing to allow the appellant to rely on  text  messages
    between the appellant and her partner.

 4. Before me, both representatives agreed that the appellant's counsel had
    attempted to adduce text messages in the course of the  hearing  during
    the examination of a witness. There is no  reference  to  this  in  the
    decision of the FTTJ, however.  The appellant's solicitors provided  me
    with a statement by counsel who had represented the  appellant  at  the
    hearing before the FTTJ.  This was not Mr Burrett.  Counsel had set out
    the sequence of events at the hearing before the FTTJ.

 5. Mr Kotas helpfully indicated, at the start of  the  hearing,  that  the
    respondent accepted the FTTJ had failed to refer in his decision  to  a
    relevant document, namely a  discharge  note  from  Croydon  University
    Hospital of 13 November 2017, and  that  this  constituted  potentially
    corroborative independent evidence of the appellant's  claimed  lesbian
    relationship.

 6. Mr Burrett, for the appellant, set out the  course  of  events  at  the
    hearing before the  FTTJ.  He  accepted  that  the  attempt  to  adduce
    evidence of text messages in the course of  examination  of  a  witness
    might not have been the correct course but submitted that  counsel  had
    been entitled to do so.  The issue, he submitted, was  the  failure  of
    the FTTJ to refer  to  this  event  in  his  decision.   That  was,  he
    submitted, procedurally unfair: if the FTTJ had refused  to  admit  the
    evidence he had to provide his reasons for so doing.   Furthermore,  he
    had made an adverse credibility finding at [43] on the basis  that  the
    appellant had not been able to produce evidence of  any  text  messages
    between herself and any former partners or indeed her current  partner.
    This was not correct because the appellant had attempted to adduce such
    evidence but had been prevented from so  doing  by  the  FTTJ  himself.
    Furthermore, he submitted, the  FTTJ  had  failed  to  have  regard  to
    relevant  evidence  relating  to  her  sexuality.   He  had  used   the
    appellant's previous exercise of deceit as his starting point; that was
    not inappropriate but the FTTJ was required to check for  corroboration
    of her claim nonetheless: the text messages and the  medical  evidence.
    He had not referred  to  the  latter.   Taking  this  missing  evidence
    together, balanced against the adverse  factors,  the  outcome  of  the
    appeal might have been different.

 7. Mr Kotas, for the respondent, accepted the FTTJ had made  no  reference
    to the medical evidence which indicated the appellant had overdosed  as
    a result of the proposed separation from her female partner.  The  FTTJ
    had noted this evidence but made no findings on it. This was despite  a
    submission that he should do so. It was accepted, for  the  respondent,
    that the FTTJ  should  have  made  a  finding  on  evidence  which  was
    potentially corroborative of the appellant's claim  to  have  a  female
    partner. He submitted it was difficult to say whether  the  outcome  of
    the hearing would have been different if the FTTJ  had  taken  it  into
    account.

Discussion

 8. The FTTJ notes the appellant's counsel objected to the  late  admission
    by the respondent of two documents relating to the appellant's partner:
    a letter of refusal of her human rights claim and  an  initial  contact
    and asylum registration form. The appellant's counsel argued  that  the
    appellant was prejudiced by late production. The  FTTJ  did  not  allow
    these documents to be admitted for the respondent because they had only
    been served on the day of the appeal hearing and "had clearly taken the
    appellants [sic] Counsel by surprise. It would be unfair  to  admit  it
    [sic] at this late stage".

 9. There is  no  reference,  however,  in  the  FTTJ's  decision,  to  the
    appellant seeking to adduce evidence of text messages at any  stage  in
    the hearing, contrary to the  statement  of  counsel  representing  the
    appellant at the hearing.  I accept that she attempted to  adduce  such
    evidence albeit  there  is  no  reference  to  an  application  in  the
    decision: there was no dispute on this issue before me.

10. I bear in mind the guidance in R (on the application of AM  (Cameroon))
    v AIT [2007] EWCA Civ 131 in which the  Court  of  Appeal  stated  that
    unfair decisions on interlocutory matters, such as adjournments or  the
    admission of evidence, can amount to errors  of  law.   Such  decisions
    will have to be grounds for arguing that they display gross  procedural
    unfairness or a complete denial of natural justice.

11. I also have in  mind  that  the  FTTJ  was  required  to  consider  the
    significance of the evidence of text  messages,  the  reason  for  late
    submission, and any problems late service would cause to the respondent
    (MD (Pakistan) [2004] UKIAT 00197).  Good reasons  required  more  than
    simply that the evidence was relevant but could  include  that  it  was
    highly pertinent. It may be that it could not be served  in  accordance
    with directions and that the admission would cause no undue  difficulty
    to the respondent.  In the present case, the  fact  the  FTTJ  made  an
    adverse finding on credibility as a  result  of  his  belief  that  the
    appellant  was  unable  to  obtain  such  messages,  suggests  that  he
    considered them to  be  highly  pertinent  to  his  assessment  of  her
    credibility.  The  issue  was  whether  there  were  good  reasons  for
    consideration of the evidence, not the failure to  serve  on  time  (AK
    (Iran) [2044] UKIAT 00103). In that case it was said that, as a general
    principle, the requirement to ensure that justice was done  in  appeals
    requiring the most anxious scrutiny would, in most cases, outweigh  the
    understandable  desire  on  the  part  of  the  Immigration   Appellate
    Authority (as it then was)  to  ensure  that  its  directions  and  the
    provisions of the Procedure Rules are not flouted with  impunity.  This
    is  such  a  case,  being  an  appeal  against  a  decision  to  refuse
    protection.

12. The FTTJ made a procedural error of law: the appellant sought to adduce
    such evidence and no reason has been given in the FTTJ's  decision  for
    the refusal to allow them to be admitted.

13. As regards materiality, it is highly relevant that, at [43],  the  FTTJ
    states this:

         "Nor has the appellant been  able  to  provide  any  text  messages
         between herself and any former partners,  or  indeed  that  of  her
         current partner. She seeks to rely only in essence on the  contents
         of nine photographic copies of photos appearing within  the  appeal
         [sic].  There is no evidenced indicating  when  these  photos  were
         taken, or indeed when."

14. Thus the FTTJ has drawn an adverse  inference  as  to  the  appellant's
    credibility (the core  issue  in  this  appeal)  from  the  appellant's
    failure to be "able to provide any text messages  between  herself  and
    ... her current partner" (my emphasis).  This is a mistake of fact. The
    appellant was able to provide such text messages but was prevented from
    so doing by the FTTJ.  This is both a procedural error (the failure  to
    address the issue of whether the text messages should be admitted late)
    and a mistake of  fact  (the  appellant  being  able  to  produce  such
    messages contrary to the finding at [43]).

15. The FTTJ notes at [7] under the heading  "the  evidence"  that  he  has
    taken into account both the  respondent's  and  appellant's  respective
    bundles.   At [37] he refers to having considered the evidence  in  the
    round and assessed it cumulatively. He also refers to having considered
    the totality  of  the  evidence,  "including  that  which  I  have  not
    specifically referred [sic]".

16. Mr Kotas accepted that the FTTJ had failed to address his mind  to  the
    content of the discharge note issued by Croydon University Hospital NHS
    Trust dated 13 November 2017. This document refers  to  an  intentional
    drug overdose by the appellant.  It is recorded that the  overdose  was
    precipitated by "increasing life stressors - the Home  Ofice  wants  to
    relocate her to Leeds away from her female partner". I also  note  this
    document records the appellant as having had a termination of pregnancy
    ("TOP") in the past; to that extent it is potentially reflective of the
    appellant's own evidence in her witness statement at paragraph 24.  The
    appellant's counsel had made specific reference to this document in her
    skeleton argument which was before the FTTJ.

17. According to paragraph 49 of MA (Somalia)  [2010]  UKSC  49,  "Where  a
    tribunal has referred to considering all the evidence, a reviewing body
    should be very slow to conclude  that  that  tribunal  overlooked  some
    factor, simply because the factor is not explicitly referred to in  the
    determination concerned".   However, as was said in MK  (Duty  to  give
    reasons) Pakistan [2013] UKUT 00641 (IAC), "If a  tribunal  found  oral
    evidence to be implausible, incredible or unreliable or a  document  to
    be worth no weight whatsoever, it  was  necessary  to  say  so  in  the
    determination and for such findings to be supported by reasons. A  bare
    statement that a witness was  not  believed  or  that  a  document  was
    afforded no weight was unlikely to  satisfy  the  requirement  to  give
    reasons."   In the  present  case,  no  reasons  have  been  given  for
    rejecting  the  medical  record  which  is  relevant  and   potentially
    corroborative of the appellant's claim to be in a lesbian relationship.
     The failure to consider this material evidence is an error of law.

18. As was said by Keene LJ in IA (Somalia) v Secretary of  State  for  the
    Home Department [2007] EWCA Civ 323:

         "... in public law cases, an error of law will be regarded as
         material unless the decision-maker must have reached the same
         conclusion without the error ... [A]n error of law is material if
         the Adjudicator might have come to a different conclusion ... "

19. The FTTJ erred in making, at least  in  part,  an  adverse  credibility
    finding on the false premise that the appellant was  unable  to  obtain
    text  messages.  He  also  failed  to  take  into  account  independent
    potentially corroborative evidence. Had he not  erred,  he  might  have
    reached a different conclusion.  The  credibility  of  the  appellant's
    account was the crux of the appeal.  The  FTTJ's  credibility  findings
    are tainted by these errors of law and cannot stand. The decision  must
    be set aside in its entirety.  The parties were agreed  that,  in  such
    circumstances, it was appropriate for the appeal to be  decided  afresh
    in the First-tier Tribunal.

Decision

20. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved material
    errors on points of law.  The decision is set  aside.   The  appeal  is
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal, to be dealt with afresh,  pursuant
    to Section 12(2)(b)(i) of the Tribunal Courts and Enforcement Act  2007
    and Practice Statement 7.2(v), before  any  judge  aside  from  FTTJ  C
    Greasley.

21. Given the nature of this appeal, the appellant is entitled to anonymity
    in these proceedings.

A M Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge  Dated: 11 January 2019


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

A M Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge  Dated: 11 January 2019
                                 DIRECTIONS


 1. Any further documentary and/or witness evidence relied upon  by  either
    party is to be filed with the Tribunal and served upon the other  party
    by no later than 28 days before the date of the hearing  in  the  First
    Tier Tribunal.

 2. The appeal is listed at Hatton Cross with  a  time  estimate  of  three
    hours to be heard at 10.00 am on ............................

 3. An interpreter is not required.






A M Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
 Dated: 11 January 2019
