
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11557/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Remote Hearing by Microsoft Teams    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 1st June 2021                     |On 23rd June 2021                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

                                    J O E
                         (Anonymity Direction Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARy OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Imo, Chancery CS Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008


An anonymity direction was made by the First-tier Tribunal ("the FtT").  As
the appeal raises matters regarding a claim for international protection,
it is appropriate for an anonymity direction to be made.  Unless and until
a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the appellant is granted anonymity.
No report of these proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify him or
any member of his family.  This direction applies both to the appellant and
to the respondent.  Failure to comply with this direction could lead to
contempt of court proceedings.


Remote Hearing


   1. The hearing before me on 1st June 2021 was a remote video hearing held
      during the Covid-19 pandemic. Neither party objected to a remote
      hearing. The appellant was able to join the hearing from the offices
      of his solicitors.  I sat at the Birmingham Civil Justice Centre. I
      was addressed by the representatives in exactly the same way as I
      would have been if the parties had attended the hearing together.  I
      was satisfied: that no party has been prejudiced; and that, insofar as
      there has been any restriction on a right or interest, it is justified
      as necessary and proportionate.  I was satisfied that it is in the
      interests of justice and in accordance with the overriding objective
      to proceed with a remote hearing because of the present need to take
      precautions against the spread of Covid-19, and to avoid delay.  I am
      satisfied that a remote hearing will ensure the matter is dealt with
      fairly and justly in a way that is proportionate to the importance of
      the case, the complexity of the issues that arise, and the anticipated
      costs and resources of the parties.  No technical problems were
      reported to me by the parties representatives during the course of the
      hearing.  At the end of the hearing I was satisfied that both parties
      had been able to participate fully in the proceedings.


Introduction


   2. The appellant is a national of Nigeria.  He arrived in the UK on 4th
      October 2019 and sought entry as a visitor. He was refused permission
      to enter, and removal directions were set for his removal to Nigeria
      on 5th October 2019.  Prior to removal on 5th October 2019 the
      appellant claimed asylum.  The appellant stated that the reason for
      his claim is due to his sexuality.  The claim was refused by the
      respondent for reasons set out in a decision dated 12th November 2019.




   3. The respondent accepts the appellant is a national of Nigeria.  The
      respondent considered the appellant's account of his relationships in
      Nigeria but rejected the appellant's claim that he is a homosexual or
      that he will be perceived to be gay. The respondent concluded the
      appellant would be able to return to his home area in Nigeria and
      would not be at risk of persecution or suffering serious harm upon
      return.


   4. The appellant's appeal against the respondent's decision was dismissed
      by First-tier Tribunal Judge Hussain for reasons set out in a decision
      promulgated on 16th April 2020. Judge Hussain heard evidence from the
      appellant and his sister.  His findings and conclusions are set out at
      paragraphs [28] to [49] of the decision.  Judge Hussain refers to the
      respondent's consideration of the appellant's sexual orientation at
      paragraph [67] of the respondent's decision.  The respondent noted the
      appellant has given inconsistent accounts regarding when he came to
      the realisation that he is gay.  She noted the responses given by the
      appellant concerning his sexuality were vague and lacking in detail.
      At paragraph [30] of his decision, Judge Hussain states "I agree".
      Judge Hussain refers to the respondent's consideration of the
      appellant's relationships with two individuals that I shall refer to
      as [EG] and [WB] at paragraphs [69] and [70] of the respondent's
      decision. The respondent considered the appellant's claim that he had
      been in relationships with [EG] and [WB] to lack credibility.   At
      paragraphs [32] and [33] of his decision, Judge Hussain again states
      "I agree".  At paragraph [34] of his decision, Judge Hussain said:


         "34. In paragraph 71, the respondent revisited the appellant's
         relationship with both [EG] and [WB], and noted that his oral
         account of his attraction and how he spent time both with [EG] and
         [WB], was vague and repetitive. He failed to go to any real detail
         about his attraction or emotional connection to either [EG] or
         [WB], which damaged his credibility. I agree. In paragraph 72, the
         respondent noted the appellant's claim that he got caught twice
         having sex with [WB].  The first was in July 2019 and the second on
         2 October 2019. The respondent disbelieved the appellant because he
         would have been aware that his wife could come home at any time and
         the risk of being seen in public at the bar. He would have been
         aware of the consequences if he was to be caught, yet he carried
         out these activities. I agree that the appellant's behaviour is
         inconsistent with somebody who has already once been caught by his
         wife engaging in sex with another male."


   5. In reaching his decision, Judge Hussain also considered the
      information provided by the appellant in his visa application
      concerning his wife, son, mother and other family members, together
      with the evidence relied upon by the appellant regarding his income.
      He found that the evidence undermines the appellant's claim that he
      has lost contact with his family.  At paragraphs [37] to [40] of his
      decision, Judge Hussain referred to the other matters relied upon by
      the respondent in reaching the conclusion that the appellant's claim
      lacks credibility.  At paragraphs [40] to [42] of his decision he
      said:


         "40. I have considered, in addition to the appellant's testimony,
         evidence of his sister [J].  In her statement dated 29 October
         2019, she states that his marriage did not work out because his
         wife discovered him having sex with his gay partner in July 2019.
         His wife was now threatening to report him to the police and gang
         members in the area, who he fears will kill him. That is a strange
         position to be in. It is not at all clear, why the appellant's wife
         would tolerate him in the matrimonial home after getting caught in
         July 2019 and after having him beaten up by the local boys, only to
         threaten to report him to the police and gang members.  By far, the
         most significant discrepancy that has not been explained is the
         appellant's sister's claim that during her December 2018 visit, she
         saw the appellant, whilst he claims not to have met her during her
         trip. In his oral evidence, he went as far as to saying that she
         was incorrect in her assertion, which she in turn maintained was
         true. It seems to me either the appellant or his sister is being
         untruthful about this. Either way, I find neither of the witnesses
         are reliable.


         41.  For all the reasons given by the Secretary of State, with
         which I agree, I conclude that the appellant is not a truthful
         person. His claim, made at the time it was, is nothing of (sic) an
         opportunistic claim, to frustrate his removal.


         42.  It follows from above, that I find that the appellant has
         neither subjective nor objective fear of being treated in the
         manner amounting to persecution or contrary to Article 3 of the
         Human Rights Convention if returned to Nigeria."


The appeal before me


   6. The appellant makes a number of criticisms in the grounds of appeal,
      many of which are incoherent and difficult to follow.  The appellant
      claims the decision of Judge Hussain is "not compliant" with the test
      set out by the Supreme Court in HJ (Iran) and HT (Cameroon) v SSHD
      [2010] UKSC 31.  He also claims, without any elaboration, that Judge
      Hussain failed to follow the guidance set out in KB and AH
      (credibility - structured approach) Pakistan [2017] UKUT 00491 (IAC)
      and the decision is incompatible with the decision of the Court of
      Appeal in Demirkaya [1990] EWCA Civ 1654, at [20].  The appellant
      claims that in reaching his decision Judge Hussain referred to the
      reasons set out in the respondent's decision and simply stated "I
      agree", without any clear or adequate explanation as to why he agrees
      with the respondent's analysis of the evidence.  The appellant claims
      it was unfair of the judge not to identify any concerns he had about
      the evidence and to invite the appellant or his representative to
      address those concerns.  The appellant also claims that an appeal must
      be determined on the basis of the evidence before the Tribunal, and
      here, the appellant relied upon a Rule 35 report completed by Dr
      Sirajudeen Mumtaz on 29th October 2019, that the appellant claims,
      independently corroborated his account of being a victim of past
      persecution and lent weight to his claim that he would be at risk of
      future persecution on return to Nigeria.  The appellant claims the
      respondent had failed to have any regard to the Rule 35 report when
      reaching her decision, and the failure of Judge Hussain to have regard
      to that independent expert evidence is such that his decision is
      infected by a material error of law.  Finally, the appellant claims
      that there were "three photographs of threatening text messages" that
      formed part of the evidence before the First-tier Tribunal but do not
      feature in the judge's analysis of the appellant's fear of the 'area
      boys'.


   7. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge
      Robertson on 20th May 2020.  She said:


         "It is arguable, as stated in the grounds of application at para
         6a, that the Judge has not referred to the rule 35 report within
         the decision to establish whether it is accepted or rejected, or if
         any weight is attributed to it, in the overall assessment of
         evidence. As to the other grounds, these have less arguable merit
         because, for example, in relation to the issues raised at para 4 of
         the grounds, it was open to the judge, in the absence of a
         reasonable explanation from the appellant as to the matters raised
         in the respondent's reasons for refusal letter (RFRL), to consider
         and accept that the respondent had raised legitimate reasons for
         rejecting the appellant's claim that he was gay, and to confirm
         that she agreed with the respondent's reasoning. Where issues are
         clearly raised in the RFRL, and are not addressed by the appellant
         or his representative, there is no need for the Judge to raise them
         at the hearing. Furthermore, as to paras 1 - 2 of the decision,
         having found that the appellant had not established that he was
         gay, there was no need for the judge to consider the further
         questions set out in HJ (Iran) [2010] UKSC 31, and it would follow
         that the judge did not accept that the appellant had been
         threatened or ill-treated by the 'area boys'.  However, as
         permission has been granted in relation to para 6a of the grounds,
         it is not withheld on the other grounds. The appellant must not
         raise his hopes too high, however, as it may be found that a
         consideration of the Rule 35 report would not have made a material
         difference to the outcome of the appeal."


   8. Given the way in which the appellant's grounds of appeal are
      formulated, at the outset of the hearing before me I invited Mr Imo to
      summarise the grounds of appeal relied upon by the appellant.  Mr Imo
      submits the focus of the criticism is the Judge's adverse credibility
      finding and the conclusion that the claim for international protection
      made by the appellant is nothing but an opportunistic claim that was
      made to frustrate his removal. Mr Imo submits there was evidence
      before the Tribunal in the form of the Rule 35 report that was capable
      of lending support to the appellant's account of events and the
      failure to consider that report, has infected the overall
      consideration of the claim by Judge Hussain and impacts upon the
      adverse credibility findings made.


   9. Before me, Mr Imo submits that although a Judge is not required to
      deal with every claim made by an appellant, there is an obligation
      upon a Judge to engage with the material evidence, particularly where
      that evidence is relevant to the core of the claim.  He submits the
      respondent had failed to properly address the Rule 35 report in her
      decision, and Judge Hussain failed to consider the extent to which
      that Rule 35 report lends weight to the appellant's account of events.
       The Rule 35 was at Annex F of the respondent's bundle.


  10. Mr Imo submits the appellant's account of events in 2008 is not
      unusual and at page 9 of the appellant's bundle, there was evidence
      before the First-tier Tribunal in the form of an article published on
      13th August 2017 relating to the arrest of 15 students who were
      alleged to have beaten a classmate to death over his sexual
      orientation. Mr Imo submits that if Judge Hussain had referred to the
      Rule 35 Report and the background material, he would not have
      concluded that the appellant's claimed relationship with [EB] is not
      credible.  He submits the appellant's account of events in 2008 is
      plausible.  He submits Judge Hussain simply agreed with the
      respondent's analysis of the appellant's relationship with [EB] and
      his claim that he had been beaten in 2008 without considering for
      himself, the extent to which the Rule 35 report lends support to the
      claim made.   Mrs Imo acknowledges that at paragraph [5] of his
      decision, when outlining the appellant's claim, Judge Hussain refers
      to the Rule 35 Report when referring to the health of the appellant,
      but he submits, there was no further reference to the report when the
      Judge summarised the appellant's account of events in 2008 in
      paragraph [8] of the decision, or in his consideration of the
      appellant's relationship with [EB] at paragraph [32] of the decision.


  11. Mr Imo submits that simply put, the appellant's claim that he was in a
      relationship with [EB] that resulted in him being attacked in 2008 is
      supported by the Rule 35 report and is an account that is plausible,
      based upon the objective material that was before the Tribunal.  The
      events in 2008 formed the foundation of the appellant's claim and if
      Judge Hussain had properly considered the appellant's account based
      upon the evidence before the Tribunal, he would not have concluded
      that the appellant's claim lacks credibility and that he had made an
      opportunistic claim to frustrate his removal.


  12. In reply, Mr Diwnycz submits the grounds of appeal amount to nothing
      more than a disagreement with findings that were open to the judge. He
      submits the Rule 35 report relied upon by the appellant had been
      considered by the respondent and was referred to in paragraphs [14] to
      [16] of the respondent's decision of 12th November 2019, and Judge
      Hussain was clearly aware of the Rule 35 Report having referred to it,
      at paragraph [5] of his decision.


Discission


  13. There are two strands to the appellant's claim for international
      protection, albeit both arising from his sexuality.  The appellant
      claims that in 2008 he formed a relationship with [EG], when he was in
      school.  He claims that in 2008 he was caught in a bush beside the
      school compound by a group of up to 7 senior students.  They started
      to beat the appellant and [EG], and during that attack the appellant
      suffered a cut to his right eyebrow and the little finger of his right
      hand.  Following the attack, he went to a nearby chemist and his cuts
      were treated with plasters.  The appellant claims [EG] and he were
      taken to the school authorities where they were beaten, punished and
      then excluded from the school. The appellant claims that following
      that incident he was thrown out of the family home by his mother and
      went to Motor Park.  The appellant claims that he had no further
      contact with [EG] following that incident. The appellant claims he
      worked as a conductor for a bus driver at Motor Park, and in 2016, he
      met and entered into a relationship with another individual, [WB].


  14. Notwithstanding that relationship, the appellant married [S] on 17th
      December 2016.  The appellant has a son from his relationship with
      [S], who the appellant said was about 2 years old, and was therefore
      born in or about 2017.


  15. The appellant claims that in July 2019 and on 2nd October 2019, he was
      caught with [WB].  On the second occasion [WB] went to the appellant's
      house whilst his wife had gone to the market. When she came back, she
      caught the appellant and [WB] having sex.  He claims "the boys" came
      to the house and started beating him but later allowed him to go for
      the sake of his son. News of the incident reached the appellant's
      place of work and his boss called him in and gave him until the end of
      August to start looking for another job.  The appellant contacted his
      sister who lives in the UK and arrangements were then made for the
      appellant to visit her in the UK.


  16. At paragraphs [18] to [23] of his decision, Judge Hussain summarises
      the oral evidence of the appellant and his sister, both of whom were
      cross-examined.  The findings and conclusions of Judge Hussain are set
      out at paragraphs [28] to [42] of his decision.


  17. The assessment of the risk upon return  and  the  credibility  of  the
      claim advanced by an appellant is always a highly fact sensitive task.
      Judge Hussain was required to consider  a  number  of  factors.   They
      include, whether the account given by the appellant was of  sufficient
      detail, whether the account is internally  consistent  and  consistent
      with any  relevant  specific  and  general  country  information,  and
      whether the account is plausible.  The ingredients of the  story,  and
      the story as a whole, have  to  be  considered  by  reference  to  the
      evidence available to the Tribunal.  Judge  Hussain  was  required  to
      resolve what had happened in the past, and whether the appellant would
      be at risk on return in the future.


  18. I reject the claim that in considering the appellant's account of
      events in 2008 and in reaching his decision overall, Judge Hussain
      failed to have regard to the background material that was relied upon
      by the appellant.  Judge Hussain expressly directed himself at
      paragraph [28] of his decision that he is required to have regard to
      the background evidence relating to the country concerned.  He went on
      to say that he had looked at that evidence and found nothing there
      that is inconsistent with the appellant's claims.  He therefore
      proceeds on the premise that there is nothing inherently implausible
      about the appellant's claims and went on to consider the particular
      claim made by the appellant.


  19. I accept that there is no reference by Judge Hussain to the decision
      of the test set out by Lord Hope in his judgement in HJ (Iran) -v-
      SSHD [2010] UKSC 31.  However that is not sufficient to establish that
      the decision is vitiated by a material error of law.  As Popplewell LJ
      said, at [34] in AA (Nigeria) v SSHD [2020] EWCA Civ 1296, Appellate
      tribunals should assume that experienced judges in specialised courts
      were applying the principles, without the need for extensive citation,
      unless it was clear from what they said that they had not done so.
      Such appeals involve what is essentially an individual and fact-
      specific inquiry. There is nothing in the decision of Judge Hussain to
      suggest that the judge was unaware of what was said in HJ Iran or was
      applying some different criteria.  To the contrary, Judge Hussain
      rejected the appellant's claim that he is a homosexual male.  The
      first stage of the test set out by Lod Hope in HJ (Iran) was not
      satisfied by the appellant and the appellant's claim fell away at the
      first hurdle without the Judge needing to consider the further
      questions that are directed to the risk upon return based upon the
      appellant's sexual orientation.


  20. As Mr Imo properly submits, the issue at the heart of the appeal
      before me is what is said in paragraph 6(a) of the grounds of appeal.
      That is, the failure to have regard to the Rule 35 Report and the
      impact of that upon the Judge's consideration of the claim made by the
      appellant.


  21. I accept Judge Hussain does not refer to the Rule 35 report in his
      consideration of the appellant's claim and in reaching his findings
      and conclusions at paragraphs [28] to [42] of the decision. There is a
      reference to the report in paragraph [5] of the decision, but the
      focus there, as Mr Imo submits, is upon the health of the appellant.
      Judge Hussain notes the Rule 35 indicates that a referral would be
      made for a mental health assessment, but there is no reference in that
      paragraph to the scars referred to in the report, or the view
      expressed by Dr Sirajudeen Mumtaz that the appellant's injuries are
      consistent with his narration of events.


  22. Judge Hussain was clearly aware of the Rule 35 report and I must
      consider whether his failure to refer to what is said in sections 4 to
      6 of that report, are material to the outcome of this appeal. At
      section 4, Dr Sirajudeen Mumtaz set out the account provided by the
      appellant of events in 2008; "He was in a technical school in Nigeria
      in 2008, he was found with his partner in a bush in the school and was
      beaten by the other students in his school. He was hit with a stick on
      the right side of forehead and cut with a penknife on the right little
      finger. He was expelled from school.".  In section 5, Dr  Sirajudeen
      Mumtaz recorded a scar to the right side of the appellant's forehead
      and a scar on the little finger of his right hand.  At section 6, Dr
      Sirajudeen Mumtaz states:


         "His injuries are consistent with his narration of events and would
         need to be looked into in further detail.


         He denies any current mental health problems but I have made a
         referral to the mental health team for an assessment."


  23. I accept that where there is medical evidence corroborative of an
      appellant's account of torture or mistreatment, it should be
      considered as part of the whole package of evidence going to the
      question of credibility and not simply treated as an "add-on" or
      separate exercise for subsequent assessment only after a decision on
      credibility has been reached on the basis of the content of the
      appellant's evidence or his performance as a witness.


  24. The appellant's account of the incident in 2008 is set out at
      paragraph [8] of the decision of Judge Hussain.  He noted the
      appellant's claim that he had been beaten and "sustained a cut to his
      right eyebrow and right pinky finger." He noted the appellant's claim
      that after the attack he went to a nearby chemist store and was
      treated with plasters on both cuts.   In paragraph [32] of his
      decision, Judge Hussain refers to the respondent's consideration of
      the appellant's claim to have formed a relationship with [EB].  The
      respondent concluded that the appellant's account of that relationship
      is not credible. Judge Hussain agreed that the appellant's claim lacks
      credibility. The Judge reached his findings and conclusions having
      considered all the evidence in the round.  Judge Hussain had noted, at
      paragraph [8], the appellant's claim that he had sustained a cut to
      his right eyebrow and right pinkie finger.  There is nothing within
      the findings and conclusions set out by Judge Hussain that suggests he
      did not accept that the appellant has a scar on the right of his
      forehead and on the little finger of his right hand or that he
      rejected the appellant's claim because it was not corroborated in any
      way.  As I have noted, Judge Hussain had considered the background
      material and concluded that there is nothing inherently implausible
      about the appellant's claim.


  25.  I have considered the Rule 35 Report and I am satisfied that the
      failure to refer to the report at paragraphs [28] to [42] of the
      decision was not material to the outcome of the appeal. At its
      highest, section 4 of the report simply sets out in the briefest of
      terms, the account given by the appellant of the incident in 2008.  It
      is simply a record of what the appellant said to the medical
      practitioner. Section 5 of the report simply confirms that the
      appellant has a scar on the right side of his forehead and on the
      little finger of his right hand.  At section 6 of the report Dr Mumtaz
      simply states that the appellant's injuries are consistent with his
      narration of events, but importantly, goes on to say "... and would
      need to be looked into in further detail.".  There is no further
      evidence before the Tribunal regarding the scars.


  26. The primary purpose of a Rule 35 report is to ensure that particularly
      vulnerable detainees are brought to the attention of those with direct
      responsibility for authorising, maintaining and reviewing detention.
      The respondent had referred to the report in her decision dated 12th
      November 2020 and noted, at paragraph [15] that the appellant's
      injuries were found to be consistent with his narration of events.  Dr
      Mumtaz adopted the Istanbul Protocol ("The Manual on Effective
      Investigation and Documentation of Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or
      Degrading Treatment or Punishment").  Under the heading "D.
      Examination and Evaluation following specific forms of Torture", the
      Istanbul Protocol states:


         "186... For each lesion and for the overall pattern of lesions, the
         physician should indicate the degree of consistency between it and
         the attribution
         ...
         (b) Consistent with: the lesion could have been caused by the
         trauma described, but it is non-specific and there are many other
         possible causes;


         ..."


  27. Dr Mumtaz therefore considered that the appellant's scars were
      "consistent with" his narration of events but that is not conclusive
      because it does not exclude many other possible causes for the injury
      to the forehead and on the little finger.  Here, the only explanation
      for the scars referred to in the Rule 35 report came from the
      appellant.  In my judgement Dr Mumtaz relied entirely upon the
      explanations given by the appellant and there is nothing in the Rule
      35 report to indicate that Dr Mumtaz stood back and considered them
      objectively.  In fact Dr Mumtaz expressly stated that although the
      injuries are consistent with the appellant's narration of events, that
      "would need to be looked into in further detail".  It is now well
      established that in the case of marks or injury which are inherently
      susceptible of a number of alternative or everyday explanations, such
      as the scars here, reference should be made to any physical features
      or "pointers" found which may make the particular explanation for the
      injury advanced more or less likely.  There was no further
      investigation of the nature of the scars, their physical features or
      their age, and in the circumstances, the Rule 35 added nothing.


  28. It follows that in my judgment, the failure to refer to the Rule 35
      report was not material to the outcome of the appeal and accordingly,
      did not infect the adverse credibility findings made.


  29. Judge Hussain considered the evidence before the Tribunal, including
      the appellant's evidence that he has lost contact with his family, and
      the evidence of text messages from the area boys threatening his life.
       He also had regard to the evidence before the Tribunal regarding the
      appellant's employment and the appellant's claim to be a 'ghost
      worker', taken together with the evidence that the appellant had his
      own tricycle business.  Although the decision could have been better
      expressed, an appellate court should resist the temptation to subvert
      the principle that they should not substitute their own analysis of
      the evidence for that of the Judge by a narrow textual analysis which
      enables it to claim that the Judge below misdirected themselves.  It
      is not a counsel of perfection. An appeal to the Upper Tribunal is not
      an opportunity to undertake a qualitative assessment of the reasons to
      see if they are wanting, perhaps even surprising, on their merits.


  30. A fact-sensitive analysis of the risk upon return was required.  In my
      judgement, the findings made by Judge Hussain were findings that were
      properly open to him on the evidence before the FtT and it was open to
      him to conclude that the appellant is not a witness of truth and has
      advanced a claim for international protection that is nothing but an
      opportunistic claim to frustrate his removal.  The findings reached
      cannot be said to be perverse, irrational or findings that were not
      supported by the evidence.


  31. It follows that in my judgment, there is no material error of law in
      the decision of Judge Hussain, and I dismiss the appeal.


Decision


  32. The appeal is dismissed.  The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
      Hussain promulgated on 16th April 2020 shall stand.


  33. I make an anonymity direction.




Signed   V. Mandalia            Date:        10th June 2021

 Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia



