
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/11152/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 19 April 2018                           |On 24 April 2018               |
|                                           |                               |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAFFER


                                   Between

                                     IAM
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Spurling of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Miss Z Ahmed a Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. The brevity of this decision is due to the commendable focus of the
         Representatives and narrowness of the issue.

      2. Pursuant to Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
         Rules 2008 (SI 2008/269) I make  an  anonymity  order.  Unless  the
         Upper Tribunal or a Court directs otherwise,  no  report  of  these
         proceedings or any form of publication thereof  shall  directly  or
         indirectly identify IAM. This direction applies to, amongst others,
         all parties. Any failure to comply with this direction  could  give
         rise to Contempt of Court proceedings. I do so in order to preserve
         the anonymity of IAM as this is a protection claim.

Background

      3. The Respondent refused the Appellant's application  for  asylum  or
         ancillary protection on 17 October 2017. His  appeal  against  this
         was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Abebrese  ("the  Judge")
         following a hearing on 29 November 2017.

      4. It is not necessary to go into the detail of the case. It concerned
         an Iraqi Kurd from Makhour which is in Mosul. That  is  a  disputed
         part of Iraq currently under  the  control  of  the  Iraqi  Kurdish
         Region (IKR). The issue related to the  feasibility  of  him  being
         safely returned to Iraq as an individual who had not established it
         was reasonably likely he was at real risk in  his  home  area  from
         ISIL or had been personally targeted, or that he had an "unapproved
         relationship" with a girl.

The grant of permission

      5. Judge Ford granted permission to appeal (6 February 2018) as it  is
         arguable that the consideration given by the Judge to the viability
         of internal relocation from two proposed points of return  (Baghdad
         and Erbil) for this Appellant is inadequate.

Appellant's position

      6. IAM's home is within a contested area. The Judge did not  focus  on
         the general problems there or focus specifically on where IAM could
         go for support in obtaining his Civil Status Identity Document. The
         finding that the Judge made at [38] is inadequate as IAM  can  only
         get a passport if he can go home and there has been  no  assessment
         of the mechanism of his return there.

Respondent's position

      7. No rule 24 notice was filed.

      8. Miss Ahmed submitted that the ability of IAM to internally relocate
         is dealt with in the refusal letter at  [56/57].  He  said  in  his
         screening interview that his passport is in  Iraq.  The  Judge  was
         entitled to accept the Respondent's  evidence  of  the  ability  to
         return him. It is accepted that the reasoning in  the  decision  at
         [38] is very brief. He  would  be  returning  as  a  failed  asylum
         seeker, with no profile, who has family, and can  get  a  passport,
         and all this was detailed in the refusal letter at [39-54].

Guidance case law

      9. AA (Article 15(c))  Iraq  CG  [2017]  EWCA  Civ  944  replaced  all
         existing country guidance on Iraq. The headnote  is  detailed.  The
         relevant parts for the purpose of  this  appeal  are  to  be  found
         particularly in [9, 10, 11, 15, and 20]. I will not  set  them  out
         here as it is unnecessary. The guidance in BA (Returns to  Baghdad)
         Iraq CG [2017] UKUT 00018 (IAC) does not alter the position.

Discussion

     10. Contrary to that which was asserted  by  Miss  Ahmed,  the  refusal
         letter does not address the issue of his  ability  to  relocate  to
         Baghdad at [56] other than to quote extracts from the  headnote  in
         AA. There is no assessment  of  IAM's  personal  circumstances.  In
         those circumstances, a bland reliance on that by the Judge would be
         wholly inadequate. And yet that is what the Judge  did  as  all  he
         says is at [38]

             "I am of the view on the basis of the objective material  that
             the appellant may be (sic - "able to") return to Baghdad."

         The Judge does not conduct any assessment of the objective evidence
         to support that assertion. He does not identify the relevant  parts
         of AA he considered as being applicable to IAM having summarised it
         at [8-10] regarding returning to and moving in  and  from  Baghdad.
         That is a material error of law.

     11. In relation to his ability to obtain the relevant CSID  or  laissez
         faire, the Judge is equally dismissive as all he says at [38] is

             "I also  accept  the  evidence  of  the  respondent  that  the
             appellant will be able to obtain a passport and that  he  will
             be able to obtain a laissez faire document".

         The Judge does not analyse IAM's evidence regarding the  difficulty
         of getting help in obtaining the relevant evidence  or  getting  to
         where he needs to go to get it, and he does not address the factors
         identified in AA. That is a material error of law.

     12. I am satisfied having heard from the  representatives  that  it  is
         appropriate to remit the matter for a new hearing on the  issue  of
         the feasibility  of  him  being  safely  returned  to  Iraq  as  an
         individual who had not established it was reasonably likely he  was
         at real risk in his home area from  ISIL  or  had  been  personally
         targeted, or that he had an "unapproved relationship" with a  girl,
         as the errors, go beyond those contained  within  the  Presidential
         Guidance for retention in the Upper Tribunal.

Decision:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

    I set aside the decision.

    I remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal for a  new  hearing  with
    only those findings regarding his lack of specific risk from  ISIL  and
    of having had an "unapproved relationship" being preserved. The hearing
    shall not be before Judge Abebrese.




Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saffer
23 April 2018
