
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11359/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 8 May 2018                                 |On 14 May 2018                |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J M HOLMES


                                   Between

                                    M. R.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and
               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Behbahani, Solicitor, Behbahani & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Iran, who entered the UK  legally  as  a
    student, and whose leave to  remain  as  such  was  extended  until  17
    December 2012. In 2012 he married an  Iranian  national  who  had  been
    granted DLR alongside the other members of her family, and then  sought
    to vary his  leave  as  her  dependent  spouse.  That  application  was
    refused, and his appeal rights against that decision were exhausted  in
    2014. The Tribunal's conclusion was that neither he, nor she, faced any
    risk of harm in Iran, that they could return to  Iran  upon  their  own
    legitimate Iranian passports in safety, and that they could properly be
    expected to pursue their married life together in Iran.

 2. Following the exhaustion of his appeal rights  against  that  decision,
    and notwithstanding the terms of that decision, the  Appellant  claimed
    asylum in July 2014. The appeal against the refusal of that  claim  was
    dismissed by the Tribunal on the basis that the evidence that had  been
    provided by both his wife and himself of a risk of harm in Iran  was  a
    fabrication. His appeal  rights  in  relation  to  this  decision  were
    exhausted in 2015.

 3. On 19 October 2016 the Appellant made a fresh claim to  asylum  on  the
    basis that he and his wife were now genuine converts  to  Christianity,
    and that as perceived apostates they faced a real risk of harm in Iran.
    The appeal against the refusal of that claim came before the First-tier
    Tribunal at Taylor House, when it  was  heard  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Gaskell. The appeal was dismissed on all grounds  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 15 January 2018.

 4. The Appellant's application for permission to appeal asserted a failure
    to properly consider the evidence of the two witnesses relied  upon  by
    the Appellant as to whether his Christian faith  was  genuine,  and,  a
    failure to give adequate reasons. Permission was granted by First  tier
    Tribunal Judge Foudy on 8 February 2017 on the basis that although  the
    Judge had made detailed findings on all of the issues in the appeal, it
    was arguable that the reasons given were inadequate. No application has
    been made to introduce evidence under Rule 15(2A) of the Upper Tribunal
    Procedure Rules. Thus the matter comes before me.

 5. As the grant of permission identified, it is not open to the  Appellant
    to argue that the Judge has failed to make a finding upon  any  of  the
    disputed issues with which he had to engage. Those disputed issues were
    rather narrower than would otherwise have been the case, because of the
    previous decisions of the Tribunal, upheld upon earlier appeals.  Those
    previous decisions also meant that the Tribunal  was  obliged  in  this
    appeal to approach the Appellant and his wife with significant  caution
    because they had been found to have fabricated evidence in the past.

 6. As Mr Behbahani accepts, the primary issue for  the  Tribunal  in  this
    appeal was whether the Appellant and his wife had undertaken a  genuine
    conversion to the Christian faith, or, had deceived those who  believed
    that they had.

 7. It was not in issue before the Judge;

      i) that both the Appellant and his wife had been  brought  up  in  the
         Muslim faith,

     ii) that both the Appellant and his wife  had  sought  to  deceive  the
         Tribunal in the past with false evidence,

    iii) that the two witnesses, the Reverend Lambert and Mr Hird, genuinely
         believed that the Appellant and his wife had abandoned their Muslim
         faith and embraced the Christian faith, and,

     iv) that the couple's first exploration of the  Christian  faith  post-
         dated the exhaustion of the Appellant's appeal rights in 2015.

 8. Whilst the Judge's decision is indeed  relatively  brief,  the  reasons
    given for the key conclusion are in my judgement  adequate  within  the
    current guidance as to the meaning of that  term;  MD  (Turkey)  [2017]
    EWCA Civ 1958 and VV (grounds of appeal) Lithuania [2016] UKUT 53.  The
    reader can easily see why the Appellant failed, and as  Mr  Behbahani's
    argument developed it became increasingly clear that  this  was  not  a
    complaint about a lack of reasons, but in reality merely a disagreement
    with the reasons that were given. The evidence that the  Appellant  and
    his wife gave to the Judge upon their religious faith was quite  simply
    disbelieved. Five reasons were given for that conclusion.

 9. Although Mr Behbahani  said  everything  that  could  be  said  on  the
    Appellant's behalf the challenge offered to the Judge's decision is  in
    reality no more than a disagreement with it, and an implicit  assertion
    that the Judge was not entitled to go behind the opinions  of  the  two
    witnesses from the Church. The Judge rejected the  explanation  offered
    to him by the Appellant and his wife for why they first came to explore
    the Christian faith after the  exhaustion  of  the  Appellant's  appeal
    rights, and he was entitled to do so for the reasons he  gave.  He  was
    entitled to note that it was the Rev Lambert himself during a telephone
    conversation with the Respondent who had alerted her to  the  reduction
    in frequency of Church attendance of the family after the Appellant and
    his wife had been accepted for baptism. He was entitled  to  find  that
    the frequency of attendance had increased as the  date  of  the  appeal
    hearing approached.  Indeed,  that  at  least,  appears  to  have  been
    admitted before him. The  Judge  then  quite  properly  looked  at  the
    explanation he was offered for why the attendance of all three  members
    of the family had reduced, and then increased in that fashion.  He  was
    entitled to reject that explanation for the reason he gave. Finally the
    Judge was entitled to look at the explanations offered to  him  by  the
    Appellant and his wife for their failure to put their daughter  forward
    for baptism, and reject them for the reasons that he gave.

10. Having found that the Appellant and  his  wife  had  not  undertaken  a
    genuine conversion  to  Christianity  the  Judge  was  not  obliged  to
    consider what would be likely to happen  in  Iran  if  they  sought  to
    worship as members of a Christian congregation. Equally, in  the  light
    of the Judge's finding upon the core issue of fact, there was no reason
    to suppose that the couple would be perceived  by  anyone  in  Iran  as
    apostates. Mr Behbahani's reliance upon RT (Zimbabwe)  [2012]  UKSC  38
    was misplaced; the  evidence  before  him  did  not  suggest  that  the
    Appellant and his wife would be required  upon  return  to  demonstrate
    that they genuinely embraced the Shia faith.  But  even  if  they  were
    required to do so, given they had both been brought up in  that  faith,
    and had not abandoned it, it is very difficult to see why they would be
    unable to do so. Equally misplaced was his reliance upon  AB  (internet
    activity -state of evidence) Iran [2015] UKUT 257; as he  accepted  the
    evidence before the Judge did not suggest that any  material  had  been
    made publicly accessible upon the  internet  that  identified  them  as
    apostates.

11. In the circumstances I am satisfied that it was open to the Judge  upon
    the evidence before him to conclude, for the reasons that he gave, that
    the Appellant and his wife were not apostates, and that they would  not
    attract any adverse attention or enquiry from the  Iranian  authorities
    upon their return to  Iran.  That  conclusion  was  not  perverse,  and
    adequate  reasons  were  given  for  it.  In  the  circumstances,   and
    notwithstanding the terms in which permission to appeal was granted,  I
    therefore dismiss the Appellant's challenge, and confirm  the  decision
    to dismiss the appeal on all grounds.

12. The anonymity direction previously made is continued.


Notice of decision

The decision promulgated on 15 January 2018 did not involve  the  making  of
an error of law sufficient to require the decision  to  be  set  aside.  The
decision of the First tier Tribunal to dismiss  the  appeal  is  accordingly
confirmed.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008


Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 8 May 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J M Holmes

