
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
PA/11760/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester                       | Decision & Reason Promulgated   |
|On 14 December 2017                       | On 15 December 2017             |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PICKUP

                                   Between

                            PIERRE MARCEL KAMAHA
                        [NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the appellant:     Mr C Timson, instructed by Maya Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr G Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the appellant's  appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Tobin promulgated 13.3.17, dismissing his appeal against
    the decision of the Secretary of State, dated 14.9.17,  to  refuse  his
    protection claim based on imputed political opinion.

 2. The Judge heard the appeal on 24.2.17.

 3. First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Shaerf  granted  permission  to  appeal  on
    26.7.17.

 4. Thus the matter came before me on 14.12.17 as an appeal  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

Error of Law

 5. For the reasons summarised below, I found no material error of  law  in
    the making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  such  as  to
    require it to be set aside.

 6. In granting permission to appeal, Judge Shaerf granted permission on  a
    single ground  only.  That  was  on  the  basis  that  the  appellant's
    solicitors had submitted a supplementary bundle to the Tribunal by  fax
    on 22.2.17, which had been stamped  by  the  Tribunal  as  received  on
    24.2.17, but which was not passed to the judge.  The  bundle  had  been
    returned to the appellant's  representatives  with  a  covering  letter
    stating that Judge Tobin had asked for it to be returned  and  was  not
    being considered because it arrived after the  hearing  concluded.  The
    judge stated, "I have not looked at the document, and  cannot  take  it
    into consideration, because of I were to take it into account  I  would
    need to hear from the  respondent's  representative  and  that  is  not
    possible."

 7. The response of the judge was unsatisfactory. Whilst it  is  clear  the
    bundle had been received after the hearing, it was also clear  that  it
    had been sent before the hearing, albeit outside  compliance  with  the
    Tribunal's standard directions that  such  evidence  should  have  been
    submitted not later than 5 days before the hearing. The  Tribunal  must
    receive a great deal of correspondence, including by fax, and cannot be
    expected to receive, examine and process the  extra  material  just  as
    soon as it was sent.

 8. However, there were other ways of dealing with the  difficulty  without
    simply ignoring what might have been important evidence. By the date of
    the Tribunal's letter returning the bundle, dated 28.2.17, the decision
    had not been promulgated. In fact, it had not been made at all, as  the
    decision is dated 10.3.17 and was not promulgation until  13.3.17.  The
    judge could have directed the parties to return to  court  for  further
    submissions on the additional material. Alternatively, the judge  could
    have had the documentation forwarded to the  respondent  allowing  time
    for the Secretary of State  to  make  any  further  representations  in
    writing arising from this documentation, and then giving the  appellant
    the opportunity to respond, again in writing.

 9. Before doing either of the two suggestions above, the judge could  also
    have examined the documentation and  considered  whether  it  would  or
    could have made any difference to the outcome of the appeal.

10. In his  submissions,  Mr  Timson  was  not  able  to  explain  why  the
    appellant's representative,  counsel,  had  not  adduced  the  evidence
    himself at the hearing. It must surely have been part of the  brief  to
    counsel. Mr Timson sought an adjournment to obtain  counsel's  note.  I
    refused that application as the point was obvious and Mr  Timson  could
    not explain why it had not been done before today.

11. Neither  could  Mr  Timson  explain  in  what  way  the  documents  not
    considered could have made any material difference to  the  outcome  of
    the appeal.

12. In fact, a careful reading of the decision reveals that  the  documents
    in question in  the  returned  supplementary  bundle  were  taken  into
    account, so that no error of law arises.

13. It is clear from the returned bundle that it  contained  two  documents
    with translations of each: a certificate of exemption of  company  tax,
    and an article on Cameroon  Boko  Haram  Mayor  Fotokol.  The  covering
    letter to the faxed bundle explains that these documents  were  already
    to be found in the appellant's main bundle, and the only difference was
    the inclusion of the translations from French to English.

14. On reading the decision of the First-tier Tribunal at [15] it is  clear
    that these documents were produced. There,  the  judge  refers  to  the
    appellant serving a supplementary bundle at  the  commencement  of  the
    hearing, which "contained the  Cameroon  certificate  of  exemption  of
    company tax together with a certified translation  and  an  article  on
    Cameroon Boko Harman Mayor Fotokol, again with certified  translation."
    It is obvious that these are the documents the appellant now  complains
    were not taken into account. It is clear  that  they  were  before  the
    Tribunal and the judge has clearly stated that they  were  read  before
    the start of the hearing and that  he  re-read  all  the  documentation
    before making his decision.

15. In the circumstances, there is absolutely no merit in  this  ground  of
    appeal. Permission was not granted on any other  ground.  It  is  clear
    that had the decision been read carefully, permission should  not  have
    been granted to appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.

16. However, Mr Timson  sought  to  advance  further  points  of  complaint
    against the decision, but had made no prior application  to  amend  the
    grounds and, of course, had not sought permission from  the  First-tier
    Tribunal in respect of them. Neither had the Secretary  of  State  been
    given notice. However, in my view even at their  highest  these  points
    were no more than minor quibbles with the decision and in the light  of
    the overall findings I was not satisfied that any material error of law
    was disclosed. In the circumstances I refused permission to advance any
    appeal on those further grounds.

Conclusions:

17. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law such that the decision  should
    be set aside.

     I do not set aside the decision.

                    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands  and  the
                    appeal remains dismissed on all grounds.
     [pic]
     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup


Anonymity

I have  considered  whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  any
anonymity direction. No submissions were made on the issue.  The  First-tier
Tribunal did not make an order  pursuant  to  rule  13(1)  of  the  Tribunal
Procedure Rules 2014.
Given the circumstances, I make no anonymity order.


Fee Award         Note: this is not part of the determination.

In the light of my decision, I have considered whether to make a  fee  award
pursuant to section 12(4)(a) of the Tribunals, Courts  and  Enforcement  Act
2007.

I have had regard to the Joint Presidential Guidance  Note:  Fee  Awards  in
Immigration Appeals (December 2011).

I make no fee award.

Reasons: No fee is payable and thus no fee award can be made.

     [pic]
     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup



