
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11037/2019 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided under Rule 34                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 2 October 2020                    |On 8 October 2020                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                    ZFAH
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                          DECISION AND REASONS (P)

 1. The appellant was born in 1975 and is a citizen  of  Saudi  Arabia.  He
    appealed to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  against  the  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State dated 24 October  2020  refusing  him  international
    protection. The First-tier Tribunal, in a  decision  promulgated  on  5
    February 2020, dismissed the appeal. The appellant  now  appeals,  with
    permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. Both parties have responded to  the  directions  issued  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal on 16 July 2020. In the light of  the  responses,  I  consider
    that this appeal may fairly  be  determined  without  a  hearing.   The
    Secretary of State, in R24 notice dated 22 July 2020, acknowledges that
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal is flawed by legal  error  such
    that it should be set aside. The judge misunderstood  the  evidence  of
    the appellant, in particular believing incorrectly that  the  appellant
    claimed that he had returned to Saudi Arabia after he had been tortured
    by the Saudi authorities. I agree with both parties that the  error  of
    law is such that the credibility assessment conducted by the First-tier
    Tribunal is unreliable and that there will need to  be  a  fresh  fact-
    finding exercise which is better conducted in the  First-tier  Tribunal
    to which this appeal is  returned  for  that  Tribunal  to  remake  the
    decision at or following a hearing de novo. None  of  the  findings  of
    fact shall stand.

    Notice of Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  is  set  aside.  None  of  the
    findings of fact shall stand. The appeal is returned to the  First-tier
    Tribunal (not Judge A J Parker; Manchester; first available  date)  for
    that Tribunal to remake the decision at or following a hearing de novo.


Signed                              Date 2 October 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.
