
[pic]
IAC-AH-KRL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11608/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|on 17th August 2017.                  |on 25th August 2017                  |
|                                      |                                     |


                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley

                                   Between

                                    [M N]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION Not made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms C Rayan, an assistant solicitor with Duncan Lewis
& Company Limited
For the Respondent:    Mr Steven Walker, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                     REASONS FOR FINDING AN ERROR OF LAW


1.   The appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan, who was born on  [  ]  2001.
    He entered the United Kingdom clandestinely in a vehicle on  8th  April
    2016, and claimed asylum the same  day.   The  respondent  refused  his
    asylum claim on 7th October 2016 and  the  appellant  appealed  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

2.   His appeal was heard at Hatton Cross on 22nd  November  2016,  and  was
    dismissed on  asylum  grounds,  dismissed  on  humanitarian  protection
    grounds and dismissed on human rights grounds.

3.   Dissatisfied with the decision the appellant  sought  and  was  granted
    permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal.   In  a  permission  dated
    29th June 2017 Upper Tribunal Judge Plimmer said this

    "1.  For the reasons set out in the renewal grounds  of  appeal  it  is
         arguable the First-tier Tribunal failed to take  relevant  evidence
         into account when determining the credibility  of  the  appellant's
         claim to have been kidnapped and threatened by the Taliban in light
         of the acceptance that his father was in the Afghan Army.


    2.   It is also arguable that the First-tier Tribunal's  assessment  of
         the country expert report prepared by Dr  Giustozzi  is  irrational
         for the reasons set out at  paragraphs  5  and  6  of  the  renewal
         grounds of appeal."

4.   At the hearing before me today, Mr Walker was in some  difficulties  in
    identifying the error of law, because a Rule 24 response  submitted  on
    behalf of the respondent simply suggests that the respondent  does  not
    oppose  the  appellant's  application  and  invites  the  Tribunal   to
    determine the appeal with a fresh oral continuance hearing to  consider
    whether the appellant's appeal should be remitted.

5.   It seems clear to me that the second ground does  identify  a  material
    error of law in any event, in the judge's  treatment  of  the  expert's
    report.  Since the parties are agreed I set aside the decision.

6.   Given the fact that the  appellant  has  effectively  not  had  a  fair
    hearing and that the determination is flawed, I have concluded that the
    correct course is to remit this appeal for hearing afresh by the First-
    tier Tribunal.  Were I to retain the appeal of the hearing in the Upper
    Tribunal by me, it could be several months before the  matter  were  to
    come back to me.  The matter is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for
    hearing afresh by a judge other than First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Roots.
    No findings are preserved.

No anonymity direction is made.

Richard Chalkley
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley
17th August 2017.

