
[pic]

Upper Tier Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11533/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Liverpool                   |Decision Promulgated                 |
|On 3 May 2018                        |On 08 May 2018                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup


                                   Between

                                  TARIQ [A]
                        [No anonymity direction made]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Ms N Patel, instructed by Lei Dat Baig Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the appellant's  appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Knowles promulgated 19.12.17, dismissing on all  grounds
    his appeal against the  decision  of  the  Secretary  of  State,  dated
    24.10.17, to refuse his protection claim.

 2. First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Andrew  granted  permission  to  appeal  on
    17.1.18.

 3. Thus the matter came before me on 3.5.18 as  an  appeal  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

Error of Law

 4. For the reasons summarised below, I found sufficient error  of  law  in
    the making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal as to require the
    decision to be set aside and remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to  be
    remade.

 5.  The  crucial  issue  in  the  appeal  was  that  of  the   appellant's
    nationality. He claimed to be Syrian, which, if  accepted,  would  have
    entitled him to refugee status. However, the respondent's  case,  based
    on expert language analysis, was that he is in fact Egyptian.

 6. At [27] the judge noted that the burden is  on  the  appellant  to  the
    lower standard of a reasonable degree of likelihood to demonstrate that
    he is Syrian. However, the judge may not have recognised  that  if  the
    respondent positively asserts that he is not Syrian but  Egyptian,  the
    burden is on the Secretary of State to  so  demonstrate  to  the  civil
    standard, the balance of probabilities.

 7. The judge did address some of the  evidence  relevant  to  establishing
    nationality, such as the appellant's explanation for getting the colour
    of the Syrian passport wrong, or his claimed memory problems.  At  [31]
    of the decision the judge also addressed a number of inconsistencies in
    the appellant's account.

 8. When at [32] in addressing the expert language report relied on by  the
    respondent, the judge failed to engage with  the  arguments  raised  on
    behalf of the appellant as to why the  report  was  unsatisfactory  and
    those elements which were supportive of the claimed Syrian nationality.
    However, the grounds on this issue are insufficient to demonstrate  any
    error of law. It was  not  necessary  for  the  judge  to"engage  in  a
    detailed analysis of the verified linguistic report," as  claimed,  nor
    to make a critical assessment of the analyst's credentials.

 9. However, there are better points  made  in  the  grounds  such  as  the
    absence of any findings about the issue of the Syrian ID card  produced
    by the appellant, although it is referred to  in  the  summary  of  the
    evidence at [16] of the decision. The respondent's  case  was  that  it
    could not be verified and the judge would have  been  entitled  in  the
    circumstances to accord little weight  to  such  a  document,  applying
    Tanveer Ahmed [2002] UKAIT 00439, but it was not addressed. Nor did the
    judge make any findings as to the  appellant's  claimed  visit  to  the
    Egyptian Embassy in London, referenced in  the  evidential  summary  at
    [17] of the decision.

10. Whilst it is not incumbent on a tribunal to resolve every single  issue
    or  factual  dispute,  there  were   potentially   important   elements
    supporting the appellant's claim in respect of which the tribunal  made
    no actual findings. Mr McVeety conceded  that  the  judge  should  have
    addressed these issues one way or another. I find the failure to do  so
    amounts to an error of law in the making of the decision. It  was  also
    unfair to the appellant to effectively ignore the evidence that on  its
    face supported his claim. In the  circumstances,  the  decision  cannot
    stand and must be set aside to be remade.



Remittal

11. When a decision of the First-tier Tribunal has been set aside,  section
    12(2) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 requires either
    that the case is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  with  directions,
    or it must be remade by the Upper Tribunal. The scheme of the Tribunals
    Court and Enforcement Act 2007 does not assign the function of  primary
    fact finding to the Upper Tribunal. Where the facts are  unclear  on  a
    crucial issue at the heart of an appeal, as  they  are  in  this  case,
    effectively there has not been a valid determination of  those  issues.
    The errors of the First-tier Tribunal Judge vitiates all other findings
    of fact and the conclusions from those facts so that there has not been
    a valid determination of the issues in the appeal.

12. In all the circumstances, I relist this appeal for a fresh  hearing  in
    the First-tier Tribunal, I do so on the basis that this is a case which
    falls squarely within the  Senior  President's  Practice  Statement  at
    paragraph 7.2. The  effect  of  the  error  has  been  to  deprive  the
    appellant of a fair hearing and  that  the  nature  or  extent  of  any
    judicial fact finding which is necessary for the decision in the appeal
    to be re-made is such that, having regard to the  overriding  objective
    in rule 2 to deal with cases fairly  and  justly,  including  with  the
    avoidance of delay, I find that it is appropriate to remit this  appeal
    to the First-tier Tribunal to determine the appeal afresh.

Conclusions:

13. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law such that the decision  should  be
    set aside.

     I set aside the decision.

                    I remit the appeal to be decided afresh  in  the  First-
                    tier  Tribunal   in   accordance   with   the   attached
                    directions.
     [pic]
     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated


Consequential Directions

14.  The  appeal  is  remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  sitting   at
    Manchester;

15. The appeal is to be decided afresh with no findings of fact preserved;

16. The ELH is 3 hours;

17. An interpreter in Arabic will be required;

18. The appeal may be listed before any First-tier Tribunal Judge, with the
    exception of Judge Knowles;

19. The appellant is to ensure  that  all  evidence  to  be  relied  on  is
    contained within a single consolidated, indexed and paginated bundle of
    all objective and  subjective  material,  together  with  any  skeleton
    argument and copies of all  case  authorities  to  be  relied  on.  The
    Tribunal will  not  accept  materials  submitted  on  the  day  of  the
    forthcoming appeal hearing;

20. The First-tier Tribunal may give such further or alternative directions
    as are deemed appropriate.

Anonymity

I have  considered  whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  any
anonymity direction. No submissions were made on the issue.  The  First-tier
Tribunal did not make an order  pursuant  to  rule  13(1)  of  the  Tribunal
Procedure Rules 2014.
Given the circumstances, I make no anonymity order.


     [pic]
     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated

