

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11633/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision sent to parties on:|
|by Skype for Business                        |                            |
|                                             |On 24 February 2021         |
|On 5 February 2021                           |                            |
|                                             |                            |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON



                                   Between

                                 S N (Nepal)
                           [ANONYMITY ORDER MADE]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr Sharaz A Ahmed of Counsel, appearing by Direct
Access
For the respondent:    Mr Andy McVeety, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

Anonymity order

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) The Tribunal has ORDERED that no one shall publish  or  reveal
the name or address of S N  who is  the  subject  of  these  proceedings  or
publish or reveal any information which would  be  likely  to  lead  to  the
identification of him or of any member of  his  family  in  connection  with
these proceedings.

Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise  to  contempt  of
court proceedings.

Decision and reasons

 1. The appellant appeals with permission from the decision of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal dismissing his appeal against the  respondent's  decision
    on 2 June 2019 to refuse him refugee status under the 1951  Convention,
    humanitarian protection, or leave to remain in the  United  Kingdom  on
    human rights grounds.

 2. The appellant has claimed to be both a citizen of Nepal, and a  citizen
    of Tibet, which now forms part of the People's Republic of China.   The
    respondent intends to return him to Nepal, not to the Chinese  province
    of Tibet.  It is the risk on return to Nepal which is relevant in these
    proceedings.

 3. The First-tier Judge found the appellant to be a citizen of Nepal.

Background

 4. The appellant was born on 23 October 1977.  He  is  a  Buddhist.   When
    giving evidence in the First-tier Tribunal,  he  was  more  comfortable
    speaking in Nepalese.   His current case is that he is  a  single  man,
    with no dependants, and that he is Tibetan, not Nepalese.

 5. The appellant entered the United Kingdom on  24  April  2014,  age  37,
    travelling via Mumbai, India, on a Nepalese passport, issued to him  by
    the Nepalese authorities, on a visit visa which expired on 18 September
    2014.  The respondent was able to access  a  copy  of  his  visit  visa
    application, in which he stated that he was a Nepalese  national,  that
    his parents were Nepalese (he provided their names on the  application)
    and gave a travel history including a visit to Thailand and two  visits
    to China.   He said he was married, with two children.  He entered  the
    United  Kingdom  on  a  Nepalese  passport,  having  provided  passport
    details, including his passport number, on the visit visa application.

 6. In his asylum interview, the appellant said that an agent obtained  the
    documents for him and that in fact he was a single Tibetan man with  no
    family, and did not know his parents' nationality as they died when  he
    was small.  The  appellant  claims  no  longer  to  have  the  Nepalese
    passport mentioned in his visit visa application, and has given various
    explanations for its loss.  However, he has not attended  the  Nepalese
    embassy to seek to replace his missing passport.  He accepts  that  one
    was issued to him and the passport number appears  on  his  visit  visa
    application.

 7. When his visit visa expired, the appellant did not embark for Nepal  or
    Tibet.  On 12 May  2018,  he  was  served  with  form  RED.0001  as  an
    overstayer,  notifying  him  that  he  was  subject  to  administrative
    removal.  The appellant claimed asylum the same day.  In his  screening
    interview, the appellant told the interviewer that on May 31 (the  year
    is not specified), he had become a Nepalese citizen  'according  to  my
    identity card'.  He said he had never been to Tibet.

 8. The appellant's case is that he was orphaned very young and grew up  in
    Nepal with a foster family.  The  appellant  thought  he  was  Tibetan:
    friends told him  that  he  looked  Tibetan,  but  he  himself  had  no
    knowledge about this as he was orphaned too young to remember.   He  is
    not certain whether he was born in Tibet or Nepal and has given varying
    accounts on that point.  From about 1989 or  1990,  he  spent  time  in
    India, travelling back and forth to Nepal, with the older  son  related
    to a family member of his foster family.

 9. On 2 June 2019, the respondent refused his asylum claim and  all  other
    claims within and outwith the Immigration Rules HC 395 (as amended).

10. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.

First-tier Tribunal decision

11. The First-tier Judge noted that at the appellant's request,  a  Tibetan
    interpreter was provided for the hearing.   At  the  interpreter  check
    stage, there were difficulties.  The appellant said  that  although  he
    spoke Tibetan (and Hindi), he was more comfortable in Nepalese.

12. The First-tier Judge then established with the interpreter that he  had
    the ability to interpret in Nepalese:  the interpreter said that he had
    interpreted in Gurkha cases in Nepalese, and  Counsel  (Mr  Ahmed,  who
    appears today), said that he had heard the interpreter interpreting  in
    Nepalese in cases where he was the representative and had no  objection
    to the change of language by the  same  interpreter.   The  interpreter
    then checked the Nepalese language with the appellant,  who  said  that
    was much more comfortable for him.  The  appellant  proceeded  to  give
    evidence in the Nepalese language. Mr Ahmed, who  also  appears  today,
    accepted in the First-tier  Tribunal  hearing  that  the  appeal  under
    Articles 2 and 3 ECHR would stand or fall with the protection appeal.

13. The First-tier Judge set out his credibility concerns at [28]-[31]. His
    identity and passport number were on his application form and the judge
    considered that  this  could  be  used  to  obtain  appropriate  travel
    documentation for Nepal,  if  the  appellant  really  did  not  have  a
    passport still. At [30], he identified additional concerns  which  were
    not put at the hearing: discrepancies as to  where  the  appellant  was
    born, what happened to his Nepalese passport, and where he  was  living
    from the age of 17 onwards.

14. The First-tier Judge found the appellant's  protection  account  to  be
    fabricated in a bid to establish a right to refugee status  and  remain
    in the United Kingdom.   He  found  the  appellant's  account  to  lack
    credibility and to be inconsistent, even making allowance for his youth
    when he lost his parents.

15. The judge found that Article 8 ECHR was not engaged. The appellant  had
    not learned to speak English in the 6 years he had spent in the  United
    Kingdom, although he had learned to be a chef and had met many  British
    people who were kind to him.  There were  no  supporting  witnesses  to
    establish his culinary prowess or his United Kingdom friendships.   Nor
    was there any evidence to establish his financial independence.

16. If there were any relevant Article 8 ECHR rights, they were  outweighed
    by the public interest in immigration control.

17. The appellant applied for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

Permission to appeal

18. First-tier Judge Scott Baker granted  permission  to  appeal,  for  the
    following reasons:

         "2.  The grounds assert that the First-tier  Judge  had  failed  to
         follow the guidance  in  Y  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
         Department [2006] EWCA Civ 1223 in failing to exercise  caution  in
         credibility and plausibility; that credibility was  the  key  issue
         and the judge had failed correctly to apply the jurisprudence.

         3.   The issue in the appeal was one of nationality - the appellant
         claimed  that  he  was  Tibetan;  incorrectly  referenced  by   the
         respondent and judge as a Tibetan national and had previously lived
         in Nepal.

         4.   At [25] there is a self-direction as to the applicability of Y
         and the judge reminded himself of the need to consider the evidence
         in the round including  the  background  material,  which  was  not
         evidenced or thereafter considered.  He reminded  himself  at  [27]
         that the appellant was uneducated, but not unintelligent.  At  [28]
         he stated that the issue was whether the appellant was Nepalese  or
         Tibetan.

         5.   The judge notes at [29.1] that the appellant initially claimed
         that he was Nepalese, and subsequently varied his  account  to  say
         that he was Tibetan.  One of the key components was the appellant's
         evidence given at the screening interview that  his  main  language
         and dialect was Tibetan.   At  [29.3]  the  judge  finds  that  the
         appellant had made no mention of being  Tibetan  at  the  screening
         interview, which is arguably factually incorrect, and at  [30]  and
         [31], makes adverse findings on evidence whilst acknowledging  that
         the matters had not been put to the appellant.

         6.   Arguably the judge  has  erred  in  law  in  his  approach  to
         credibility, Y at [25] applied and  arguably  has  made  inadequate
         findings of fact. "

Rule 24 Reply

19. No Rule 24 Reply was received from the respondent.

20. That is the basis on which this appeal came before the  Upper  Tribunal
    today.

Submissions

21.  Mr Ahmed relied on his grounds of appeal and on  the  guidance  as  to
    caution in negative credibility findings given by the Court  of  Appeal
    in Y v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2006] EWCA Civ 1223.



22. He accepted that even if credible, the allegations  the  appellant  had
    made about his treatment in Nepal, as  a  person  of  apparent  Tibetan
    heritage, would fall  short  of  the  standard  required  to  establish
    persecution or serious harm.

23. Mr Ahmed maintained that Article 8 ECHR was applicable and  that  there
    would be significant obstacles  to  the  appellant's  reintegration  in
    Nepal after 6 years away.

24. It was not necessary to call on Mr McVeety.

Analysis

25. The appellant relies on the observations at [25]  in  the  judgment  of
    Lord Justice Keene, with whom Lord Justice Carnwath (as  he  then  was)
    and Lord Justice Ward agreed.  Those observations must be seen  in  the
    context of the subsequent paragraphs:

         "25. There seems to me  to  be  very  little  dispute  between  the
         parties as to the legal principles applicable to the approach which
         an adjudicator, now known as an  immigration  judge,  should  adopt
         towards issues of credibility.  The  fundamental  one  is  that  he
         should be cautious before  finding  an  account  to  be  inherently
         incredible, because there is a considerable risk that  he  will  be
         over influenced by his own views on what is or  is  not  plausible,
         and those views will have inevitably been  influenced  by  his  own
         background in this country and by the customs and ways of  our  own
         society. It is therefore important that he should seek to  view  an
         appellant's account of events, as Mr Singh rightly argues,  in  the
         context of conditions in  the  country  from  which  the  appellant
         comes. ...

         26.  None of this, however, means that an adjudicator  is  required
         to take  at  face  value  an  account  of  facts  proffered  by  an
         appellant, no matter how contrary to common sense and experience of
         human behaviour the account may  be.  The  decision  maker  is  not
         expected to suspend his own judgment, nor  does  Mr  Singh  contend
         that he should. In appropriate cases, he is entitled to  find  that
         an account of events is so far-fetched and contrary to reason as to
         be incapable of belief. The point was well put in the Awala case by
         Lord Brodie at paragraph 24 when he said this:

             "... the tribunal of  fact  need  not  necessarily  accept  an
             applicant's account simply because it is not  contradicted  at
             the relevant hearing. The tribunal of fact is entitled to make
             reasonable findings based on  implausibilities,  common  sense
             and  rationality,  and  may  reject  evidence  if  it  is  not
             consistent with the probabilities  affecting  the  case  as  a
             whole".

         He then added a little later:

             "...  while  a  decision  on  credibility  must   be   reached
             rationally, in doing so the decision maker is entitled to draw
             on his common sense  and  his  ability,  as  a  practical  and
             informed person, to identify what is or is not plausible".

         27.  I agree. A decision maker is entitled to regard an account  as
         incredible by such standards, but he must take care not  to  do  so
         merely because it would not seem reasonable if it had  happened  in
         this country. In essence,  he  must  look  through  the  spectacles
         provided by the information he has about conditions in the  country
         in question. ..."

26. That passage is of less assistance  to  the  appellant  than  Mr  Ahmed
    suggests.  The conflict in the appellant's account here is  nothing  to
    do with perception or westernised assumptions, but rather that  he  has
    given several mutually contradictory accounts of his birth, his  family
    circumstances, his past travel and his ethnic or national origins.

27. The grounds of appeal are an attempt to reargue the factual conclusions
    reached by the First-tier Judge, in particular at [29] and  [30].   The
    points made at [29] arise out of the appellant's oral evidence and  his
    previous accounts in his screening interview and asylum interview.   It
    is not suggested that they were not put to  the  appellant  during  the
    hearing.

28. To the extent that the points in [30] were identified by the judge when
    writing his decision, if they were the only discrepancies  relied  upon
    in his decision, that might have been a proper reason to interfere with
    the judge's findings of fact and credibility, but such is not the case.
      The  appellant's  accounts  are  riddled  with   contradictions   and
    discrepancies.

29. I remind myself of the  guidance  recently  given  in  AA  (Nigeria)  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2020] EWCA Civ 1296 at [41]
    that it is impermissible to interfere with the  findings  of  fact  and
    credibility by a First-tier Judge who has heard and seen the  appellant
    give evidence, 'merely on the grounds that [the Upper  Tribunal  Judge]
    would themselves have reached a different conclusion'.

30. In this case, the First-tier Judge has given cogent,  intelligible  and
    sufficient reasons  for  reaching  the  conclusions  which  he  did  on
    credibility.  It was unarguably open to him, on the evidence summarised
    in his decision, to conclude that, whatever the appellant's nationality
    at birth, he is a Nepalese citizen with a Nepalese  passport  now,  and
    that this claim has been fabricated to enable him to stay in the United
    Kingdom.

31. I  uphold  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Judge  and  dismiss  the
    appellant's appeal.

DECISION

32. For the foregoing reasons, my decision is as follows:


    The making of the previous decision involved the making of no error  on
    a point of law


    I do not set aside the decision but order that it shall stand.




Signed   Judith AJC Gleeson                           Date:     9 February
2021
         Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson



