
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: PA/11651/2019 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decision Under Rule 34               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8 September 2020                  |On 10 September 2020                 |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

                                     WS
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Cassady's Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Home Office Presenting Officers Unit


                          DECISION AND REASONS (P)



Unless and until a Tribunal or Court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies  amongst  others  to  all  parties.  Failure  to  comply  with  this
direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Introduction

      1. In this decision I determine whether the decision of the First-tier
         Tribunal ('FTT') sent on 7 January 2020, discloses an error of  law
         such that it should be set aside.

      2. I have made this decision 'on the papers' and  without  a  hearing,
         following the decision  and  directions  of  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
         Norton-Taylor dated 12 May 2020 granting permission to appeal.

      3. I have made an anonymity order because this decision refers to  the
         appellant's international protection claim  and  sensitive  medical
         evidence regarding his mental health.

Rule 34

      4. When granting  permission  to  appeal  Judge  Norton-Taylor  issued
         directions to the parties setting out his provisional view that  in
         this case it would be appropriate to determine whether  the  making
         of the FTT's decision involved the making of an error of  law,  and
         if so, whether that decision should be set aside,  on  the  papers.
         Directions also gave both parties an opportunity  to  make  written
         submissions and to indicate within 21  days  of  the  notice  being
         sent, if they opposed the matter proceedings without a hearing.  No
         submissions have been filed by either party.

      5. Neither party has objected  to  the  matter  proceeding  without  a
         hearing.  I  am  satisfied  that  it  is  in  accordance  with  the
         overriding objective and the interests of justice for there to be a
         timely determination of the question whether there is an  error  of
         law in the decision of the FTT, and that it is entirely appropriate
         in the circumstances of this case for the error of law decision  to
         be determined on the papers, to secure the proper administration of
         justice.

Background

      6. The appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan who claims that he has  a
         well-founded fear of persecution there vis a vis the Taliban.

      7. The FTT rejected the core of the appellant's account and  concluded
         that the evidence relied upon by the appellant in  support  of  his
         asylum  claim  was  not  credible,  on  the  basis  that   it   was
         inconsistent and implausible.   The FTT attached little weight to a
         psychiatric report dated 3 January 2020, prepared by  a  Consultant
         Psychiatrist, Dr Hajioff ('the psychiatric report').

Appeal to the Upper Tribunal ('UT')

      8. Although the appellant advanced  three  grounds  of  appeal,  Judge
         Norton-Taylor restricted the  grant  of  permission  to  the  FTT's
         approach to the psychiatric report.

Discussion

      9. Before turning to the specific grounds of appeal relied upon, it is
         necessary to set out the structure of the FTT's decision.  At  [15]
         the FTT summarised the evidence before it including the psychiatric
         report and a country expert report dated 21 December 2019  from  Dr
         Giustozzi.  The FTT recorded that all the  evidence  available  had
         been considered at [24], before going on to find that:

          - the appellant's failure to claim  asylum  earlier  damaged  his
            credibility [30];

          - his account was not  internally  consistent  in  many  respects
            [31]; these went to the core of  his  claim  and  significantly
            damaged his credibility [33];

          - his claim to have returned home after his father's funeral  was
            not plausible [32];

          - no weight could be attached to documents relied upon to support
            his claim because "I  have  already  made  adverse  credibility
            findings about the appellant" [34];

          - little weight should be given to the psychiatric report [36];

          - the appellant can safely return to his home area [37-39];

          - the appellant is not at risk from the Taliban as claimed and it
            follows he is not at risk in his  home  area  or  alternatively
            Kabul [45];

          - the country expert report is of little assistance [46];

          - despite claiming PTSD he gave evidence without  difficulty  and
            is able to manage everyday life in the UK, and would be able to
            do so upon return to Afghanistan [47].

     10. The psychiatric  report  bases  the  diagnosis  of  PTSD  upon  the
         appellant's own account of his symptoms.   These  are  wide-ranging
         and serious, and include: anxious all the time, sleeps  with  light
         on, nightmares most nights, concentration impaired, loses awareness
         in public.  Although Dr Hajioff does not explicitly say so,  it  is
         implicit from reading the psychiatric report as a whole that he did
         not regard the appellant  to  be  feigning  or  exaggerating  these
         symptoms.

     11. When determining the  approach  to  be  taken  to  the  appellant's
         evidence during the course of the hearing and the extent  to  which
         he should be regarded as vulnerable, the FTT has not engaged in any
         meaningful manner with the evidence in the psychiatric report.   At
         [6] the FTT noted that the appellant's then representative made  no
         application to treat him as vulnerable but it was explained to  the
         appellant that he should make it clear if  he  did  not  understand
         anything.   The  failure  to  directly   address   the   issue   of
         vulnerability at the beginning of the hearing, given  the  contents
         of the  psychiatric  report  breaches  the  relevant  vulnerability
         guidance and constitutes an error of law - see AM  (Afghanistan)  v
         SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 1123.   As  noted  in  SB  (vulnerable  adult:
         credibility) Ghana [2019] UKUT 00398 (IAC), by applying  the  Joint
         Presidential Guidance Note No 2 of 2010,  two  aims  are  achieved.
         First, the judicial fact-finder will ensure  the  best  practicable
         conditions  for  the  person  concerned  to  give  their  evidence.
         Secondly, the vulnerability will also be taken  into  account  when
         assessing the credibility  of  that  evidence.   The  FTT  has  not
         directed  itself  in  accordance  with  this  or  carried  out  the
         important task of assessing  for  itself  potential  vulnerability.
         Although the FTT noted at [47] that the appellant did not have  any
         apparent difficulties in giving evidence, the  FTT  noted  numerous
         inconsistencies and has not addressed whether and  to  what  extent
         they might be explained by the symptoms he described to Dr  Hajioff
         and/or the diagnosis made.

     12. For the reasons set out in the grounds of appeal, the FTT's reasons
         for attaching little weight to Dr Hajioff's report are inadequately
         reasoned.   Whilst  it  would  have  been  helpful  to   have   had
         corroborating evidence  from  the  GP,  Dr  Hajioff  (a  Consultant
         Psychiatrist with considerable experience and expertise accepted by
         the FTT) did not regard this to be essential.  It is also difficult
         to see why the erroneous recording of the appellant's siblings made
         a  material  difference  to  the  weight  to  be  attached  to  the
         psychiatric report.

     13. There is a further error of law.  The FTT has  failed  to  consider
         the medical and country background evidence  holistically  and  has
         instead treated it as an 'add-on', in breach of the guidance in  AM
         (Afghanistan).  The assessment of plausibility is  founded  on  the
         totality of the evidence and not a separate stage in the assessment
         of credibility - see MM (DRC: Plausibility: Democratic Republic  of
         Congo) [2005] UKIAT 19.  The FTT appears to have reached an adverse
         credibility finding prior to assessing the psychiatric  report  and
         the country expert report.  That this is so  is  evident  from  the
         overall structure of the decision.  By [34]  the  FTT  attached  no
         weight  to  documents  because  adverse  credibility  findings  had
         already been made.  At that point the psychiatric  report  and  the
         country expert report had not been assessed.

     14. Indeed the country expert report was not assessed until the FTT had
         made it explicit that the credibility of the  claim  was  rejected.
         The FTT clearly considered plausibility at an earlier stage at [32]
         but entirely failed to direct itself to the  external  plausibility
         of the appellant's account vis a vis the country expert report when
         making findings on credibility.  Indeed, the FTT  appears  to  have
         regarded the country expert's evidence on  plausibility  to  be  of
         little assistance on the basis that credibility is for the Tribunal
         not the country expert.  Whilst credibility is  for  the  Tribunal,
         the  Tribunal  is  obliged  to  take  into   account   plausibility
         holistically and as part of its fact  finding  exercise.   In  this
         case there  were  specific  detailed  aspects  of  the  appellant's
         account the country expert regarded  as  plausible.   These  should
         have been taken into account prior to making an adverse credibility
         finding.

     15. Although the FTT made comprehensive findings of fact in relation to
         inconsistencies in the  appellant's  account,  these  cannot  stand
         because they are vitiated by an overarching failure  to  apply  the
         vulnerability guidance and make  credibility  findings  only  after
         considering all the relevant evidence holistically.

Disposal

     16. The assessment of a claim for asylum  which  turns  on  credibility
         such as this, is always a highly fact sensitive task,  and  in  all
         the circumstances, I have decided that it is appropriate  to  remit
         this appeal to the FTT  for  a  fresh  hearing,  having  considered
         paragraph 7.2 of the Senior President's Practice Statement of  25th
         September 2012.  The nature and extent of any judicial fact-finding
         necessary will be extensive.

     17. When the decision is re-made by  the  FTT  and  when  applying  the
         relevant vulnerability guidance, care must be taken to address  the
         appellant's mental health by  reference  to  the  medical  evidence
         (including any GP evidence) available.



Notice of Decision

     18. The appeal is allowed.  The decision of the FTT is set aside, and I
         remit the matter for a re-hearing de novo by a judge other than FTT
         Judge SL Farmer, with no findings preserved.


Melanie Plimmer
Upper Tribunal Judge Plimmer

8 September 2020

