
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11003/2018 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided under rule 34 (P)          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 2 July 2020                     |On 15 July 2020                    |
|                                   |                                   |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEKI?


                                   Between

                                     W K
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation (by way of written submissions)
For the appellant:     Mr D Hewitt of Counsel instructed by J D Spicer Zeb
                    Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

    Background

      1. This appeal comes before me following the grant  of  permission  to
         appeal by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Haria  on  23  January  2020
         against the determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Saffer,
         promulgated on 2 January 2020 following a hearing at Bradford on 23
         December 2019.

      2. The appellant is an Ethiopian national born  on  6  July  1982.  He
         claims to have entered the UK in July 2017 via Italy and France and
         claimed asylum on the basis that he would be at risk on  return  to
         Ethiopia because of his support for the Ginbot 7 (PG7).  He  claims
         to have attended secret meetings, to have distributed leaflets  and
         to have given seeds to members to  sell  for  financial  gain.   He
         claims that he was detained once or twice and to have been released
         on the second occasion after payment of a bribe.   In  the  UK,  he
         claims to have joined PG7 and to have attended a demonstration.

      3. This appeal has a long history and it is helpful to  set  that  out
         here. The respondent's decision was made on 31 August  2018  and  a
         pre-hearing review was conducted on 1 October 2018. The appeal  was
         listed for hearing at Manchester on 15 October 2018.  That  hearing
         was adjourned to 8  November  2018  when  it  was  adjourned  again
         because  the  respondent  adduced  new   country   evidence   which
         undermined the appellant's case. An adjournment was granted so that
         the appellant could undertake his own research. Another pre hearing
         review then took place on  8  January  2019  with  the  substantive
         hearing on 22 January 2019 before First-tier Tribunal Judge Raikes.
         The appeal was dismissed by way of a determination promulgated on 7
         February 2019. Permission  to  appeal  was  refused  by  First-tier
         Tribunal Judge Bulpitt on  21  March  2019  but  granted  by  Upper
         Tribunal Judge Jackson on 29 April 2019.  It  was  heard  by  Upper
         Tribunal Judge C Lane at Bradford on 4 June 2019  and  remitted  to
         the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing. It  then  came  before
         First-tier Tribunal Judge Saffer on 23 December 2019.

      4.  The  judge  essentially  accepted  the  appellant's  account   but
         dismissed the appeal because of the  transformation  of  the  human
         rights landscape in Ethiopia following the election of a new  Prime
         Minister, the removal of the ban on the PG7 and  the  OLF  and  the
         disbanding of the PG7 (at 19). He found that past  PG7  support  or
         membership would not give rise to a real risk of harm and that  the
         changes had been significant and durable so that reliance  upon  MB
         (OLF and MTA - risk) Ethiopia CG [2007] UKAIT 00030 was  no  longer
         appropriate.

      5. The appellant puts forward two  grounds  which,  as  presented  are
         interlinked, but the criticisms made are several. It  is  argued  :
         (1) that the judge departed from country  guidance  without  giving
         cogent reasons for so doing; (2) that he relied on  the  2019  CPIN
         report and not the 2017 one which the respondent had referred to in
         her decision letter and that the full  CPIN  report  had  not  been
         adduced; (3) that the evidence did not support the statement by the
         judge that there were no political prisoners; (4)  that  the  judge
         did not give reasons for why he preferred the 2019 CPIN over MB and
         the 2017 CPIN; and (5)  that had the judge restricted consideration
         to the 2017 CPIN, he  would  have  allowed  the  appeal  given  his
         positive findings of credibility.

    Covid-19 crisis

      6. As a result of the Covid-19 pandemic and need to  take  precautions
         against its spread, directions were sent to the parties on 28 April
         2020. They were asked to present any objections to the matter being
         dealt with on the papers and to make any further submissions on the
         error of law issue within certain time limits.

      7. The Tribunal has received written submissions from both parties and
         no objections have been raised to the matter  being  considered  on
         the papers.  I now proceed to consider the material on file and  to
         make a decision on whether or not the judge materially erred in law
         such that his decision should be set aside.

    Discussion and Conclusions

      8. I have considered all the evidence, the grounds for permission  and
         the submissions made by both parties.

      9. No challenge has been brought in respect of the judge's  article  8
         findings and those, therefore, stand.

     10. The appellant's written submissions  are  dated  11  May  2020.  In
         summary they argue that that the determination  be  set  aside  and
         then re-decided by the  Upper  Tribunal  without  the  need  for  a
         further oral hearing but  on  the  basis  on  further  submissions,
         possibly even as a new country guidance case. It is maintained that
         if the judge was bound by MB, then the appeal must be  allowed.  It
         is submitted that the respondent relied upon the 2017 CPIN  in  her
         decision letter  and  that  indicated  that  persons  such  as  the
         appellant who had been active in an  opposition  group  would  face
         persecution, particularly as PG7 was viewed as a  terrorist  group.
         It is submitted that the appeal should have  been  allowed  on  the
         basis of the material relied on by the respondent in  her  decision
         letter combined with the positive credibility findings made by  the
         judge. It is submitted  that  extracts  from  the  2019  CPIN  were
         adduced at the hearing and that this raises  procedural  challenges
         as the judge would have had to have undertaken his own research  if
         he wanted to have regard to the entire report. It is submitted that
         the contents if the report do not support the findings  made,  that
         the report does not  amount  to  cogent  evidence  which  justifies
         departure from country guidance and that there was no evidence that
         the changes were durable  and  well  established.  The  submissions
         point out that the judge was wrong to say that the report suggested
         that there were no political prisoners; rather, it  stated  that  a
         number of political prisoners had been released.  It  is  submitted
         that whilst this could be a first step, it was not  evidence  of  a
         durable change. It is also submitted that the judge gave no reasons
         for departing from the existing country guidance in MB or from  the
         2017 CPIN relied on by the respondent in her decision letter. It is
         suggested that country guidance is in desperate need of  an  update
         if judges are to be stopped from undertaking their own analysis and
         reaching inconsistent conclusions.

     11. The respondent's submissions of 18 May  2020  are  that  there  was
         strong and  cogent  evidence  before  the  Tribunal  to  warrant  a
         departure from MB and that the judge had provided reasons for doing
         so. It is pointed out that the judge considered whether the changes
         were durable, found that they were and that in light of the changes
         in Ethiopia reliance upon country guidance which was over 12  years
         old and which Counsel had conceded in submissions was in need of an
         update, was no longer appropriate. The respondent points  out  that
         the change in  country  circumstances  was  first  brought  to  the
         attention of the appellant on 8 November 2018 and that was why  the
         hearing  had  been  adjourned.  The  respondent  submits  that  the
         appellant did not seek to provide any rebuttal evidence but  merely
         continued to rely  on  MB.  It  is  accepted  that  the  2019  CPIN
         evidenced no  high  profile  political  prisoners  rather  than  no
         prisoners at all but that the judge's omission  of  'high  profile'
         did not impact upon the outcome of the appeal given the  extent  of
         the changes that had occurred. Reliance is placed on extracts  from
         the 2019 CPIN. It is argued that it does not simply focus  on  high
         profile leaders and that the judge obviously preferred the 2019  to
         the 2017 report as it was more up to date.  Various  extracts  from
         the CPIN are relied upon. It should  be  mentioned  here  that  the
         references given of 2.5.7, 2.5.15, 2.5.21 and 2.5.28 are inaccurate
         and should be 2.4.7, 2.4.15. 2.4.21 and 2.4.28.  I  also  state  at
         this point that I have not had regard to these parts of the CPIN as
         they were not part of the extracts that had been placed before  the
         judge.

     12. There has been no reply from  the  appellant  to  the  respondent's
         submissions although by way of the directions of 28 April 2020,  he
         was given seven days to file and serve a response.

     13. The country information adduced by the appellant for his June  2019
         appeal consisted of the 2018 report from the US State Department, a
         2019 Human Rights Watch report (on events  of  2018),  the  Amnesty
         International report for 2017/2018, two CPIN  reports  for  October
         2017 and one for November 2017. The same bundle was resubmitted for
         the December 2019 hearing along with further personal evidence.  No
         further country information was adduced.

     14. I deal first with the criticism that the judge had  regard  to  the
         CPIN of 2019 as opposed to 2017 and gave no  reasons  for  this.  I
         note that the grounds are prepared by the same Counsel who appeared
         at the hearing before Judge Saffer. I also note from the Record  of
         Proceedings that he raised no objections to the submission  of  the
         2019 report at the start of the hearing  when  it  was  adduced  or
         during the course of his submissions.  No  adjournment  application
         was made for time to consider this document and indeed, I note that
         reference to the change in country conditions by the respondent was
         the reason the hearing of  November  2018  was  adjourned  although
         there is nothing on file to suggest that the respondent served  any
         documentary evidence following that adjournment.

     15. The Country Policy and Information Note Ethiopia: Opposition to the
         government Version 3.0 was published in August  2019,  four  months
         prior to the hearing on 23 December 2019.  It  is  surprising  that
         this was not included in the appellant's appeals bundle in place of
         the three out of date 2017 CPINs that were; it  is  certainly  best
         practice to adduce more up to date evidence where it exists. As the
         respondent points out in her submissions the appellant was  put  on
         notice in  November  2018  that  her  view  was  that  the  country
         situation has changed in Ethiopia and that the appellant  then  had
         ample opportunity to adduce any evidence to  rebut  that  position.
         Plainly the 2019  CPIN  could  not  have  been  relied  on  by  the
         respondent in her decision letter as that letter  was  prepared  in
         August 2018. However, quite rightly, as the respondent observes  in
         her submissions, it is her duty to bring to the  attention  of  the
         Tribunal any relevant evidence: UB [2017] EWCA Civ 85 at  paragraph
         16.

     16. It is difficult to follow  the  appellant's  argument  that  cogent
         reasons were not given by the judge for preferring the 2019 CPIN to
         the 2017 CPIN. It is surely obvious that a more up to  date  report
         is preferable than an out of date one. Moreover, as the appellant's
         representatives will be aware, judges are required to decide asylum
         appeals on the situation as it exists at the date  of  the  hearing
         and not as it was at the date of the decision. It would  have  been
         an error of law had the judge relied on the CPIN 2017 to allow  the
         appeal when there was more up to date evidence which pointed  to  a
         different outcome.  I find no merit  whatsoever  in  the  complaint
         that no reasons were given for the reliance on the  2019  evidence.
         This is simply a disagreement on the part of the appellant  because
         the older outdated evidence was more advantageous to his case.

     17. The appellant also argues that the submission of an extract of  the
         2019 CPIN raises "procedural challenges"  because  "unless  the  IJ
         (sic) relied only on the pages provided, then he  would  have  been
         forced to undertake his own research  outside  of  the  information
         provided" (paragraph 12 of the grounds  and  paragraph  21  of  the
         submissions). The only  basis  for  this  contention  is  that  the
         judge's findings at paragraph 19 are  not  supported  by  the  CPIN
         extract. I have considered paragraph 19 with  care.  I  would  note
         that there is nothing at all in that paragraph that  would  suggest
         that the contents were based only upon a summary of the CPIN.  With
         that in mind, I have considered the country information as a whole,
         as it was before the judge and excluding  the  extracts  from  CPIN
         cited in the respondent's submissions which were not.

     18. Although the appellant's submissions maintain that  the  judge  was
         given pages 37 and 38 of the CPIN, the Tribunal files shows that in
         fact pages 35 and 36 were adduced and that  they  cover  s.  8.1.1-
         8.1.7 on PG7 (also known as Ginbot 7, G7  and  Patriot  Ginbot  7).
         That extract provides the following relevant information:  that  it
         was reported on 22 June 2018 that the group had  ceased  all  armed
         attacks following reforms  announced  by  the  new  government  and
         confirmed that it would call off all assaults in order  to  support
         the agenda of the new Prime Minister (8.1.5), that due to  internal
         disputes it was highly unlikely to become a major opposition  party
         (8.1.6), that as of May 2019 the party  did  not  exist,  that  its
         activities had a year earlier been regularized by  the  government,
         that it had been disbanded and had  announced  a  unilateral  cease
         fire with a view to engage in peaceful struggle and that  they  had
         returned to Ethiopia from their base in Eritrea in  September  2018
         (at 8.1.7).

     19. The US State Department report in the appellant's  bundle  provides
         the following information:

         "Abiy's assumption of office was followed by  positive  changes  in
         the human rights climate. The government  decriminalized  political
         movements that had been accused of treason  in  the  past,  invited
         opposition leaders to return to the country  and  resume  political
         activities, allowed peaceful rallies  and  demonstrations,  enabled
         the formation and unfettered operation of new political parties and
         media outlets, continued steps to release  thousands  of  political
         prisoners, and undertook revisions of repressive laws. On  June  5,
         the parliament voted to lift the SOE.

         Both  the  number  and  severity  of  these  human  rights   issues
         diminished significantly under Abiy's administration, and  in  some
         cases they were no longer an issue by the end of the year.

         The government took positive steps  toward  greater  accountability
         under Abiy to change the relationship between security  forces  and
         the population. In August the federal  government  arrested  former
         Somali regional  president  Abdi  Mohamoud  Omar  on  human  rights
         grounds. On June 18, the prime minister spoke  to  the  nation  and
         apologized on behalf of the government for decades of mistakes  and
         abuse he said amounted to terrorist acts.

         The federal and regional governments released  9,702  prisoners  in
         the six weeks following the former prime minister's announcement of
         prisoner releases on January 3. During these weeks  the  government
         released the vast majority of  imprisoned  high-profile  opposition
         politicians, journalists, and activists.

         The federal attorney general dropped charges and/or granted pardons
         to 744 individuals charged with or convicted of crimes of terrorism
         and corruption. Of that number,  576  were  convicted  and  serving
         prison terms, while 168 were still on  trial.  The  majority,  more
         than 500, walked out of  prisons  on  May  29.  The  justifications
         provided by the government for the releases included remorse by the
         convicts, abatement of  the  threat  to  society,  and  ability  to
         contribute to the continued widening  of  political  space.  Senior
         opposition  politicians,  journalists,  activists,  and  government
         officials charged with terrorism and corruption  were  included  in
         those released.

         On May 29,  authorities  released  Ethiopian-born  British  citizen
         Andargachew Tsige, second in command of Patriotic Ginbot 7 (PG7), a
         former government-designated terror organization delisted in  June,
         on a  "pardon  under  special  circumstances."  Detained  in  2014,
         Andargachew was serving two life sentences and was sentenced to the
         death penalty.

         On July 20,  the  HPR,  in  an  emergency  session  passed  a  bill
         providing amnesty for individuals and groups  under  investigation,
         on trial, or convicted  of  various  crimes.  The  law  applies  to
         persons and organizations convicted of crimes committed before June
         7. The  federal  attorney  general  announced  that  those  seeking
         amnesty must register within six months from July 23. On August 23,
         the federal  attorney  general  announced  650  prisoners  in  four
         federal prisons benefitted from releases via either a pardon or the
         granting of amnesty. The government granted amnesty  to  more  than
         200 of these prisoners in accordance with the amnesty proclamation.

         In September, in keeping with a long-standing tradition of  issuing
         pardons at  the  Ethiopian  New  Year,  four  regional  governments
         released 8,875 persons.

         There were no  high-profile  political  prisoners  at  year's  end,
         because the government dropped charges and/or  granted  pardons  to
         more than ten  thousand  individuals  charged  and  convicted  with
         crimes of terrorism and corruption.

         On May 29, the attorney general withdrew charges against  diaspora-
         based Ginbot  7  leader  Berhanu  Nega  and  Oromo  activist  Jawar
         Mohammed, as well as their respective media organizations Ethiopian
         Satellite Television and Radio and Oromo Media Network.

         Upon the end of  the  SOE  and  with  the  encouragement  of  Prime
         Minister Abiy, a number of new and returned diaspora media  outlets
         were able to register and begin operations in the country.

         Upon taking office Prime  Minister  Abiy  stated  that  freedom  of
         speech is essential to  the  country's  future.  NGOs  subsequently
         reported that practices such  as  arrests,  detention,  abuse,  and
         harassment of persons for criticizing the  government  dramatically
         diminished.

         The government's arrest, harassment, and prosecution of journalists
         sharply declined and imprisoned journalists were released.

         On July 5, the parliament  legally  removed  the  Oromo  Liberation
         Front  (OLF),  ONLF,  and  PG7   from   the   list   of   terrorist
         organizations. Journalists,  both  state  and  private,  were  less
         afraid of reporting on these groups following their delisting.

         Prime Minister Abiy invited diaspora media  outlets  to  return  as
         part of broader  reforms  to  open  up  political  dialogue.  Major
         outlets  and  bloggers  returned  and  began   operations   without
         incident.

         After the lifting of the SOE, security forces' response to protests
         showed signs of increasing restraint. In July  and  August  Federal
         Police and Addis Ababa police provided security to at  least  three
         large peaceful demonstrations staged without prior notification  to
         the authorities in Addis Ababa.

         The government, controlled by the EPRDF, called  on  all  diaspora-
         based opposition groups, including  those  in  armed  struggle,  to
         return  and  pursue  nonviolent  struggle.  Virtually   all   major
         opposition groups, including OLF, Oromo Democratic Front, ONLF, and
         PG7, welcomed the request and returned to the country."

     20. The Human Rights Watch report covering events of 2018 reported:

         "After years of widespread protests  against  government  policies,
         and brutal security force repression, the  human  rights  landscape
         transformed in 2018 after  Abiy  Ahmed  became  prime  minister  in
         April. The government lifted the state of  emergency  in  June  and
         released thousands of political prisoners from detention, including
         journalists and key opposition leaders such as  Eskinder  Nega  and
         Merera Gudina. The government lifted restrictions on access to  the
         internet,  admitted  that  security  forces  relied   on   torture,
         committed to  legal  reforms  of  repressive  laws  and  introduced
         numerous other reforms, paving the way  for  improved  respect  for
         human rights.

         Parliament lifted the ban on three  opposition  groups,  Ginbot  7,
         Oromo Liberation Front (OLF), and Ogaden National Liberation  Front
         (ONLF) in June. The government  had  used  the  proscription  as  a
         pretext for brutal crackdowns on opposition members, activists, and
         journalists suspected of affiliation with the groups. Many  members
         of these and other groups are now returning to Ethiopia from exile.

         Ethiopia released journalists who had been wrongfully  detained  or
         convicted on politically  motivated  charges,  including  prominent
         writers such as Eskinder Nega and Woubshet Taye,  after  more  than
         six years in jail. The federal Attorney  General's  Office  dropped
         all pending charges against  bloggers,  journalists  and  diaspora-
         based media organizations, including the Zone 9 bloggers, Ethiopian
         Satellite Television (ESAT), and Oromia Media Network (OMN),  which
         had previously faced charges of violence inciting  for  criticizing
         the government.

         OMN and ESAT television stations reopened in Addis Ababa  in  June,
         following  calls  by  Prime  Minister   Abiy   for   diaspora-based
         television stations to return. Additionally, the government  lifted
         obstructions to access to more than 250 websites.  The  restriction
         on access to the internet and mobile applications introduced during
         the 2015 protests was also lifted.

         Many of Ethiopia's repressive laws  used  to  silence  dissent  and
         restrict citizens' meaningful  engagement-including  the  Charities
         and Societies Proclamation, the Media Law, and  the  Anti-Terrorism
         Proclamation-were being revised at time of writing.

         Government  officials  often  dismissed  allegations  of   torture,
         contrary to credible evidence. But in a July speech to  parliament,
         Abiy admitted that the government used torture and  other  unlawful
         techniques on suspects, acknowledging that such techniques amounted
         to terrorism by the state

         Earlier this year,  Ethiopia  closed  Makaelawi  detention  center,
         known for torture and mistreatment of  political  prisoners.  After
         media reported significant complaints of abuse  from  prisoners  in
         other federal detention centers,  the  federal  Attorney  General's
         Office dismissed administrators of five facilities in July ...

         In July, the federal attorney general told media that  there  would
         be  investigations  into  torture  and  mistreatment  in  detention
         facilities.  In  November,  a  number  of   high-ranking   security
         officials were arrested due to their alleged involvement  in  human
         rights abuses in detention, according to the attorney general."

     21. The Amnesty International report covers events of 2017/2018 and  so
         is of limited use, being older than the  other  reports.  It  does,
         however, confirm the lifting of the  state  of  emergency  and  the
         release of tens of thousands of prisoners.

     22. It may  be  seen  therefore  from  the  above  summary  of  country
         information that the judge's summary of paragraph  19  was  a  fair
         rendition based on the evidence before him and  not  restricted  to
         that adduced by the respondent. Indeed, at paragraph 20, the  judge
         confirms that he had read all the material submitted even if it had
         not been recorded in the determination.

     23. I accept that the judge was, however, mistaken to say there were no
         political prisoners when he most probably meant to say  there  were
         no high profile political  prisoners,  I  cannot  agree  that  this
         omission could have impacted on his decision making  when  all  the
         evidence on the changes in Ethiopia are taken into account. I  note
         also that at paragraph 35 he refers to the release of prisoners and
         not to the release of all prisoners.

     24.  That  leaves  the  complaint  about  the  departure  from  country
         guidance. As the grounds  and  appellant's  submissions  themselves
         acknowledge,  the  country  guidance  is  desperately  in  need  of
         updating. It is some 13  years  old.  There  have  been  monumental
         changes in Ethiopia since then, particularly since  Prime  Minister
         Abiy took control on 2 April 2018. Most significantly,  PG7  is  no
         longer  classed  as  a  terrorist  organisation,  it  has,  indeed,
         disbanded and ceased  to  exist  and  its  leaders  have  committed
         themselves to a peaceful dialogue with  the  government.  Not  only
         have its officials returned to Ethiopia from Somalia, but political
         activists generally have been returning in large numbers to greater
         freedom and openness. Detention  centres  have  been  closed  down,
         investigations have been launched into allegations of ill treatment
         and  the  government  has  apologised  for  the  actions   of   its
         predecessors. Although the appellant also argues that the judge was
         wrong to find that these changes were durable, no  good  reason  is
         given for why  it  is  contended  that  they  are  not.  The  judge
         specifically addressed his mind to  this  issue  at  paragraph  35.
         whilst I accept that the CPIN  report  was  published  just  months
         prior to the hearing, it reported on events that  had  taken  place
         well before that and as can be seen from the summary of the country
         information above, the political scene in Ethiopia changed as  soon
         as PM Abiy took power. The judge was not therefore  simply  relying
         on evidence that was four months old.

     25. The judge's reasoning  is  clear  and  cogent.  He  was  adequately
         explained why he departed from country guidance and  why  he  found
         that the appellant would not be at risk on return  at  the  present
         time.  Indeed, it would have been  impossible  for  any  First-tier
         Tribunal  Judge  to  have  found  that  the  appellant  could  have
         succeeded in the context of the current evidence.

    Decision

     26. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain  an  error
         of law and it is upheld. The appeal is dismissed.

    Anonymity

     27. The First-tier Tribunal judge did not make an anonymity  order  and
         it does not appear that any  such  order  was  sought.  Whilst  the
         starting point  for  consideration  of  anonymity  orders  in  this
         Chamber of the Upper Tribunal is open justice, I  am  mindful  that
         paragraph 13 of the Guidance Note on anonymity confirms that it  is
         the present practice of  both  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  this
         Tribunal that an anonymity order is made  in  all  appeals  raising
         asylum or other international protection claims. Pursuant  to  Rule
         14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008  I
         therefore make an anonymity order.

     28. Unless the Upper Tribunal or a court directs otherwise, no  reports
         of these proceedings of  any  form  of  publication  thereof  shall
         directly or  indirectly  identify  the  appellant.  This  direction
         applies to, amongst others, the appellant and the  respondent.  Any
         failure to comply with this direction could give rise  to  contempt
         of court proceedings. I do so in order to  avoid  a  likelihood  of
         serious harm arising to the  appellant  from  the  content  of  the
         protection claim.




    Signed


           R. Keki?


           Upper Tribunal Judge


           Date: 2 July 2020


