
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: pa/11272/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Decision Promulgated       |
|On 20 April 2018                                |On 23 April 2018           |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

                                ej (albania)
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr James Collins, Counsel instructed by Sentinel
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L.Tarlow, Specialist Appeals Team


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals to the Upper Tribunal ("UT") from the decision of
    the  First-tier  Tribunal  ("FtT")  promulgated  on  23  November  2017
    dismissing her appeal against the decision of the respondent  dated  23
    October 2017 to refuse her protection  and  human  rights  claims.  Her
    appeal was dismissed without a hearing for want of jurisdiction.



The Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 2. Designated Judge Shaerf dismissed the appeal for want  of  jurisdiction
    because at paragraph 125 of Annex A to the decision the respondent  had
    certified that the claims were clearly unfounded pursuant to section 94
    of the 2002 Act, and therefore she could not appeal their refusal  from
    within the UK. However, as Judge Shaerf noted, she  was  purporting  to
    exercise a right of appeal from within the UK.

The Grant of Permission to Appeal

 3. Resident Judge Martin granted the appellant permission to appeal on the
    ground that, as had subsequently been clarified by  the  respondent  in
    response to a PAP letter, "it was the respondent's intention  that  the
    refusal of that claim  should  give  rise  to  a  suspensive  right  of
    appeal", and so it was at least arguable that  there  was  jurisdiction
    for the Tribunal to consider the appeal.

Discussion

 4. At the hearing before me to determine whether an error of law was  made
    out, Mr Tarlow conceded at the outset that the FtT had jurisdiction  to
    hear the appellant's appeal.

 5. Mr Collins showed me a copy of the respondent's  response  to  the  PAP
    letter. In this letter, the respondent drew attention to the fact  that
    at page 2 of the decision letter the appellant was  expressly  afforded
    an in-right right of  appeal.  The  respondent  acknowledged  that  the
    contents of paragraph 125 were contradictory,  but  she  asserted:  (a)
    "the claimed contradiction" was  not  material  as  the  appellant  had
    exercised her right of appeal; and (b) the certification  at  paragraph
    125 did not nullify the in-country  right  of  appeal  which  had  been
    afforded to her to appeal the decision of 23 October 2017.

 6. The appellant  had  made  an  earlier  asylum  claim,  which  had  been
    certified. When refusing  her  renewed  asylum  claim,  the  respondent
    expressly stated that her submissions amounted to a  fresh  claim.  The
    respondent intended to afford the  appellant  an  in-country  right  of
    appeal in respect of her fresh claim, and she expressly did so at  page
    2 of the decision letter.

 7. Paragraph 125  is  directly  contradictory,  as  it  asserts  that  the
    appellant cannot appeal  from  within  the  UK.  I  am  satisfied  that
    paragraph 125  was  inserted  in  error.  The  error  led  to  material
    unfairness as the FtT was thereby induced to proceed  upon  a  mistaken
    premise, to the appellant's manifest disadvantage.

 8. The upshot is that the FtT was wrong to dismiss the appeal for want  of
    jurisdiction, and the parties are in agreement that the decision of the
    FtT should be set aside and the appeal remitted to the FtT.





Notice of Decision

 9. The decision of the FtT dismissing the appeal for want of  jurisdiction
    was erroneous in law, and it is set aside. The FtT has jurisdiction  to
    hear the appellant's appeal.

Directions

10. This appeal is remitted to the FtT at Taylor House.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson           21 April 2018


