
                                    [pic]
IAC-BH-PMP-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11225/2019 (v)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford by Skype for       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Business                             |                                     |
|On the 4 November 2020               |On 12 November 2020                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

                                     NK
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     AND

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Howard, Solicitor instructed on behalf of the
appellant
For the Respondent:    Ms. R. Pettersen, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction:

      1. The appellant, a citizen of  Afghanistan  appeals  with  permission
         against the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Lodge)
         (hereinafter referred to as the "FtTJ") who dismissed his appeal in
         a decision promulgated on the 3 February 2020.

      2. I make a  direction  regarding  anonymity  under  Rule  14  of  the
         Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal  Rules)  Rules  2008  as  the
         proceedings relate to the  circumstances  of  a  protection  claim.
         Unless  and  until  a  Tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise  the
         appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
         shall directly or indirectly identify him. This  direction  applies
         both to the appellant and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
         with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

      3. The hearing took place on 4 November 2020, by means  of  Skype  for
         Business. which has been consented to and not objected  to  by  the
         parties. A face to face hearing was not held  because  it  was  not
         practicable and both  parties  agreed  that  all  issues  could  be
         determined in a remote hearing.  I conducted the hearing from court
         at  Bradford  IAC.  The  advocates  attended  remotely  via  video.
         Although there  was  an  intermittent  issue  regarding  sound,  no
         substantial technical problems were encountered during the  hearing
         and  I  am  satisfied  both  advocates  were  able  to  make  their
         respective cases by the chosen means. I am grateful  to  Mr  Howard
         and Ms Pettersen for their clear oral and written submissions.

Background:

      4. The appellant's immigration history is summarised in  the  decision
         of the FtTJ and in the decision letter.

      5. The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on 4 August 2016 as  an
         unaccompanied minor. He applied for asylum on 25  August  2016  and
         the claim was refused  on  19  February  2017,  but  he  was  given
         discretionary leave expiring on 18 August 2019.

      6. The basis of his claim was that he feared the Taleban would harm in
         on return to Afghanistan for failing to accede to their request  to
         recruit him.

      7. He claimed that the Taleban had a regular presence in  his  village
         and further claimed that the Taleban instructed his father to allow
         them to take them away, in order that he be trained  as  a  suicide
         bomber. The appellant claimed his father was killed by the  Taliban
         for failing to hand him over. Following his father's  killing,  the
         appellant's mother reported the incident to the police; other  than
         attending the village and are fighting seeming between  the  police
         and  the  Taliban,  nothing  further  was  done.   Thereafter   the
         appellant's mother, with the help of his uncle,  made  arrangements
         for the appellant to leave the country.

      8. The appellant claimed that the  Taleban  forcefully  recruit  young
         children.

      9. The decision letter at paragraphs 26 - 37 rejected the  appellant's
         account that the Taleban sought to recruit him making reference  to
         his factual claim and the background evidence. The respondent  also
         rejected  his  claim  that  the  Taleban  had  killed  his   father
         (paragraph 38 - 42 and dealt with the claim that  he  lost  contact
         with his family in Afghanistan at paragraphs 43 - 46.

The decision of FtTJ Young-Harry:

     10. The appellant appealed against this decision and it  was  dismissed
         by the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Young-Harry)  in  a  decision
         promulgated on the 10 April 2017.

     11. In that decision FtTJ made the following findings:

          1) The FtTJ considered the objective material at paragraphs 15  -
             16 but reached the conclusion that although force was used  in
             exceptional circumstances, in general the Taleban do not force
             recruits to join. The  judge  found  that  the  appellant  had
             failed to satisfy him that his situation  was  so  exceptional
             the Taleban would use force in his case. The judge found  that
             the reference in the country evidence to family members  being
             killed or punished, clearly related to  the  Taleban's  failed
             attempts at coercion and the consequences faced by parents who
             failed to hand over their children. The  judge  did  not  find
             that it referred to forced recruitment.

          2) The judge found that even if he accepted  that  the  appellant
             situation was exceptional and the Taleban chose to  use  force
             to recruit him, which the judge did not,  the  inconsistencies
             in the rest of the appellant's evidence led the judge to doubt
             his claim that he was being forced to join or that his  father
             was killed.

          3) The judge made  reference  to  the  objective  evidence  which
             speaks of young recruits being indoctrinated from the  age  of
             six.  The  judge  found  that  to  be  inconsistent  with  the
             appellant's claim and that  his  knowledge  of  the  Taleban's
             recruiting methods was entirely inconsistent with the  country
             evidence.

          4) As to the death of his father, the  appellant  was  unable  to
             give the date of his father's death and was not even  able  to
             provide an  approximate  date.  Even  taking  account  of  the
             appellant's  young  age  the  judge  found  that  it  was  not
             unreasonable  to  have  expected  him  to  have  provided   an
             approximate date or time frame given the significance  of  the
             event.

          5) The judge noted at question 68 of  the  substantive  interview
             the appellant claimed that he was in the village at  the  time
             of his father's death, however  in  his  most  recent  witness
             statement the appellant claimed that it is not in fact present
             when his father died.  The  judge  found  that  the  appellant
             sought to slightly alter his evidence to in order  to  explain
             why, if the Taliban had previously wanted to take it by force,
             they did not do so when they came to the village to  kill  his
             father.

          6) When asked in an interview why he was not taken by the Taleban
             when they came to kill his father,  the  appellant  failed  to
             answer the question or provide an explanation. The judge found
             that the recent changes evidence that was contained in his new
             statement was simply an attempt to explain the discrepancy.

          7) Further inconsistency related to the length of time  spent  in
             France before coming to the UK (see paragraph 23).

          8) The judge rejected the appellant's claim that his  father  was
             killed by the Taliban for failing to hand him over (see 24).

          9) The judge also did not accept that the appellant's  claim  was
             consistent with the usual methods employed by the Taleban when
             recruiting young people, when considering the country evidence
             (at [24)).

         10) The judge found  the  appellant's  account  to  be  vague  and
             lacking in  detail  in  the  various  inconsistencies  in  his
             evidence that the judge to conclude  that  the  appellant  had
             failed to discharge the burden upon him.

         11) As to the claim  that  he  had  lost  contact  his  family  in
             Afghanistan the judge rejected  that  claim  also.  The  judge
             found that the appellant had failed to  provide  any  credible
             evidence of efforts to contact his family and the inability to
             meet and care for him on return. The judge  found  that  there
             was nothing to suggest that his mother and  siblings  did  not
             remain in the family home similarly the judge  found  that  it
             was  likely  that  his  uncle  remained  in  Kabul  where  the
             appellant left him a few months ago and that he would be  able
             to meet the appellant on his return to Kabul (at [25]).

     12. The appellant applied for permission to appeal  the  decision,  but
         permission was refused on 10 April 2017 it  is  recorded  that  the
         appellant became "appeal rights exhausted" on 25 April 2017.

     13. Further submissions were submitted on 17 October  2018  which  were
         refused in a decision letter of 25 October 2019.

     14. The further submissions claimed that the appellant  maintained  his
         initial asylum claim that he would fear the Taleban and  that  they
         would forcibly recruit or harm him on return to Afghanistan. It was
         further submitted that he was a  member  of  a  PSG  "unaccompanied
         minor" as he had no family to  return  to  in  Afghanistan  it  was
         further claimed that you be at risk as he  would  be  perceived  by
         anti-government  forces  as  being   an   individual   who'd   been
         westernised. It was said that he would be at risk of forced  labour
         by the Taleban and also raised article 15  (c)  the  basis  of  the
         level of violence in Afghanistan placed  at  risk  if  he  were  to
         return there.

The decision letter of 25 October 2019:

     15. The decision letter set out the previous findings of  the  FtTJ  in
         2017 at paragraphs 12 - 22, and that in light of those findings  of
         fact claim to be at risk of forced labour and  recruitment  to  the
         Taleban in addition to his claim of being  an  unaccompanied  minor
         upon return was rejected.

     16. As to the claim that he would be at risk on  return  as  individual
         who had been westernised, the decision letter made reference to the
         objective material and that there had been  anecdotal  accounts  of
         experiences of returnees, some of which reportedly included violent
         incidents that there was  no  evidence  that  the  alleged  violent
         incidents were as a consequence of being westernised and that there
         was no  general  indication  that  incidents  of  violence  against
         returnees were due to any  apparent  "westernised"  demeanour  (see
         targeted incidents against returnees).  In  contrast,  the  reports
         indicating that many returnees in the West are  welcome  back  into
         their families and society, particularly if they are seen as having
         made a success of themselves. Further reference  was  made  to  the
         objective material at  paragraphs  27  -  30.  On  that  basis  the
         respondent considered that  the  appellant  had  not  provided  any
         substantive evidence state that he would be targeted over and above
         any other Afghan civilian  with  his  profile  if  he  were  to  be
         returned to  Afghanistan.  His  family  in  Afghanistan  have  been
         supportive of him and therefore is not accepted that  he  would  be
         seen to have failed all that there would be any negativity  towards
         him for  economic  reasons.  Furthermore,  the  objective  material
         showed that there was little evidence of any risk from returnees on
         account of having a "westernised" demeanour or otherwise.

     17. As to the claim under Article 15 (c), the respondent addressed this
         at paragraphs 32 - 53 and by reference to the findings of  fact  of
         the FtTJ, and in the light of the country guidance case AS  (safety
         of Kabul) Afghanistan CG [2018] UKUT 118 and the issue of  internal
         relocation. In the light of the factors  set  out,  the  respondent
         considered that internal relocation to  Kabul  would  be  a  viable
         option for the reasons set out at paragraph 51 - 53. It was set out
         in summary at [53] that he had provided no evidence to show that he
         would be at individual  risk  in  the  Taleban.  Even  if  it  were
         accepted that he would be at risk in his claim  home  province,  it
         was considered that sufficiency of protection will be available  to
         him in Kabul city and he could return their  utilising  the  skills
         and resourcefulness and with his family support.

     18. The appellant appealed that decision to the FtT.

The decision of FtTJ Lodge:

     19. The basis of the case advanced  before  the  FtTJ  is  set  out  at
         paragraph 25 that he would be at risk upon return to Afghanistan on
         the basis that he will be returning as an unaccompanied child. That
         he will be the object of forced recruitment by the Taleban and that
         he would be at risk on account of his membership  of  a  particular
         social group, namely "children in Afghanistan" and that he would be
         at risk because he would be perceived to be  a  westernised  Afghan
         there was also an article 15 (c ) risk.

     20. The FtTJ set out the evidence given by the appellant at [9] - [24].
         As can be seen from the decision, much of his evidence  related  to
         the issue of contact with his family relatives in Afghanistan.  The
         FtT also heard evidence from  his  "foster  father"  and  again  at
         paragraphs 21 - 23 much of his evidence related to contact with the
         appellant's family.

     21. The FtTJ set out his analysis and factual findings from  paragraphs
         [25 -49].

     22. When making an assessment of the evidence,  the  FtTJ  recorded  at
         [26] that throughout he had borne in mind the appellant's age which
         was 17 at the date of the hearing.

     23. At paragraphs [27 - 40] the FtTJ set out his analysis of the  issue
         of whether the appellant would be returning to  Afghanistan  as  an
         unaccompanied child. The judge began with the earlier findings made
         by FtTJ Young-Harry who found that  the  appellant  had  family  in
         Afghanistan who he was in contact with, his  mother,  siblings  and
         uncle in Kabul and whilst there was mention of his father  who  the
         judge did not accepted been killed  in  the  circumstances  of  the
         appellant claimed, he was not mentioned as someone who could assist
         the appellant on his return ( at [27]). The FtTJ  referred  to  the
         finding made by the earlier  judge that the appellant had failed to
         provide credible evidence and made efforts to contact his family in
         Afghanistan and that the judge  was  satisfied  that  even  if  the
         appellant had now demonstrated it made efforts to trace his  family
         through the Red Cross, it would not negate  the  earlier  findings.
         However, at [ 31] the judge found that the appellant had  not  made
         any significant efforts to trace his family. The  judge  considered
         the documentary evidence of the Red Cross at paragraphs 32 - 36 and
         at [37] he was satisfied on the evidence that the appellant had not
         made any serious attempt to contact his family in Afghanistan.  The
         judge therefore concluded at [39] that he was  satisfied  that  the
         appellant had  produced  nothing  new  which  would  allow  him  to
         overturn the findings of the previous judge that the appellant  had
         lost contact with his family. Thus the judge found that he was  not
         satisfied that the appellant was an unaccompanied child and that as
         the earlier judge had  found  on  return  to  Kabul,  he  would  be
         received by his uncle and/or his mother who could then continue  to
         care for him ( at [40]).

     24. As to the question of whether on return the appellant was likely to
         be forcibly recruited to the Taleban, the FtTJ began by considering
         the decision made by FtTJ Young- Harry at paragraph [18], and  that
         "I find, even  if  I  am  willing  to  accept  that  the  appellant
         situation was exceptional and the Taleban chose  to  use  force  to
         recruiting, which I do not, the inconsistencies and the rest of the
         appellant's evidence led me to doubt his claim that  he  was  being
         forced to join or that his father was killed."

     25. At [42] the judge made reference to the appellant's submission that
         the  use  of  the  word  "exceptional"  and  that  the   background
         information now demonstrated that it would not be  exceptional  but
         commonplace for young Afghans  to  be  forcibly  recruited  to  the
         Taleban.

     26. At [43] the FtTJ's finding is as follows:

             "I am not prepared to accept that argument. The tenor of judge
             Young-Harry's   determination    is    that    the    multiple
             inconsistencies in the appellant's account of  such  that  his
             account of fearing recruitment (and the death  of  his  father
             for not allowing it) is such that his account  is  not  to  be
             believed. No new evidence has  been  advanced  to  demonstrate
             that forcible recruitment is a real risk for  this  particular
             appellant."

     27. At [44] the FtTJ addressed the issue as to  whether  the  appellant
         would be at risk because he was a member of a PSG namely  "children
         Afghanistan". The judge stated  "there  is  no  precedent  for  any
         general  proposition  that  all  children  in  Afghanistan  form  a
         particular social group irrespective  of  their  particular  family
         circumstances. The reality is that Miss Sepulveda  is  advancing  a
         15(c) case are nothing more than  that.  The  problem  however  the
         appellant is that following AK, there is no 15 (c) risk in Kabul".

     28. At [45] the FtTJ addressed the decision of Elgafaji, where  it  was
         emphasised that the summer to qualify for protection on  the  basis
         of indiscriminate  violence  without  needing  to  show  that  they
         individually would be at risk, the level of violence would need  to
         be so high that anyone returning to Afghanistan would  be  at  risk
         "only on account of his presence in the territory of  that  country
         or region". That is probably not the case at present in Kabul.

     29. At [46] the FtTJ set out that the appellant has a family to  return
         to; he has an uncle in Kabul, and he had his mother and siblings in
         Laghman province. The FtTJ stated "I am obliged to note that on the
         appellant's own evidence there is no Article 15 (c) risk in Laghman
         province (see page 62 of appellant's bundle).  But  even  if  there
         were, the appellant will be returned to Kabul where  he  will  have
         the support of his uncle".

     30. At [47] the judge addressed  the  issue  of  whether  he  would  be
         perceived to be "westernised" and at risk on account of  that.  The
         judge accepted that some Afghans returning from some Western states
         may face discrimination and  social  stigma.  However,  this  would
         appear for the most part be due to their being  perceived  to  have
         failed by  being  returned  rather  than  being  westernised.  Such
         treatment is unlikely by its nature  or  repetition  to  amount  to
         persecution or serious harm. There is no official country  guidance
         which indicate that being westernised, if indeed the appellant  has
         demonstrated that he is westernised, would lead to risk of violence
         or persecution in Kabul.

     31. As to the appellant's own  particular  characteristics,  the  judge
         took into account that he had no health concerns and that whilst he
         had had some (minor) mental health  input  in  2018  there  was  no
         evidence of any mental health problems at the present time.

     32. Thus the  judge  concluded  that  the  fresh  submissions  had  not
         provided him with any evidence that required the judge  to  revisit
         the findings of the previous judge and that it  was  not  satisfied
         that the appellant had not established the low standard that he was
         at risk on return to Afghanistan.

     33. The judge recorded that counsel for  the  appellant  had  indicated
         that Article 8 was not an issue (at [50]).

     34. The FtTJ therefore dismissed his appeal. Permission to  appeal  was
         issued on a number of grounds and permission was refused and  on  6
         May 2020 permission was granted by UTJ Norton-Taylor.

The grant of permission:

     35. The grant of permission was a limited grant and I set out below the
         ambit of the grant of permission:

             "The grounds of appeal can be categorised as follows (although
             ground 1 is, to an extent, interlinked with ground 2);  first,
             it is said that the judge erred in finding that the  appellant
             would not return as an unaccompanied/unattached minor; second,
             the  judge  failed  to  have  regard   to   relevant   country
             information   relating   to   civilians   (and   children   in
             particular); third, it is said that the judge failed  to  have
             regard to relevant materials relating  to  the  assessment  of
             evidence and the best interests of children.

             The first ground is unarguable.  The judge had regard  to  all
             relevant evidence relating to the assertion that the appellant
             would  return  without  any  family  support.   This  evidence
             included not simply the appellant's word (see below), but  the
             evidence  from  the  foster  parent,  the  Red   Cross,   and,
             importantly, the previous decision of the First-tier  Tribunal
             from 2017 in which relevant findings of fact  had  been  made.
             The judge clearly did this evidence in the round.  The essence
             of his finding was not focused on the particular  strength  of
             the relationship between the appellant and his uncle,  but  on
             the  (undisputed)  fact  that  the  appellant  had  not   even
             mentioned the uncle when interacting with the Red Cross.

             In respect of paragraph 3.1 of the grounds, it is correct that
             the  judge  has  not  specifically  referred  to   the   Joint
             Presidential Guidance Note No. 2 of  2010.   However,  he  did
             specifically state at paragraph 26 that he was bearing in mind
             the appellant's age when assessing the evidence.  The  grounds
             have not put forward any particulars as to how/why the judge's
             assessment of the evidence in light of the appellant's age was
             even arguably flawed.

             In light of the above,  I  refuse  permission  in  respect  of
             ground 1.  For the avoidance of any doubt,  it  is  unarguable
             that the judge erred in law when finding  that  the  appellant
             would not return to Afghanistan as an unaccompanied/unattached
             minor.

             Having said that, it is arguable that the judge has failed  to
             take account of and/or provide adequate reasons in respect  of
             country  information  before  him  and  referred  to  in   the
             appellant's skeleton argument (as asserted in paragraphs  1.9-
             2.3 of the grounds, and subject to what I said about ground 1,
             above).  It is also arguable that  the  judge  has  failed  to
             undertake an assessment of the appellant's best interests  and
             factor this into his  overall  conclusions  on  the  issue  of
             return.  I therefore grant permission on this limited basis.

             Whether any errors found to exist are material is of course  a
             matter which the appellant must be in a position to address in
             due course".

The hearing before the Upper Tribunal:

     36. In the light of the COVID-19 pandemic  the  Upper  Tribunal  issued
         directions, inter alia, indicating that it was provisionally of the
         view that the error of law issue could be determined without a face
         to face hearing and that this could  take  place  via  Skype.  Both
         parties have indicated that they were content for  the  hearing  to
         proceed by this method. Therefore, the Tribunal listed the  hearing
         to enable oral submissions to be given by each of the parties.

     37. Mr Howard on behalf of the appellant, who appeared before the  FtTJ
         relied upon the written grounds of appeal,  the  previous  skeleton
         argument field before the FtTJ and  written  submissions  sent  and
         dated 2 July 2020.

     38. No Rule 24 response was filed on behalf of the respondent.

     39. I also heard oral submission from the advocates, and I am  grateful
         for their assistance and their clear oral submissions.

The submissions on behalf of the appellant:

     40. Dealing with ground 1, the written submissions  made  reference  to
         the findings of fact made by the FtTJ  that  he  would  not  be  an
         unaccompanied minor upon return to Afghanistan (see paragraphs  1.1
         - 1.8 of the written submissions). However as Mr  Howard  accepted,
         UTJ Norton-Taylor had expressly  not  granted  permission  on  that
         ground stating  that  "for  the  avoidance  of  any  doubt,  it  is
         unarguable that the judge  erred  in  law  when  finding  that  the
         appellant   would    not    return    to    Afghanistan    as    an
         unaccompanied/unattached  minor."  There  had   been   no   further
         submissions or application to challenge the grant of permission and
         therefore it is not necessary to consider that part of ground one.

     41. As to the remainder of ground one, the written submissions and  the
         oral submissions of Mr Howard submit  that  the  FtTJ's  assessment
         that there was no new evidence to support the  appellant's  account
         of the risk of forced  recruitment  to  him  by  the  Taliban  upon
         return, failed to take into account background material which post-
         dated the previous FtTJ's decision.

     42. Mr Howard submitted that this was set out at paragraphs 43 - 46  of
         the appellant's skeleton argument which demonstrated that  forcible
         recruitment by the Taleban was a real risk for the  appellant  upon
         return. Thus,  it  is  submitted  that  the  judge  had  failed  to
         acknowledge  and  consider  the  new   background   material   when
         considering that issue.

     43. Mr Howard directed the Tribunal to that material as set out in  the
         skeleton argument where it was argued that "the background material
         strongly supports the  children  in  Afghanistan  are  specifically
         targeted by AGE for recruitment, child labour  and  forced  labour,
         and therefore being a child in Afghanistan is a lone single  factor
         that places the child at risk of such persecution."

     44. The first reference is UNHCR eligibility guidelines  for  assessing
         the  international  protection  needs  of   asylum   seekers   from
         Afghanistan dated 30 August 2018 at pages 149 - 152.

     45. The second reference is to the  EASO  report  Afghanistan  security
         situation dated June 2019 at pages 103 - 108.

     46. The third reference is to children in armed conflict in Afghanistan
         United Nations Security Council dated September 2019 pages 22 - 28.

     47. The fourth reference is to the  EASO  report  Afghanistan  security
         situation paragraph 1.4.5 relating to children.

     48. The grounds refer to the background material  supporting  that  the
         nature of roles of children recruited by such groups  would  amount
         to persecution and include, but are not limited  to,  carrying  out
         suicide attacks, planting improvised explosive devices,  acting  as
         spies and being active in combat.

     49. The material referred to in support of that is  the  same  material
         set out above.

     50. The skeleton argument also  stated  that  the  background  material
         supported the children were specifically targeted  for  recruitment
         by such groups, on account of their age and  their  vulnerabilities
         attributed  by  their  rage.  Such  recruitment  methods  including
         recruitment through deceitful means,  using  brainwashing  ideology
         methods, and/or through forceful  means.  The  background  material
         identified there is the same as above namely the EAS oh  report  at
         pages 103 - 108 paragraphs 5.1 - 5.21.4.

     51. Finally, it is  submitted  that  the  background  material  further
         supported that a child residing in a family unit in Afghanistan did
         not  eliminate  the  risk  of  persecution  on  account   of   such
         recruitment. The background material in support of that  submission
         was again said to be the EASO report at pages 103 - 108  paragraphs
         5.1 - 5.2.1.4 and, the UNHCR eligibility  guidelines  dated  August
         2018 at page 149 - 150 (paragraph 3).

     52. The same references were said to support the risk of persecution by
         state actors for example state security  forces  for  child  labour
         possibly recruitment through pressure means. Again, it is submitted
         that the background material supports the submission that  a  child
         residing in a family unit in Afghanistan did not eliminate the risk
         of persecution on account of such recruitment.

     53. Mr Howard submitted that the judge failed to  have  regard  to  the
         objective material.

     54. As to the second part of ground one, it was submitted that the FtTJ
         at paragraphs [45 - 46] gave inadequate reasons  for  finding  that
         the situation in Afghanistan is such  that  the  appellant  is  not
         entitled  to  humanitarian  protection.  In  particular,  the  FtTJ
         referred to the proposed areas  of  return,  Laghman  Province  and
         Kabul.

     55. In this context Mr Howard submits that the judge failed to consider
         the appellant's claim to humanitarian protection on the basis  that
         the appellant is a vulnerable person due to his young  age  is  not
         required to demonstrate as high a degree of indiscriminate violence
         as would be otherwise for a  grant  of  subsidiary  protection.  He
         submitted that the appellant would be at  an  enhanced  risk  as  a
         child and as he had lived in the UK for four years.

     56. Mr Howard submits that the judge failed to consider the  background
         material in assessing the risk of indiscriminate  violence  to  the
         appellant in Laghman province.

     57. That material was referred to as the EASO report pages 62 - 63,  48
         - 52, and the UNHCR eligibility guidelines report dated  30  August
         2018 at pages 209 - 2011 at section 4 entitled "internal flight  or
         relocation alternative in Kabul."

     58. The submissions made on behalf of the  appellant  assert  that  the
         UNHCR report considered internal flight and relocation in Kabul and
         found that "civilians who partake in day-to-day economic and social
         activities in Kabul are exposed to a real risk of falling victim to
         the generalised violence affects the city. Such activities  include
         travelling to and from a place of work, travelling to hospitals and
         clinics, or travelling to school: livelihood activities  that  take
         place in the city's streets, such as street vending: it  was  going
         to markets, mosques and other places where people gather."

     59. The submission of the appellant is that the  UNHCR  concluded  that
         "given  the  current  security,  human  rights   and   humanitarian
         situation in Kabul, an IFA/IRA is generally not  available  in  the
         city."

     60. The written submissions relied upon by Mr  Howard  then  go  on  to
         partially cite the decision of the tribunal in AS (safety of Kabul)
         Afghanistan CG [2018] UKUT 00118 at  paragraph  189  where  it  was
         found that "significant weight can and should be attached  to  such
         evidence  from  the  UNHCR  as  the  guidelines  on   international
         protection  and  the  eligibility  guidelines  for  assessing   the
         international protection needs of asylum seekers  from  Afghanistan
         (2016)."

     61. Mr Howard therefore submits the UNHCR  report  in  the  appellant's
         bundle post-dated AS (Afghanistan) ("AS1")  and  should  have  been
         given due weight and consideration in assessing relocation.

     62. As to the issue of risk on account of  "westernisation"  Mr  Howard
         referred to paragraph [47] of the FtTJ's decision and that was  the
         judge accepted that they faced discrimination paragraph 34  of  the
         skeleton argument provided background material that individuals who
         are perceived by AGE to be westernised are at risk  of  persecution
         in Afghanistan. The reference to the background  material  was  the
         UNHCR eligibility guidelines dated 30 August 2018  at  page  143  -
         144.

     63. Mr Howard referred to the grant of permission and  that  the  judge
         had stated that it was for the representatives to demonstrate  that
         any errors were material. In this respect he made reference  to  AS
         ("AS2") and that in the headnote at (iv) the revised  circumstances
         took into account the age of the returnee.

     64. Mr Howard further argued that at [44] the FtTJ fell into  error  by
         finding that the appellant was not at risk of  persecution  due  to
         his  membership  of  a  particular  social   group   "children   in
         Afghanistan".

     65. He submitted that that was an irrational finding and that the judge
         had failed to engage with the appellant's arguments and had  failed
         to acknowledge and consider any of the reliable sources  referenced
         at paragraphs 40 - 60 of the skeleton argument.

The submissions made on behalf of the respondent:

     66. Ms Pettersen on behalf of the  respondent  submitted  that  in  the
         light of the FtTJ's finding that he would  have  support  in  Kabul
         with his uncle and that he would be put in touch  with  his  mother
         and siblings, the characterisation of his young age is mitigated by
         those facts. She submitted that Mr Howard was unable  to  point  to
         any risk factor that he would be at risk of individualised violence
         and therefore  the  threshold  was  not  passed  in  his  case.  Ms
         Pettersen submitted that in light of AS1 and now AS2, the appellant
         would not be at risk of indiscriminate violence in Kabul nor had it
         been demonstrated that it will be unduly harsh for him to  relocate
         there on the factual findings made by the FtTJ.

     67. Ms Pettersen submitted that the FtTJ did address the issue of  risk
         due to "westernisation" at  [47]  and  that  some  returnees  faced
         discrimination, there was no CG decision  which  supported  such  a
         risk. Thus, the judge gave adequate reasons for that finding.

     68. Ms Pettersen on behalf of the respondent submitted  that  FtTJ  did
         not fall into any material error. As to the risk from  the  Taleban
         or forced recruitment, the  FtTJ  made  a  firm  finding  that  the
         appellant did have an uncle to return to in Kabul.  Therefore,  any
         failure to consider the objective material falls away  because  the
         appellant would be returning to Kabul with family support who would
         be able to provide protection. The appellant would be returning  to
         Kabul as a young adult (after exceptional leave to  remain  ceases)
         and risks in terms of forced recruitment did not  occur  in  Kabul.
         The references to the material in the  skeleton  argument  did  not
         assist the appellant as the appellant has someone he can return  to
         in Kabul.

     69. At the conclusion of the hearing I reserved my decision which I now
         give.



Decision on error of law:

     70. The Upper Tribunal when granting  permission  made  to  plain  that
         whether any errors are found to exist are material, is matter which
         the appellant must address. In the course of my assessment the  two
         country guidance cases of  AS  (Safety  of  Kabul)  Afghanistan  CG
         [2018] UKUT 118 (IAC) I shall refer to as "AS1")  and AS (Safety of
         Kabul) Afghanistan CG [2020] UKUT 130 (IAC)  as ("AS2").

     71. Mr Howard argued that at [44] the FtTJ fell into error  by  finding
         that the appellant was not  at  risk  of  persecution  due  to  his
         membership of a particular social group "children in Afghanistan".

     72. He submitted that that was an irrational finding and that the judge
         had failed to engage with the appellant's arguments and had  failed
         to acknowledge and consider any of the reliable sources  referenced
         at paragraphs 40 - 60 of the skeleton argument.

     73.  When  cross-referencing  the  submission  made  to  the   skeleton
         argument, that can be found at paragraph 40,  it  states  "risk  on
         return as a "child" in  Afghanistan.  "It  is  submitted  that  the
         appellant is at risk of persecution upon return to  Afghanistan  on
         account of his membership to the particular social group  "children
         in Afghanistan."

     74. No further elucidation is given as  to  that  argument  within  the
         skeleton  argument  other  than  in  the  context  of   the   other
         submissions relating to forced recruitment and forced labour  which
         is set out as above.

     75. The submission also has to be seen in  the  light  of  the  factual
         findings of  the  FtTJ  that  he  would  not  be  returning  as  an
         unaccompanied child.

     76. In the decision of LQ (Age; immutable  characteristic)  Afghanistan
         [2008]  UKIAT  the  Tribunal  found  that  age  was  an   immutable
         characteristic for the purpose of considering whether a  particular
         social group is shown when considering the Refugee Convention.   In
         the circumstances of that particular case, the  Tribunal  found  as
         follows:

             "In the light of the expert evidence,  we  conclude  that  the
             risk of  severe  harm  to  the  appellant,  as  found  by  the
             Adjudicator, would be as a result of his membership of a group
             sharing an immutable characteristic and constituting, for  the
             purposes  of  the  Refugee  Convention,  a  particular  social
             group."

     77. However, this is not to be regarded as any form of country guidance
         nor precedent for any general  proposition  that  all  children  in
         Afghanistan form a particular social group  irrespective  of  their
         particular family circumstances. There is no error  in  the  FtTJ's
         assessment.

     78. As to the risk of forced recruitment, the FtTJ considered  this  at
         paragraphs [41]-[43]. Whilst it is submitted that the  FtTJ  failed
         to have regard to the objective material cited within the  skeleton
         argument. I have set out above the references made in the  skeleton
         argument. The grounds refer to the background  material  supporting
         that the nature of roles of children recruited by such groups would
         amount to persecution and include, but are not limited to, carrying
         out suicide attacks, planting improvised explosive devices,  acting
         as spies and being active in combat.

     79.  When  considering  that  material,  it  is  generalised  objective
         material that  makes  reference  to  the  recruitment  and  use  of
         children  by  all  parties  in  the  conflict  reported  throughout
         Afghanistan (page 149). There are  generalised  references  to  the
         type of recruitment throughout  those  reports.  The  UNHCR  report
         summarises at page 152 that the UNHCR considered that  it  depended
         on the specific circumstances of the case, men of fighting age  and
         children  community  members  into  the  ALP  may  be  in  need  of
         international refugee protection on the  basis  of  a  well-founded
         fear of persecution for membership of their PSG. It states  men  of
         fighting age and children who  resist  forced  recruitment  by  the
         state or nonstate actors may also be in the need  of  international
         refugee protection. Thus, the UNHCR make reference to the  specific
         circumstances of the individuals concerned.

     80. In the decision of HK and others (minors - indiscriminate  violence
         - forced recruitment by Taliban  -  contact  with  family  members)
         Afghanistan CG [2010] UKUT 378 (IAC)  the  headnote  stated:  While
         forcible recruitment by the Taliban cannot be discounted as a risk,
         particularly  in  areas  of  high  militant  activity  or  militant
         control, evidence is required to show that it is a  real  risk  for
         the particular child concerned and not a mere possibility.

     81. There was no new subjective evidence  advanced  on  behalf  of  the
         appellant to demonstrate that he was  at  risk  of  persecution  or
         serious harm based on his earlier account  relating  to  events  in
         Afghanistan. Therefore, the findings of fact made by  Judge  Young-
         Harry remained as the  basis  of  the  factual  assessment  of  the
         circumstances in relation to the appellant's home  area.  The  FtTJ
         was entitled to consider those factual findings that he  would  not
         be at risk of forced recruitment.

     82. On the evidence before the FtTJ, there was no  risk  identified  to
         the appellant that was specific to him and therefore it was open to
         the judge to  find  that  the  evidence  did  not  demonstrate  the
         forcible  recruitment  of  any  kind  was  a  real  risk  for  this
         particular appellant (at [43]).

     83. Whilst Mr Howard submitted that  the  background  material  further
         supported that a child residing in a family unit in Afghanistan did
         not  eliminate  the  risk  of  persecution  on  account   of   such
         recruitment. The background material in support of that  submission
         did not expressly state that a child living with  the  family  unit
         did not provide any  form  of  protection.  Again,  the  background
         material was generalised material relating to recruitment by  armed
         groups and methods of recruitment such as for economic reasons  and
         based on lack of opportunities (see page 106  and  by  the  use  of
         coercion which included means of pressure on the family) but it has
         not been demonstrated  that  there  was  any  real  risk  for  this
         particular appellant beyond " a mere possibility".

     84.  The  grounds  challenge  the  FtTJ's  assessment  of  whether  the
         appellant would be perceived to be "westernised" (see  decision  of
         the FtTJ at [47]). Whilst it is submitted that the judge failed  to
         consider the objective material, it was open to the judge  to  find
         that some Afghans returning  from  some  Western  states  may  face
         discrimination  social  stigma  as  this  reflected  the  objective
         material. It was further open the judge to find that there  was  no
         "country guidance"  which  indicated  that  being  westernised,  if
         indeed the appellant has  demonstrated  that  he  was  westernised,
         would lead to a risk  of  violence  or  persecution  in  Kabul.  As
         regards westernisation, AS (Safety of Kabul) Afghanistan CG  [2018]
         ("HS1") found no real risk of persecution because of westernisation
         and held at paragraph 187:

             "187. We do not find a person on  return  to  Kabul,  or  more
             widely  to  Afghanistan,  to  be  at  risk  on  the  basis  of
             'Westernisation'. There is simply a  lack  of  any  cogent  or
             consistent evidence of incidents of  such  harm  on  which  it
             could be concluded that there was a real risk to a person  who
             has spent time in the west being  targeted  for  that  reason,
             either because of appearance, perceived or actual attitudes of
             such a person. At most, there is some evidence of  a  possible
             adverse social impact or suspicion affecting social and family
             interactions, and evidence from a very small  number  of  fear
             based on 'Westernisation',  but  we  find  that  the  evidence
             before us falls far short of establishing an objective fear of
             persecution on this basis for  the  purposes  of  the  Refugee
             Convention."

     85. In respect of westernisation AS (Safety of  Kabul)  Afghanistan  CG
         [2020] ("HS2") identified the mere fact of being a returnee did not
         prevent  someone  from   securing   accommodation   or   work   but
         acknowledged the challenges for returnees and held:

             "246.  The  UNHCR,  in  the  2019  COI  UNHCR  Report,   cites
             extensively from  a  recent  German  study  which  found  that
             returnees to Kabul from Germany have faced violence, suspicion
             and hostility. This study (which we have not seen)  was  based
             on  only  55  individuals,  and  therefore  caution  must   be
             exercised before drawing generalised conclusions from  it.  We
             accept that some people in Kabul are suspicious of and hostile
             towards returnees. However, the evidence before us, considered
             together  and  as  a  whole,  points   to   returnees   facing
             challenging circumstances not because they have returned  from
             the west (risk from westernisation was categorically  rejected
             in the 2018 UT decision (at para. 187) and  this  finding  was
             not appealed), but  primarily  because  of  poverty,  lack  of
             accommodation and the absence of employment opportunities,  as
             well as the security situation.  The  mere  fact  of  being  a
             returnee does not prevent  a  person  accessing  accommodation
             (the  evidence  is  that  the  "tea  house"  accommodation  is
             available to all males) or being taken on for day labour  work
             in  the  informal  market.  Nor  does  it  prevent  a   person
             establishing, or re-establishing,  a  network,  although  care
             would need to be taken to avoid  people  who  are  hostile  to
             returnees."

     86.  In  the  light  of  both  of  those  decisions,  it  is  not  been
         demonstrated that the FtTJ's decision was in error. In  any  event,
         the witness statement of the appellant makes no  reference  to  any
         particular  characteristics  that  would  indicate  that   he   was
         westernised or would be perceived as such (as referred to  at  [47]
         of the FtTJ's decision).

     87. I now deal with the issue raised of Article 15 (c).  As  the  Upper
         Tribunal noted in AA (unattended children) Afghanistan CG at  [35],
         the  starting  point  in  considering  a  claim  for   humanitarian
         protection under Article 15(c)  is  the  decision  of  the  ECJ  in
         Elgafaji (Case C-465/07), [2009] 1 WLR 2100.  After  reviewing  the
         three types of 'serious harm' defined in Article 15,  the  judgment
         of the ECJ in Elgafaji continued:

             "35. In that context, the word 'individual' must be understood
             as covering harm to civilians irrespective of their  identity,
             where the degree of indiscriminate violence characterising the
             armed conflict taking place assessed by ... the  courts  of  a
             member state to which a decision refusing ...  an  application
             [for subsidiary protection] is referred, reaches such  a  high
             level that substantial grounds are shown for believing that  a
             civilian, returned to the relevant country or, as the case may
             be, to the relevant region, would, solely on  account  of  his
             presence ... face a real risk of being subject to the  serious
             threat referred to in Article 15(c) of the Directive."

     88. The personal circumstances of an individual were also addressed  by
         the Court:

             "39. In that regard the more the applicant  is  able  to  show
             that  he  is  specifically  affected  by  reason  of  fact  as
             particular to his personal circumstances, the lower the  level
             of indiscriminate violence required for him to be eligible for
             subsidiary protection."

     89. The FtTJ did not accept that this was a case in which the appellant
         would be able to show that his personal circumstances  (apart  from
         his age) would  make  him  specifically  liable  to  indiscriminate
         violence. The appellant was required to demonstrate  that  that  he
         would have would 'solely on account of his presence'  face  a  real
         risk of being subject to the serious threat of violence referred to
         in Article 15(c).

     90.  When  looking  at  the  appellant's  specific   circumstances   as
         established before FtTJ Young-Harry and as before FtTJ  Lodge,  the
         FtT was entitled to find that he had failed to meet  that  test  on
         the evidence that it heard and for the reasons it gave. Even if the
         FtTJ was wrong to state at [46] that there was no  Article  15  (c)
         risk in Laghman Province, the FtTJ proceeded on the basis  that  he
         would be returned to Kabul  and that the FtTJ properly applied  the
         CG as it then was, in AS1 and as now confirmed in AS2 , that  there
         is no Article 15 (c) risk in Kabul.

     91. The grant of permission made it plain that the appellant would have
         to demonstrate the materiality of any errors. Both advocates  agree
         that in establishing any  materiality  (if  they  were  to  be  any
         errors) that a consideration of the new CG would be necessary  (HS1
         and HS2).

     92. In the submissions made by Mr Howard (and in the  written  grounds)
         reliance is placed upon the UNHCR  guidelines  in  the  appellant's
         bundle (dated 2018). In AS (Safety of Kabul) (CG) [2020] UKUT  130,
         the Upper Tribunal considered a large amount of evidence  regarding
         the Article 15(c) risk, including the 2018  UNHCR  Guidelines,  the
         2019 UNHCR Submissions, the 2019 COI UNHCR Report, and EASO's Legal
         Analysis and Recommendations. All of which are relied upon in  this
         appeal.

     93. In AS2 at  [152]-[193],  the  Tribunal  considered  in  detail  the
         UNHCR's position both in its 2018 Guidelines  and  in  more  recent
         documents in 2019. That evidence was  not  "presumptively  binding"
         and so determinative of the judicial assessment  of  risk  (see  HF
         (Iraq) v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 1276 at [43]-[44] per Elias  LJ).  It
         formed  "part  of  the  overall  examination  of   the   particular
         circumstances of each of the appellant's case,  no  more  no  less"
         (see R (EM (Eritrea)) v SSHD [2014] UKSC 12 at [74] per Lord Kerr).



     94. In its analysis as based on all the evidence, the Tribunal  in  AS2
         stated that they did not reach the same conclusion in  relation  to
         the risk of indiscriminate violence in  Kabul  or  as  to  internal
         relocation. At [209], the Tribunal stated:

             "Although violent crime is prevalent, the  evidence  does  not
             point to it being at such a  high  level  that  the  appellant
             would be at real risk merely on account  of  his  presence  in
             Kabul."

     95.  At [210] the Tribunal recognised its finding  was  different  from
         the conclusion reached in the UNHCR documents, including  the  2018
         Guidelines. The Tribunal stated:

             "We recognise that  we  have  reached  a  conclusion  that  is
             different from that expressed  by  UNHCR  in  the  2019  UNHCR
             submissions where (in contrast to the  2018  UNHCR  Guidelines
             and 2019 UNHCR COI Report) it is stated in  terms  that  UNHCR
             believes Kabul is not 'a relevant  IFA'.  We  have  based  our
             assessment on the same statistical evidence relied upon by the
             UNHCR  (casualty  rates  recorded  by  UNAMA).  However,   our
             approach to the UNAMA casualty figures appears  to  differ  to
             UNHCR in two significant ways.

             a.   Firstly, it appears that UNHCR have looked at  the  total
                  number of casualties, compared these over time,  but  have
                  not  considered  the  casualty  rate.  We  note  that  the
                  approach we have adopted, of relying on the casualty  rate
                  rather than the absolute number of  casualties,  was  also
                  used by EASO, who in the 2019 EASO Guidance contextualised
                  the number of civilian casualties in 2018 by  noting  that
                  the total of 1,866 (as reported by UNAMA) corresponded  to
                  38 per 100,000 inhabitants. In our view,  once  the  total
                  number of casualties in Kabul is set against the  size  of
                  the population, the conclusion that the risk is at a level
                  where internal relocation  is  not  an  option  (i.e.  not
                  relevant), becomes untenable.

             b.   Secondly, UNHCR appears to  have  interpreted  the  UNAMA
                  figures as showing an upward trend, over the last  several
                  years, in the number of casualties in Kabul.  However,  as
                  explained above, we do not agree that  the  data  supports
                  such a conclusion, as it appears to us that,  since  2016,
                  there has been a relatively steady and  consistent  number
                  of casualties each year".

         Having  considered  the  UNHCR  evidence,  as  summarised  in   the
         headnote,  the  Tribunal  did  not  accept  that   the   level   of
         indiscriminate violence engaged Art 15(c). At para (ii) the UT said
         this:

             "(ii)    There is widespread and  persistent  conflict-related
                  violence  in  Kabul.  However,  the  proportion   of   the
                  population affected by indiscriminate  violence  is  small
                  and not at a level where a  returnee,  even  one  with  no
                  family or other network and who has no  experience  living
                  in Kabul, would face a serious and  individual  threat  to
                  their  life  or  person  by   reason   of   indiscriminate
                  violence".

     96. In the light of AS2, it cannot be said that the  UNHCR  Guidelines,
         that were in the bundle would have led to any other outcome  or  to
         show that any return to Kabul( where he had family living  )  would
         breach Art 15(c) of  the  Qualification  Directive.  The  Tribunal'
         country guidance in AS2 is that no such  risk  can  be  established
         despite the UNHCR's views.

     97. Also, in so far as the UNHCR evidence proposed  that  it  would  be
         unreasonable or unduly harsh, such that internal relocation was not
         available, to return to Kabul, the UT's decision in AS2  reached  a
         different conclusion "in general". At para (iii) of  the  headnote,
         the Upper Tribunal's position is summarised that:

             "it will not, in general, be unreasonable or unduly harsh  for
             a single adult male in good health to relocate to  Kabul  even
             if he does  not  have  any  specific  connections  or  support
             network in Kabul and even if he does not have a Tazkera".

     98. Whilst at paras (iv) and (v) of the  headnote,  the  UT  recognised
         that the "particular circumstances of an individual applicant  must
         be taken into account in the context of conditions in the place  of
         relocation", there was no indication that this  appellant  had  any
         physical or mental health difficulties ( see FtTJ at [48])  and  he
         would be returning to Kabul where he had family  relatives.   Thus,
         the conclusion reached that the appellant could not  bring  himself
         within the Qualification Directive was open to  the  FtTJ  for  the
         reasons given at [44-46]

     99. The grounds do not expressly challenge the issue of  relocation  to
         Kabul. The factual findings made by the FtTJ make it plain that  he
         would not be returning as an unaccompanied minor because  he  would
         have the assistance of his uncle to whom he could return in  Kabul.
         Whilst Mr Howard relies upon his  age.  In  AS  (Afghanistan)  2018
         (HS1), the Upper Tribunal stated:

             "232.    We also consider the  age  at  which  a  person  left
                  Afghanistan to be relevant as  to  whether  this  included
                  their formative years. It is reasonable to infer that  the
                  older a person is when they leave, the  more  likely  they
                  are  to  be  familiar  with,   for   example,   employment
                  opportunities and living independently.

             233. Although we find that  it  is  reasonable  for  a  person
                  without a support network or specific connections in Kabul
                  or elsewhere in  Afghanistan  to  internally  relocate  to
                  Kabul, a person will be in a more advantageous position if
                  they do have such connections depending on where they are,
                  the  financial  resources  of  such   people   and   their
                  status/connections. We have in mind that the  availability
                  of  a   support   network   may   counter   a   particular
                  vulnerability of an individual on return."

    100. Drawing those matters together, I  am  satisfied  that  the  FtTJ's
         decision that the appellant  could  not  ring  himself  within  the
         Qualification Directive and could return to  Kabul  in  safety  was
         open to the FtTJ for the reasons given at [44-46].

    101. The last point relied upon by Mr Howard is that the FtTJ failed  to
         apply the Joint Presidential Guidance Note  number  2  of  2010  in
         assessing the appellant's evidence, in the light of  the  appellant
         being a child. Secondly, he submits that the judge failed to  apply
         section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009  in
         assessing the appellant's claim.

    102. There is no merit to the grounds on  which  is  asserted  that  the
         judge failed to take into account the appellant's age. Whilst it is
         right that the decision does not specifically refer  to  the  Joint
         Presidential  Guidance  Note,  it  is  plain   from   reading   the
         determination as a whole and specifically at paragraph 26 that  the
         judge properly took into account the appellant's age when assessing
         the evidence. At [48] the judge was aware that  he  had  no  mental
         health problems and took that into account.  The  grounds  and  the
         submissions made by Mr Howard fail to particularise any grounds  as
         to how or why the judge's assessment of the evidence  in  light  of
         the appellant's age was flawed.

    103. As set out earlier, the decision letter made reference  to  S55  in
         the context of the appellant's claim and in the context of his age,
         his maturity and his  degree  of  mental  development.  Again,  the
         grounds are silent as to how that impacted upon the  appellant  and
         the ROP shows that such a submission  was  not  raised  before  the
         FtTJ. The judge's record of proceedings makes no reference  to  the
         appellant's advocate making any submissions concerning  section  55
         or providing any submissions as  to  how  the  evidence  should  be
         assessed in  any  particular  way.  Mr  Howard  accepted  that  the
         skeleton argument did not refer to section 55 either.

    104. I can find no reference to any argument being advanced  before  the
         FtTJ that concerned s 55 and any "best interests"  assessment.  The
         best that Mr Howard could submit was that it was "Robinson obvious"
         because the appellant was a child. That  may  be  so,  but  in  the
         absence of any detailed and proper argument as to how  it  affected
         the case, I am satisfied that the decision  of  the  FtTJ  properly
         considered the appellant's age when reaching the overall assessment
         (see paragraph 26). There is no error of approach  as  asserted  in
         the grounds.

    105. For those reasons, I am not satisfied that it has been demonstrated
         that the decision of the FtTJ did involve the making of an error on
         a point of law that  was  material  to  the  outcome.  I  therefore
         dismiss the appeal. The decision of the FtTJ shall stand.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of  an
error on a point of law and therefore the decision shall stand.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him.  This direction applies both to the  Appellant  and
to the Respondent.  Failure to comply with  this  direction  could  lead  to
contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds
Dated 9 November 2020






                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS


1.   A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision  must  make
a written application to the Upper Tribunal. Any such  application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent.


2.   Where the person who appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).


3.   Where the person making the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5  working  days
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


4.   Where the person who appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  outside
the United Kingdom at the  time  that  the  application  for  permission  to
appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days (10 working days,  if  the
notice of decision is sent electronically).


5.   A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or a Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday, or a bank holiday.


6.   The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on the  covering
letter or covering email.

