
[pic]


Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/11984/2017



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 23rd of April 2018                |On 26th April 2018                   |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON



                                   Between

                                    [S K]

                       (Anonymity Direction Not Made)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     No appearance.

For the Respondent:    Ms A Fijiwala, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer




                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a national of Pakistan born on [ ] 1982 and he entered
    the United Kingdom in December 2009 on a validly issued visa in his own
    name as a  student.  He  then  made  a  series  of  eight  applications
    combination of student extensions, "Zambrano"  style  applications  and
    freestanding article 8 applications all of which were, other than  some
    earlier periods of lawful extended student leave, unsuccessful. He  was
    encountered by police in August 2017 and promptly claimed asylum on  12
    August 2017.

 2. The appellant based his claim on the premise  that  when  he  lived  in
    Pakistan  he  had  a  row  with  two  local  men  when  the   appellant
    accidentally brought down their  kite  at  kite  flying  festival.  The
    appellant claimed this took place in 2004 and in February 2004  he  was
    assaulted by these men and beaten and then  he  and  his  brother  were
    kidnapped and sexually assaulted. They were then released but he  would
    be picked up and beaten/raped over the next eight months by  these  two
    men and their gang. He claimed that they were local drug dealers and  a
    politically connected and a police complaint came to nothing.

 3. The Secretary of State refused his asylum and  human  rights  claim  on
    10th October 2017 and  he  appealed.  In  a  determination  dated  15th
    December 2017 Judge of  the  First  Tier  Tribunal  Lal  dismissed  the
    appellant's appeal on all grounds.

Application for Permission to Appeal


 4.  The  application  for  permission  to   appeal   asserted   that   the
    determination contained material errors of law, specifically  that  the
    judge failed to give reasons or adequate reasons for  his  findings  on
    material matters. The judge failed to assess credibility in  line  with
    case law and background evidence. The grounds referred to paragraph  52
    of the determination showing the judge  had  not  assessed  credibility
    regarding the appropriate legal framework or background  evidence.  The
    judge simply stated that he believes claim to be fabricated and made no
    clear findings. It was  submitted  that  findings  should  be  made  in
    relation to the background evidence and he had placed no weight on  the
    fact that  the  appellant's  account  was  consistent  with  background
    evidence  in  Pakistani.  The  judge's  errors   in   considering   the
    appellant's fear of the police showed that the judge had not  anxiously
    scrutinise the issues and had failed to make sustainable findings

 5. Permission to appeal was granted by  Designated  Judge  Shaerf  on  the
    basis that the grounds argued the  judge  had  made  extensive  adverse
    credibility findings without giving any sufficient reasoning to support
    them and the grounds were arguable.

The Hearing


 6. At the hearing, the appellant failed to attend despite a notice of  the
    hearing being sent to him by the Upper Tribunal  on  15th  March  2018.
    Miss Fijiwala made enquiries and confirmed that the appellant had  been
    granted bail, was reporting, and that his address was  as  recorded  on
    the notice of hearing. I concluded that the appellant had  indeed  been
    advised of the date, time and venue of the hearing and that it  was  in
    the interests of justice to proceed with the hearing. There had been no
    communication by the appellant with the tribunal to advise that he  was
    not intending or could not attend or that he requested  an  adjournment
    and,  there was no contact number on the file for the appellant.

 7. Miss Fijiwala identified that the judge  had  given  adequate  reasons,
    identified the delay of the appellant in claiming asylum  and  that  he
    had given no credible explanation for that delay. The judge had made an
    assessment of the claim and identified that there was a lack of  detail
    in relation to the assault. The judge looked at the  specific  evidence
    in relation to the appellant himself, the documentation and the medical
    evidence which was not compliant with the Istanbul protocol. The  judge
    assessed the evidence in the  round,  including  the  evidence  of  his
    neighbour, and found it not credible.  The findings were  open  to  the
    judge.

Conclusions

 8. The judge has not failed to give adequate reasons for risk  of  return.
    The judge made a succinct but careful  analysis  of  the  evidence  and
    identified at the outset, at paragraph 11, that there was no  claim  in
    relation to the refugee convention or indeed in relation to article  8.
    That was  based  on  representations  made  by  the  appellant's  legal
    representative. Owing to the description of the  appellant's  fear  and
    return of non-state agents that  would  explain  the  concentration  on
    articles 2 and 3 of the ECHR. It is not arguable that the judge  failed
    to consider the relevant evidence. It was open to him to note that  the
    appellant had made a series of applications without mentioning any fear
    of return and it was open to the  judge  to  find  that  the  delay  in
    claiming asylum adversely affected  the  appellant's  credibility.  The
    judge identified at paragraph 21 that the delay was indeed 'long'.  The
    judge also noted that the appellant only claimed asylum  after  he  was
    detained having lived illegally  in  the  UK  despite  having  numerous
    contacts with the immigration authorities. The judge gave his reasoning
    as to why he concluded that the  claim  was  fabricated  and  that  the
    appellant was never a victim  of  threats  are  because  as  the  judge
    cogently reasons at paragraph 22 the appellant

         '... as by his own admission he left the country to study  and  did
         not have a fear at that time or thereafter until he raised  it  for
         the first time in 2017'.

 9. The judge specifically recorded that the  events  of  the  attack  took
    place in 2004 whereupon the  appellant  claimed  that  he  undertook  a
    period of ill treatment for eight  months.  When  it  was  put  to  the
    appellant that he stayed in the country and indeed in the same location
    for a period of five years thereafter, the appellant then  contradicted
    himself by stating that the assault carried  on  till  he  entered  the
    United  Kingdom.   It  was  open  to  the  judge  to  make  an  adverse
    credibility finding on that basis.

10. The judge found that there was a lack of reference  to  any  detail  of
    what  happened  in  the  subsequent  five  years,   pointed   out   the
    contradiction between his oral evidence and his written  evidence,  and
    noted that had the appellant had a well-founded fear he would have left
    sooner or relocated and the appellant did not.    The  judge  found  at
    paragraph 25 that the appellant changed his evidence and "he  described
    the various changing reasons why he did not claim asylum earlier".  The
    interview was  given  was  vague  and  the  appellant  himself  was  an
    unsatisfactory witness [27]. The judge addressed the documentation that
    was provided and criticise the statement of the neighbours  as  it  was
    poorly manufactured and rejected the medical information from  Pakistan
    and the rules 35 report which "did not  assist  the  appellant  as  the
    latter recorded "some scars which 'may be consistent due to the  attack
    described'.  As Ms Fijiwala indicated neither report was compliant with
    the Istanbul protocol and lent a minimal  support  to  the  appellant's
    claim.

11. As the judge also pointed out at paragraph 28 the appellant was able to
    leave the country on  a  lawfully  issued  Visa  on  his  own  national
    passport and in the context of quote no actual  political  involvement"
    this would indicate the appellant was of no interest to the authorities
    for any other reason. Indeed, as already conceded  by  the  appellant's
    representative the refugee convention was not relied upon.

12. The judgement is pithy but displays a  careful  analysis  expressed  in
    forthright terms of the weakness of the appellant's case.  The evidence
    was considered in the round.  On this basis it was open to the judge to
    make an adverse credibility finding  against  the  appellant,  and  the
    judge did so addressing all the evidence.

13. In the light of the judge's  specific  criticisms  of  the  appellant's
    claim, and having considered the particular account of  the  appellant,
    any reliance on the background country  material  did  not  assist  the
    appellant. This is particularly  when  the  appeal  is  placed  in  the
    context of the extensive delay in the claim and the  extensive  contact
    that the appellant had  with  the  immigration  authorities  since  his
    arrival as a student.

14. For completeness I  should  point  out  that  the  grounds  argue  that
    paragraph 52 was defective.  There was no paragraph 52 in the decision.



15. As set out in Shizad (sufficiency of reasons: set  aside)  [2013]  UKUT
    00085 (IAC)

         'Although there is a legal duty to give a brief explanation of  the
         conclusions on the central issue on which an appeal is  determined,
         those reasons need not be extensive if  the  decision  as  a  whole
         makes sense, having regard to the material accepted by the  judge'.



16. For the reasons given I find there is no material error of law  in  the
    judge's decision which incorporated adequately  reasoned  findings  for
    dismissing the appellant's claim. The First-Tier Tribunal decision will
    stand.


Signed            Helen  Rimington                          Date        23rd
    April 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington

