
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/11885/2018 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided under Rule 34 of the Tribunal|Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008|On 27 July 2020                      |
|                                     |                                     |
|Without a hearing                    |                                     |
|On 1 July 2020                       |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE OWENS


                                   Between

                                     DM
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Mackenzie, promulgated on 4 December 2018.

 2. Permission to appeal was refused by First-tier Tribunal Judge Andrew on
    2 January 2019 and then by Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam on  11  March
    2020.  The appellant then petitioned the Court of Session. Following  a
    joint minute and consent from the parties the Lord Ordinary reduced the
    decision of Upper Tribunal Judge McWillian and remitted the application
    to the Upper Tribunal. On 13 November 2019 Vice President of the  Upper
    Tribunal Ockleton granted permission in light of  the  Interlocutor  of
    the Lord Ordinary.

Decision without a hearing

 3. In light of the need to take precautions against the spread of Covid-19
    and with regard to the overriding object set out in the Upper  Tribunal
    Procedure Rules to decide matters fairly and  justly,  directions  were
    sent out by the Vice President of the Upper  Tribunal  by  post  on  23
    March 2020 seeking written submissions on the assertion of an error  of
    law from both parties with a view to  determining  that  issue  on  the
    papers, and giving an opportunity for any party who felt that a hearing
    was necessary in the interests of justice to make submissions  on  that
    issue too. Submissions were received from the appellant and respondent,
    and the appellant responded to the respondent's submissions.

 4. The appellant sent  in  detailed  submissions  on  16  April  2020.  In
    response, on 23 April 2020, the respondent indicated that in the  light
    of the joint minute and consent, it was accepted  that  the  judge  had
    materially erred in failing to give adequate reasons for the assessment
    of risk based on the appellant's 'sur  place'  activities  in  the  UK,
    although it was not accepted that there was any material error in  that
    part of the decision which related to prior  events  in  Iran.  Neither
    party objected to the error of law hearing being determined  without  a
    hearing. On this basis I find that it is fair and in the  interests  of
    justice to determine whether there has been an  error  of  law  in  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal such that the  decision  should  be
    set aside, without an oral hearing.

Anonymity

 5. Since this appeal concerns a claim made under the  Refugee  Convention,
    having had regard to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)
    Rules 2008 and the Presidential Guidance Note No 1 of  2013:  Anonymity
    Orders, I consider it appropriate to make an anonymity order.

Background

 6. The appellant, who is a national of Iran arrived in the United Kingdom
    on 5 April 2018 and claimed asylum on the same day.

 7. The basis of the appellant's protection claim is that he is at risk
    from the Iranian authorities as a result of his support for a Kurdish
    political party the Party Serbesti Kurdistan (Kurdistan Independent
    Party) ('PSK') when he was in Iran. He also relies on his 'sur place'
    activities in the UK, having attended demonstrations arranged by
    Kurdish political parties.

 8. The appellant's protection claim was refused on  1  October  2018.  The
    respondent did not accept the  appellant's  account  of  his  political
    involvement and activities in Iran.  The  respondent  further  did  not
    accept that the appellant would face real risk of serious harm  on  the
    basis of having left Iran illegally or being of Kurdish ethnic  origin.



The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 9. The judge made negative credibility findings against the appellant. The
    judge found that the appellant was neither detained  at  an  opposition
    protest nor mistreated by the authorities  as  he  claimed.  The  judge
    rejected the appellant's account of putting up posters  in  March  2018
    and being wanted by the authorities in the light of  these  activities.
    The judge also rejected the appellant's assertion that he was  at  risk
    on return to Iran on account of his 'sur place' activities  in  the  UK
    including attending anti-regime demonstrations.   The  judge  concluded
    that the appellant did not have a well -founded fear of persecution and
    would not face any treatment contrary to Article 3 ECHR if returned  to
    Iran.

Grant of permission

10. On 13 November 2019 Vice  President  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  Ockleton
    granted permission in light of the Interlocutor of the Lord Ordinary.

The grounds of appeal

11. The grounds of appeal are as follows;

    Ground 1 - Errors in assessing credibility

12. Failure to give adequate reasons for finding that the appellant was not
    involved in Kurdish opposition groups  when  the  judge  accepted  that
    someone of Kurdish origin might want to support  such  a  group;   mis-
    recording the appellant's  evidence  and  then  relying  on  that  mis-
    recording to find the appellant's account implausible  and  failing  to
    take into account material evidence from the appellant in  relation  to
    the letter from the PSK when deciding what weight  to  accord  to  that
    evidence.

    Ground 2 - Failing to make adequate and reasoned findings of fact

13. Failure to take into  account  relevant  evidence  in  respect  of  the
    appellant's 'sur place' activities and irrationally concluding that the
    appellant had not come to the attention of the Iranian  authorities  in
    the light of the evidence. Failure to assess the risk to the  appellant
    properly on the basis of his 'sur place' activities.

Respondent's position

14. In her letter dated 23 April 2020 the  respondent  indicated  that  the
    Secretary of State does not oppose the  appellant's  challenge  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal decision in respect of error of law in relation  to
    the findings on the 'sur place' activities, but continues to defend the
    judge's findings on the appellant's activities in Iran.



Decision on error of law

15. When considering whether there was an  error  of  law,   I  start  with
    Ground 2 because it is accepted by the respondent in  the  'Joint  note
    and minute' and the respondent's response that there has been an  error
    of law in relation to  the  'sur  place'  activities  material  to  the
    outcome of the appeal.

Ground 2 - Sur place activities

16. The joint note and interlocutor is in the following terms;

      "Neither the Upper Tribunal nor the First-tier Tribunal made a finding
      that certain photographs which were presented in evidence featured the
      petitioner. Those photographs were produced  in  order  to  prove  his
      attendance at demonstrations in the UK in support of Kurdish political
      activity. The First tier finding was that the photographs  "appear  to
      show" the appellant  being  present  at  demonstrations  (para  45  of
      production 6/3) but did not make a finding of  fact  that  he  had  so
      attended (paras 45 -54). The Upper Tribunal's conclusion  was  on  the
      basis that the appellant was not identified in one of the  photographs
      and if the photograph came to the attention of the Iranian authorities
      there was no evidence  [that  he]  would  be  identified  (para  4  of
      production 6/5).

      In SSH and HR Iran [2016] UKUT 308 (IAC) the Upper Tribunal found that
      failed asylum seekers who had left Iran illegally will  be  questioned
      at the airport upon their return (at paragraph 23). In HB (Kurds) Iran
      CG [2018] UKUT 430 (IAC) the Upper Tribunal  identified  that  Kurdish
      ethnicity constitutes a risk factor which  when  combined  with  other
      risk factors such as perceived political activity may serve to enhance
      the risk of persecution upon return to Iran.

      In that light it is considered  that  without  a  finding  as  to  the
      petitioner's participation in  political  activity,  the  question  of
      whether he is at risk upon return to Iran cannot be answered".

17. I am in agreement that there has been a material error of law  in  this
    respect. At [45] the judge refers to a number of photographs  which  he
    states;

    "appear to show the appellant present at demonstrations".

18. He then states at [53];

    "I find there to  be  no  credible  or  reliable  evidence  before  the
    Tribunal suggesting that  the  appellant  was  anything  other  than  a
    bystander at the demonstrations".

19. Numerous photographs were submitted in evidence from page 25 to  49  of
    the appellant's bundle showing the appellant  manifestly  participating
    in pro-Kurdish demonstrations by holding flags and banners  with  other
    people in public places including outside the Scottish parliament which
    is consistent with his evidence in his witness statement  that  he  has
    attended 3 demonstrations including one in George Square, Glasgow,  one
    outside the Iranian Embassy in London and  one  in  Edinburgh.  In  the
    light of this, I am satisfied that  the  judge's  conclusion  that  the
    appellant  was  just  a  "bystander"  is  not  adequately  reasoned  or
    sustainable.

20. The judge finds at [46];

    "it is not suggested the photographs were in the public domain"

21. And at [53] that;

    "the appellant has failed to discharge the low burden of proof  on  him
    to show that his presence at the demonstration which he claims to  have
    been recorded by photographic evidence is  within  the  public  domain,
    that it would be accessible to  the  Iranian  authorities.  He  has  in
    addition failed to prove that even if the photographs  were  accessible
    that the appellant would be identified as  a  person  with  an  adverse
    profile".

22. At page 23 of the appellant's bundle there is a photograph published on
    the website of the Scottish Solidarity with Kurdistan entitled 'members
    of the  Edinburgh  Kurdish  community  gathered  outside  the  Scottish
    parliament in Monday to call on Iran to life the planned  execution  of
    Ramin Hossein Panachi'. The  website  address  is  set  out  below  the
    article. The article refers to Amnesty  International  and  encloses  a
    letter to Boris Johnson. I am satisfied that the appellant  appears  in
    this photograph and that the photograph is in  the  public  domain  and
    that the judge's findings to the contrary above at [53] are,  in  these
    circumstances, irrational.

23. I am satisfied that the judge's findings on the appellant's 'sur place'
    activities in the UK are vitiated by error in that  he  has  failed  to
    take into account relevant  evidence  and  failed  to  make  adequately
    reasoned findings. It is incumbent on  the  judge  to  make  clear  and
    reasoned findings on the appellant's 'sur place' activities in  the  UK
    in order to undertake an assessment of the risk  to  the  appellant  on
    return to Iran.

24. I am also in agreement that these errors were compounded by the judge's
    failure to take into account that the appellant would be questioned  at
    the 'pinch point' on his arrival at the airport in Iran because he is a
    failed asylum seeker who left Iran illegally. He  is  also  of  Kurdish
    origin.  He would be questioned about the reasons he claimed asylum and
    his involvement in political activities in the UK as confirmed  in  the
    recent country guidance case of PS (Christianity- risk) Iran CG  [2020]
    UKUT 00046. He is not expected to have to lie. It is for the  judge  to
    give consideration as to whether the  appellant  would  be  subject  to
    treatment amounting to serious harm  in  the  context  of  the  Iranian
    government's extreme sensitivity to those perceived to be  against  the
    regime which is confirmed in HB (Kurds)  Iran  CG  [2018]  UKUT  000430
    (IAC) at headnote 10 which states;

    "the Iranian authorities demonstrate what could be described as a 'hair-
    trigger' approach to those suspected of or perceived to be involved  in
    Kurdish political activities or support for Kurdish  rights.  By  'hair
    -trigger' it means that the threshold for  suspicion  is  low  and  the
    reaction of the authorities is reasonably likely to be extreme".

25. I am satisfied that these errors are material to the assessment of risk
    to the appellant on his return  to  Iran  and  that  the  part  of  the
    decision relating to the appellant's 'sur place' activities  should  be
    set aside.



Ground 1 - credibility

26. I now turn to Ground 1 in  relation  to  the  asserted  errors  in  the
    judge's approach to the appellant's account of what happened to him  in
    Iran and the negative credibility findings. This did not form  part  of
    the 'joint note' prepared by the parties and there is no concession  by
    the respondent that there has been a material error of law in this part
    of the decision. The material errors in the 'sur  place'  consideration
    form a discrete aspect of the asylum claim and do not infect per se the
    judge's decision in relation to events in Iran.

27. I go on to consider whether these grounds are made out. It is said that
    the judge has failed to provide clear reasoning as to why he  does  not
    accept that the appellant became involved with the  PSK.  At  [30]  the
    judge accepts that;

    "someone who is Kurdish might want to assist elements aimed at  helping
    the position of the Kurds including becoming  involve  [sic]  in  anti-
    government activity"

28. Nevertheless, at [34] the  judge  finds  the  appellant's  reasons  for
    becoming involved in the PSK are "vague".  It  is  submitted  that  the
    judge fails to explain why having accepted that  a  Kurdish  individual
    might want to become involved with anti-government elements  that  this
    reasoning would not apply to the appellant, who is himself  Kurdish.  I
    am satisfied  that  there  is  some  tension  in  the  reasoning  here,
    particularly given  the  fact  that  in  his  statement  the  appellant
    explains that his uncle was a martyr and talks  in  general  about  the
    difficulties faced by Kurds in Iran, however I am  not  satisfied  that
    this amounts to inadequate reasoning such to amount to an error of  law
    in that the judge appears to be making a general  observation  at  [30]
    before moving on specifically to the appellant's own account at [32].

Mis-recording of the evidence

29. Further it is asserted that the judge has erred in law by mis-recording
    the appellant's evidence and relying on the  mis-recorded  evidence  to
    make a negative credibility finding.

30. At [38] the judge says;

    "In my view it is implausible that the appellant would, as  he  invites
    the Tribunal to accept, go to  elaborate  precautions  to  avoid  being
    detected when  putting  up  posters  at  night,  yet  would  leave  his
    identification in a car, which was left unattended".

31. The appellant points to the appellant's evidence at paragraph 15 of the
    appellant's first statement in which he said;

    "He showed us where he was going to stop and  wait  for  us  to  finish
    putting the posters up. He dropped us off at our areas and told  us  to
    meet him back at the car".

32. It is submitted that there is no reference in the appellant's statement
    nor  in  the  appellant's  oral  evidence  to  the   car   being   left
    "unattended".  Having checked the appellant's evidence, I am  satisfied
    that at no point did the appellant claim to have left his jacket in  an
    "unattended car".

33.  The  respondent's  position  is  that  what  the  judge  found  to  be
    implausible was that the appellant would take  his  ID  with  him  when
    putting up posters illegally. I am  not  convinced  by  that  argument.
    Firstly, this is not what the judge found at all.  The  judge  did  not
    question the fact that the appellant was carrying his ID  documents  in
    his jacket but found incredible the fact that appellant left his jacket
    containing the ID in an  unattended  car.  I  am  satisfied   from  the
    wording of [38] that the judge gave weight to the fact that the car was
    "unattended" and that the judge may have found the appellant's  account
    to be more plausible had the judge considered that the jacket with  the
    appellant's ID in it had been left in a car which was attended  by  the
    appellant's  friend.   The  judge's   subsequent   finding   that   the
    appellant's account that he was so focused on carrying the bag with the
    leaflets that he didn't think to take his jacket was incredible must be
    viewed in this context.

34. I am satisfied that this is an  error  which  demonstrates  a  lack  of
    anxious scrutiny on the part of the judge. I also take account of HK  v
    SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ 1037 which is authority for the  proposition  that
    judges  must  exercise  great  care  when  considering   the   inherent
    implausibility of events.

35. In this appeal, in the context of the judge's finding at [30] and  [31]
    that the appellant's account was  broadly  consistent  with  background
    material and internally consistent from the time he claimed asylum  and
    noting that section 8 of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration  (Treatment  of
    Claimant's etc)  Act does not apply, I am satisfied that this error  in
    mis- recording  the  evidence  and  relying  on  it  to  undermine  the
    appellant's credibility in relation to one of the core  events  of  his
    claim is significant and undermines the assessment of  the  appellant's
    credibility as a whole.

    Failure to take into account appellant's evidence

36. Finally, it is asserted that the judge erred in law in failing to  give
    weight to the letter of support from the PSK because he  did  not  take
    into account the  appellant's  explanation  that  the  PSK  would  make
    enquiries prior to  issuing  the  letter.   I  find  that  the  judge's
    findings in respect of the PSK letter are  sustainable  and  adequately
    reasoned. I am satisfied that the  judge  was  entitled  to  take  into
    account inconsistencies in the provenance of the  letter  and  question
    how the writer would be aware that the appellant was of interest to the
    Ettela'at. I do not find that this ground is made out.

37. I am satisfied however, that the error  in  recording  the  appellant's
    evidence indicates a lack of anxious scrutiny which renders the judge's
    findings in respect of events in Iran unsafe and on this basis together
    with the agreed error of  law  in  the  findings  on  the  'sur  place'
    activities, I set aside the decision in its entirety.





Disposal

38. The appellant is neutral as to whether the decision should be  made  in
    the First-tier Tribunal or the Upper Tribunal although  indicates  that
    the appellant would want to produce more evidence both in  relation  to
    events in Iran and in relation  to  his  'sur  place'  activities.  The
    respondent submits that the appeal  should  be  re-made  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

39. I am satisfied that the most appropriate way to proceed is to remit the
    appeal to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  be  heard  by  a  differently
    constituted Tribunal. The decision has been set aside in  its  entirety
    and an extensive fact-finding exercise is needed.


Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the making of  an  error
on a point of law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside in  its  entirety.  The
appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for re-hearing de novo  before
a differently constituted Tribunal.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed:     R J Owens                                    Date: 15 July  2020



Upper Tribunal Judge Owens

