
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
PA/11251/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at North Shields                  | Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 31 May 2019                          | On 04 July 2019                    |
|                                        |                                    |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

                                   Between

                         mrs zeynab ranjbar farshami
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                THE SECRETARY OF STATE FR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms M Cleghorn, Counsel, instructed by Halliday
Reeves Law Firm
For the Respondent:    Ms R Pettersen, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   In a decision sent on 31 October 2018 Judge  Moxon  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (FtT) dismissed the appeal of the appellant against a decision
    made by the respondent on 7 September  2018,  refusing  her  protection
    claim.

2.   The basis of the appellant's claim was that  she  had  been  forced  to
    leave Iran because of increasing difficulties she was experiencing as a
    result of her  three  children,  and  then  in  November/December  2016
    herself, converting to Christianity.  She claimed her  house  has  been
    raided and her eldest daughter's Bible and documents  taken  away.   In
    addition, since arrival in the UK the appellant had  been  baptised  at
    Wakefield Cathedral and she was attending church  in  Stockton  Baptist
    Church.

3.   The respondent did not accept that the appellant had given  a  credible
    account either of her adverse experiences in Iran or of being a genuine
    Christian convert as evidenced by her baptism and church attendances in
    the UK.

4.   The judge arrived at the same conclusion.

5.   The appellant's grounds take issue with the  judge's  decision  in  two
    main respects, it being contended first of all that the judge's adverse
    assessment of her claimed experience in Iran was legally flawed (Ground
    1); and secondly that the judge failed to  assess  events  post-arrival
    which amounted to a sur place claim evidenced by her church  activities
    and membership, her baptism and commitments to her  faith  (Ground  2).
    In submissions ably advanced by Ms Cleghorn  in  amplification  of  the
    written grounds, particular issue was taken with what the judge  stated
    at paragraph 45 relating to the witness  statement  evidence  of  a  Dr
    Toop:

         "45. Whilst I give  Dr  Toop's  evidence  significant  weight,  and
             similarly the evidence from Mrs Toop, I would expect that  the
             very thought of questioning the  faith  of  someone  attending
             worship and other church activities with  apparent  enthusiasm
             would be unpalatable to them.   They  may  not  consider  that
             there is any reason to  doubt  the  Appellant  and  would  not
             subject the Appellant's motives to the anxious scrutiny that I
             must undertake nor are they likely to have sight of all of the
             evidence that is before me.  Whilst the  Appellant  may  spend
             considerable time at the church, she cannot  legally  work  in
             the United Kingdom and therefore she has an abundance of time.
              It was clearly not the court's intention that a Tribunal must
             consider   assertions   of   faith,   together   with   active
             participation, in a vacuum with no consideration of the  other
             evidence in the particular appeal."

6.   In reaching my assessment of the grounds, I must bear in  mind  that  I
    should not interfere in the fact-finding  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    unless persuaded  that  it  is  not  within  the  range  of  reasonable
    responses.  It is important not  to  consider  specific  paragraphs  in
    isolation but to have regard to the decision as a whole.

7.   I set  out  these  two  well-established  propositions  because  in  my
    judgement the judge's decision is not one that  is  vitiated  by  legal
    error, notwithstanding Mr Cleghorn's valiant attempts  to  persuade  me
    otherwise.

8.   As regards Ground 1, Ms Cleghorn has sought to argue that  the  judge's
    reasons for finding the appellant's account lacking in credibility were
    unsound.  She  focussed  particularly  on  what  the  judge  stated  at
    paragraphs 48 and 49:

         "48. The Appellant's evidence  credibility  is  also  significantly
             undermined by the following aspects of the evidence:


             a.    The  Appellant  has  been  inconsistent  about  her  own
                  father's  Christianity.   She  answered  that  he  was   a
                  Christian  in  answer  to  question  137  of  the   asylum
                  interview but the in answer to question 149 stated that he
                  is not a "true Christian".  Whilst she sought  to  clarify
                  her answers within her amendments to  the  interview,  she
                  failed to explain the reason for her  inconsistency.   She
                  confirmed at the interview that she was fit and well to be
                  interviewed  and  that  she  understood  the  interpreter.
                  There  is  therefore  a  clear  inconsistency  as  to  her
                  father's religion which is undermining to her credibility;


             b.   The Appellant was inconsistent in her oral evidence about
                  whether her eldest daughter has left Iran;


             c.   I do not consider it credible that the Appellant, who had
                  not at the time converted to Christianity and knowing  the
                  consequences of criticising the  prophet  Mohammed,  would
                  then compare him unfavourably to Jesus at work.   Further,
                  whilst such comments were clearly disapproved of as she is
                  said to have been dismissed, I note that the  police  were
                  not involved.  I  do  not  accept  that  this  account  is
                  credible.  Further, I note that in response  to  criticism
                  of this in the Refusal she has sought to amend her account
                  of why she was dismissed, and I note that these amendments
                  were not included  in  her  post-interview,  pre-decision,
                  witness statement; and


             d.   I consider it incredible  that  despite  the  authorities
                  seeking the whereabouts of  the  Appellant's  daughter  on
                  account  of  her  own  religious  conversion,  which   had
                  included a raid upon the Appellant's home and threats that
                  she should not withhold the whereabouts of  her  daughter,
                  the Appellant would then start to attend  a  house  church
                  and keep in her house Christian documents, notwithstanding
                  whether they were well hidden.  I do not accept  that  she
                  would have put herself in such danger,  knowing  that  the
                  authorities were interested in her family.


         49.  I have stood back and considered all of the  evidence  in  the
             round and given as much weight as I feel able to the  evidence
             that is supportive of the Appellant's claim, particularly  the
             evidence of Dr and Mrs Toop.  I have reminded  myself  of  the
             low standard of proof to be adopted.  However, even upon  that
             low standard of proof I am not satisfied that the Appellant is
             a genuine convert to Christianity, or is believed to be by the
             Iranian authorities.  I find that this  is  a  fabrication  to
             pursue an  unmeritorious  claim  for  asylum.   I  reject  her
             narrative account in its entirety."

9.   Ms Cleghorn's oral  submissions  do  not  fit  well  with  the  written
    grounds which do not take issue as such with the  judge's  findings  as
    set out it is these paragraphs:  the  complaint  made  in  the  written
    grounds concerns the judge's failure  to  counterbalance  these  points
    with the "positive evidence" which the judge accepted from  the  senior
    church figure, Dr Troop, who had provided several  witness  statements.
    Nevertheless, taking each of the main points in turn, I consider it was
    open to the judge to find the appellant inconsistent  in  her  evidence
    about her father's Christianity, that evidence veering between  stating
    he was a Christian (Q AIR 136, 137) and that he continued  to  practice
    Islam by sometimes going to  the  mosque.   The  judge  considered  the
    appellant's explanation for this  inconsistency  and  was  entitled  to
    reject it.

10.  Likewise I consider that the judge had a reasonable basis  for  finding
    inconsistency in the oral evidence the appellant gave about whether her
    eldest daughter had left Iran, setting out at paragraph 33 that:

         "33. In  cross-examination  the  Appellant  referenced  her  eldest
             daughter's Christianity and stated: '... my daughter paid  for
             the path she had taken at that  time  and  had  to  leave  the
             country'.  She then said that  she  did  not  know  where  her
             children were and when I sought to clarify she stated that she
             did not know if any had left Iran or remained in that country.
              It was noted that she had earlier stated  that  her  daughter
             had left the country and she replied that she did not know  if
             she had or not.  She was asked if she  knew  anything  of  her
             children's wellbeing and she replied: 'no, not at  all'.   She
             was asked if she knew that they were safe and she replied that
             she does not know and that she prays for them.  It  was  noted
             that  Dr  Toop  had  indicated  that  she  had  received  some
             information that they were safe and she replied  that  neither
             she nor Dr Toop are aware of her children.  She said that  one
             of her friends in Iran had told her not to worry and this  was
             in November 2016.  She clarified that this was  slightly  less
             than two years ago."

11.  As regards the judge's findings that it was not credible the  appellant
    would have compared the Prophet unfavourably  to  Jesus  at  work,  the
    focus of paragraph 48c  was  on  whether  the  appellant  had  given  a
    credible account  of  being  dismissed  from  work  for  her  Christian
    beliefs.  Her claims  regarding  this  were  the  subject  of  specific
    questions during  her  asylum  interview  where  at  Q138  it  was  the
    appellant herself who  introduced  the  claim  that  she  had  made  an
    unfavourable comparison, stating that "I was sacked from my job because
    I compared Jesus to Mohammed in favour of Jesus" and she confirmed  she
    had made such a comparison in Q140.  Whilst she then sought  to  resile
    from that somewhat in Q142 and in subsequent statements and in her oral
    evidence (as set out by the judge at paragraph 31), it  was  reasonably
    open to the judge to consider that her evidence regarding this was  not
    credible, given she would know the consequences of  criticism  of  this
    kind.

12.  As regards paragraph 48(d), not even Ms Cleghorn sought  to  raise  any
    argument against it and indeed it seems to me  a  particularly  telling
    criticism of the  appellant's  claim  that  her  own  shift  to  active
    involvement in Christian activity in Iran should occur after her  house
    had been  raided  and  specific  threats  made  to  her  regarding  the
    consequences.  If such a raid had  happened  she  would  know  her  own
    activities would be under scrutiny.

13.  Further, as Ms Pettersen correctly observed, these were  not  the  only
    reasons why the judge found the appellant's account of her  experiences
    in Iran not credible.

14.  This brings me to the main thrust of the written foundation  of  Ground
    1, which was that in  assessing  the  credibility  of  the  appellant's
    account of her experiences in Iran the judge should have counted in her
    favour the evidence of Dr Toop.  The first thing to be said about  this
    contention  is  that  it  is  crystal  clear  that  in  assessing   the
    credibility of the appellant's account of her experiences in  Iran  the
    judge took account of the evidence of Dr Toop.  Indeed, for the  judge,
    features of that evidence added to the reasons to doubt the credibility
    of the appellant's account since in the judge's view  the  account  she
    had given Dr Toop about her experiences in Iran had been  significantly
    inconsistent and also different again from the evidence she gave to the
    judge.   At  paragraph   47   the   judge   identified   the   relevant
    inconsistences as follows:

         "47. Dr Toop's first statement gives an account of the catalyst for
             the Appellant fleeing Iran  which  is  inconsistent  with  the
             Appellant's own account.  I do not accept  that  this  can  be
             simply dismissed as a problem with interpretation and I  would
             have thought that he would have taken care to ensure that  any
             content of his statement was accurate and that he  would  have
             clarified areas that he was not sure about.   I  am  satisfied
             that he correctly recorded the account he had  been  given  by
             the Appellant last year and then this year and  that  she  has
             been inconsistent when relating her account to  him.   I  also
             note the material inconsistencies between them in relation  to
             how long the Appellant attended the House Church  and  whether
             she has been notified of the wellbeing  of  her  children.   I
             note his account that the Appellant has  been  told  that  her
             children are safe and I do not accept that this is a result of
             translation errors between the two of them and  note  that  he
             gave specific information about the fact that she had  friends
             in Iran who were intermittently  giving  information  and  the
             last time was a few months ago, whereas the  Appellant  stated
             that she has had no update from almost two  years,  which  was
             before she travelled to the United Kingdom.  I therefore  find
             that the Appellant has given materially inconsistent  accounts
             in her evidence before me and in her account to Dr Toop.  This
             significantly undermines her credibility."

15.  The grounds contend that such  an  assessment  was  at  odds  with  the
    "unchallenged evidence of Dr Toop", but it is  clear  that  whilst  the
    judge described Dr  Toop  as  a  "suitable  witness  in  light  of  his
    seniority in the church" and said that he gave "substantial weight"  to
    his evidence (paragraph  42),  it  is  equally  clear  that  the  judge
    considered that his evidence as regards the appellant's account to  him
    of her experiences  in  Iran  was  undermined  by  discrepancies  "both
    between his two statements and between himself and the Appellant".  Any
    doubt as to exactly what the judge was not prepared to accept about his
    evidence is dispelled by the very particular  terms  of  paragraph  47.
    (Paragraph 32 also refers to the inconsistency between her account last
    year to Dr Toop and that given at the hearing.)  Hence, so  far  as  Dr
    Toop's evidence was to be considered positively, that could only be  in
    relation to his evidence  about  the  appellant's  Christian  faith  as
    perceived by him and his wife on the basis of their own observations of
    her since she joined their church in the UK.

16.  Ms Cleghorn makes the point that the judge's criticisms  of  Dr  Toop's
    evidence represents an about face from his statement  at  paragraph  42
    that "there is no challenge to Dr Toop's credibility".  Whilst I accept
    there is a slight tension between this statement and the criticism made
    in paragraph 47, I am entirely satisfied that the  judge  was  properly
    responding to the fact that he had in fact two accounts  from  Dr  Toop
    about what the appellant had said, one this year and one last year, and
    he preferred that of last year.

17.  Turning to Ground 2, the way this is  pleaded  is  to  argue  that  the
    judge failed to engage with  the  evidence  regarding  the  appellant's
    religious state of mind post-arrival, particularly in the  form  of  Dr
    Toop's unchallenged evidence that she had been an active church member,
    had been baptised and was committed to her faith.  In  amplifying  this
    ground, Ms Cleghorn, as already observed, took particular exception  to
    the judge's reference in paragraph 45 that "I  would  expect  that  the
    very thought of questioning the faith of someone attending worship  and
    other church activities with apparent enthusiasm would  be  unpalatable
    to them".  She submitted that it  was  unreasonable  of  the  judge  to
    assume that Dr Toop and his wife, both  experienced  Christians,  would
    not be alive to the possibility that asylum seekers  might  contrive  a
    Christian conversion to aid their case.

18.  The first difficulty with Ms Cleghorn's submission is that  neither  Dr
    Toop nor his wife attended the hearing and whilst the judge  said  that
    he accepted his explanation for being  unable  to  attend,  Mrs  Toop's
    evidence was "somewhat undermined  by  the  failure  to  attend  court"
    (paragraph 46).  One way or another, the failure of these two witnesses
    to attend meant the judge was left to assess the weight to be given  to
    their evidence in relation to  whether  the  appellant  was  a  genuine
    convert, by reference to their statements alone.  Significantly neither
    of their statements attest to expertise in being able to test sincerity
    (as attributed to them by Ms Cleghorn).  Indeed Dr Toop's letter  of  3
    February 2018  was  non-committal,  stating  that  "she  tells  me  she
    converted to Christianity from the  Muslim  faith".   Dr  Toop's  other
    statements do assert that he is "sure" and "convinced of her  Christian
    faith", but that was not the  same  thing  as  asserting  that  he  had
    specific expertise in  being  able  to  distinguish  between  true  and
    contrived beliefs.  The  judge  clearly  had  regard  to  the  detailed
    reasons given by Dr Toop for being sure she was a  Christian,  but  was
    entitled, taking the evidence as a whole, to come to a different view.

19.   A  further  difficulty  with  this  submission  is  that   the   judge
    specifically reminded himself of the very detailed  guidance  given  by
    the Scottish Inner House of Court of Session in TF (Iran)  [2018]  CSIH
    58 particularly what was said in [59] of this decision, which the judge
    quoted at paragraph 44:

         "44. When considering Dr Toop's evidence  I  also  have  particular
             regard to paragraph 59 of TF, which details:


                  'Of course it remains for the court or  tribunal  to  make
                  the final decision, and nothing in the expert evidence can
                  take that away from the court or tribunal.  To this extent
                  it is legitimate to question the experts on their opinions
                  and as to the basis upon which  they  have  reached  those
                  opinions.  In some cases it may be appropriate to question
                  the objectivity of the assessment made by the witness,  or
                  to suggest  that  there  may  be  an  element  of  wishful
                  thinking given the evangelical mission of  the  particular
                  church.  But, as we have already made clear, that exercise
                  should not start with any  predisposition  to  reject  the
                  evidence because it does not fit in  with  some  a  priori
                  view formed as to the credibility of the  appellant.   The
                  evidence should be considered on its  merits  and  without
                  any  preconception,  based  upon  an  assessment  of   the
                  individual appellants, that it  is  suspect  or  otherwise
                  falls to be disregarded'."

20.  It was these words that the  judge  quoted  immediately  prior  to  the
    assessment he made at paragraph 45.  Given that the judge only had  the
    Toops' statements to go by, I consider it was wholly in accord with the
    guidance given by their Lordships in TF for the judge to consider  that
    their  own  observations  were  not  likely  to  be  informed   by   an
    investigative approach of anxious scrutiny, particularly given the well-
    known fact that  no-one,  church  witness  or  judge,  can  "peer  into
    another's soul" and so any decision-maker must make do  with  assessing
    such claims in the context of the evidence as a whole.

21.  The written grounds aver that if the judge  was  going  to  reject  the
    supporting evidence  of  Dr  Toop  "a  full  explanation  was  needed".
    However, no further explanation was needed beyond that  given  and,  in
    the words of the court in TF, "it remains for the court or tribunal  to
    make the final decision, and nothing in the expert  evidence  can  take
    that away from the court or tribunal".

22.  For the above reasons I conclude that the  grounds  are  not  made  and
    that, being unimpaired by legal error, the decision of  the  FtT  judge
    must stand.

No anonymity direction is made.




Signed                                  Date: 1 July 2019
              [pic]
Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
