
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11013/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Cardiff Civil Justice Centre|Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|                                     |On 29 April 2021                     |
|Working Remotely by Skype            |                                     |
|On 8 April 2021                      |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                                    U E K
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Bass of Duncan Lewis Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/2698) I  make  an  anonymity  order.   Unless  the  Upper
    Tribunal or court directs otherwise, no  report  of  these  proceedings
    shall directly or indirectly identify the  appellant.   This  direction
    applies to both the appellant and to the respondent and  a  failure  to
    comply with this direction could lead to Contempt of Court proceedings.



Introduction

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Namibia who was born on 25 June 1992.

 3. The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on 24  April  2018  with  a
    student visa valid for six months.  The appellant  overstayed.   On  20
    November 2018, she was served with  RED.0001.   On  3  June  2019,  the
    appellant claimed asylum.  The basis of the appellant's claim was  that
    she feared her uncle who, together with his friends, had  sexually  and
    physically abused her in Namibia.

 4. On 26 October 2019, the Secretary  of  State  refused  the  appellant's
    claims for asylum,  humanitarian  protection  and  under  the  European
    Convention on Human Rights.

 5. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In a  determination
    sent on 21 December 2020, Judge  Trevaskis  dismissed  the  appellant's
    appeal on all grounds.  In particular, he made an  adverse  credibility
    finding and did not accept the appellant's account that  she  had  been
    abused by her uncle in Namibia and would be at risk, as a  consequence,
    on return.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 6. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal on  the
    sole ground that the  judge  had  misapplied  s.8  of  the  Asylum  and
    Immigration (Treatment of Claimants, etc.) Act 2004 ("the 2004 Act") by
    unreasonably having regard to the fact that the appellant did not claim
    asylum on arrival in the UK.

 7. On 29 January 2021, the First-tier Tribunal (Judge  Adio)  granted  the
    appellant permission to appeal.  In doing so, Judge Adio  identified  a
    number of other points, going beyond the  appellant's  sole  ground  of
    appeal, which he considered amounted to arguable  errors  of  law.   In
    addition to considering it was arguable that  the  judge  placed  undue
    weight on the appellant's failure to claim asylum at port,  Judge  Adio
    also considered it arguable that the judge erred in  law  by  requiring
    corroboration of evidence from, for example, her boyfriend  in  Namibia
    and by failing to identify the inconsistencies in  the  evidence  which
    the judge relied upon.  In para 3 of  his  decision,  Judge  Adio  said
    this:

         "Having read the decision and the grounds it is arguable  that  the
         judge placed undue weight on the failure of the Applicant to  claim
         asylum at the port.  The Judge also required corroboration and does
         not give any explanation as to why her  delay  in  claiming  asylum
         should count against her because she  could  not  provide  evidence
         from [her boyfriend] referred to at paragraph  64(ii).   There  are
         arguable  grounds  in  the  approach  of  the  judge  in  resolving
         credibility  issues  particularly  with  the  overemphasis  on  her
         failure to claim asylum on  arrival  and  the  corroboration  being
         sought for part of her  evidence.   The  Judge  makes  findings  of
         credibility between paragraphs 64 and 65 without really engaging at
         that  point  with  what  the  inconsistencies  are  and   with   an
         overemphasis on corroboration.  Although  the  judge  outlined  the
         legal framework for credibility this application is  undermined  by
         the  approach  taken  towards  the  late  asylum  claim   and   the
         requirements  for  corroborative   evidence.    All   grounds   are
         arguable".

 8. Apart from the reliance upon s.8 of the 2004 Act, the appellant did not
    contend that the judge had erred in law by requiring corroboration  (in
    the form  of  additional  evidence)  or  by  failing  to  identify  the
    inconsistencies upon which he relied in  his  determination.   Although
    the Upper Tribunal has cautioned against judges granting permission  on
    a ground  not  advanced  by  an  applicant  in  their  application  for
    permission (see AZ (error of  law:  jurisdiction;  PTA  practice)  Iran
    [2018] UKUT 245 (IAC)), nevertheless the additional grounds advanced by
    Judge Adio remain a basis upon which permission was granted.  That  was
    accepted before me by the parties.

 9. The appeal was listed at Cardiff Civil Justice Centre working  remotely
    on 8 April 2021.  The appellant was represented  by  Mr  Bass  and  the
    Secretary of State was represented by Mr Avery both of whom joined  the
    hearing by Skype.

10. Mr Bass relied upon his skeleton argument which  he  developed  in  his
    oral submissions covering the s.8 ground as well as those identified by
    Judge Adio in his grant of permission.  Mr Bass' skeleton argument also
    contended that  the  judge  had  made  impermissible  findings  on  the
    implausibility of the appellant's account.  No objection was raised  to
    this latter ground  being  relied  upon  although  its  substance  only
    appears in Mr Bass' skeleton argument.  Mr Avery made oral  submissions
    on each of the grounds now relied upon.

11. I will deal with those grounds as follows:

      1) section 8 of the 2004 Act;

      2) corroboration;

      3) inconsistencies in the evidence; and

      4) implausibility of the appellant's account.

Discussion

    1. Section 8 of the 2004 Act

12. Section 8 of the 2004 Act sets out behaviour by an individual making an
    asylum or human rights claim which must be  taken  into  account  by  a
    deciding authority (whether the Secretary  of  State  or  Tribunal)  as
    "damaging" of a claimant's credibility.  So far as  relevant,  ss.8(1),
    (2), (5) and (6) provide as follows:

         "8.  Claimant's credibility

             (1)  In determining whether to believe a statement made by  or
                  on behalf of a person who makes an asylum claim or a human
                  rights claim, a deciding authority shall take account,  as
                  damaging the claimant's credibility, of any  behaviour  to
                  which this section applies.

             (2)  This section applies to any  behaviour  by  the  claimant
                  that the deciding authority thinks -

                  (a)  is designed or likely to conceal information,

                  (b)  is designed or likely to mislead, or

                  (c)  is designed  or  likely  to  obstruct  or  delay  the
                      handling or resolution of the claim or the taking  of
                      a decision in relation to the claimant.

             ....

             (5)  This section also applies to failure by the  claimant  to
                  make an asylum claim or human rights  claim  before  being
                  notified of an  immigration  decision,  unless  the  claim
                  relies wholly on matters arising after the notification.

             (6)  This section also applies to failure by the  claimant  to
                  make an asylum claim or human rights  claim  before  being
                  arrested under an immigration provision, unless -

                  (a)  he had no reasonable opportunity to  make  the  claim
                      before the arrest, or

                  (b)  the claim relies wholly on matters arising after  the
                      arrest.

             ...."

13. It was not suggested by either representative  that  s.8  did  not,  in
    principle, apply to the appellant's behaviour in  delaying  making  her
    asylum claim between her arrival in the UK on 24  April  2018  and  her
    claim for asylum on 3 June 2019.  That was a  delay  of  over  thirteen
    months and, included, notice of her entering illegally being served  on
    20 November 2018.

14. Instead, Mr Bass' submission is that the judge gave undue prominence to
    the issue of the appellant's delay and the application of  s.8  of  the
    2004 Act, in particular dealing with it first in  the  section  of  his
    determination concerned with credibility.  Mr Bass submitted  that  the
    judge had applied a 'tick box' approach and an 'over robotic  approach'
    contrary to that emphasised as necessary by the Court of Appeal in MN v
    SSHD [2020] EWCA Civ 1746 at [127].  Mr Bass submitted that  the  judge
    had failed to engage with the appellant's reasons why she did not claim
    asylum at port, namely because she did  not  know  anything  about  the
    asylum process and had leave to enter as a student.  Mr  Bass  referred
    me to the cases of SM (Section 8: judge's process)  Iran  [2005]  UKAIT
    00116 and JT (Cameroon) v SSHD  [2008]  EWCA  Civ  878  on  the  proper
    approach to s.8.

15. In SM the AIT said this at [7]-[10]:


         "7. The purpose of section 8 of the 2004 Act is no doubt to reverse
         dicta which have  appeared  from  time  to  time  suggesting  that,
         contrary to what might be regarded as ordinary experience,  certain
         matters have no impact at all on a person's credibility when it  is
         assessed in an asylum  claim.  It  has  the  incidental  effect  of
         interfering with the well-established rule that the finder of  fact
         (in this case, the Adjudicator or Immigration Judge) should look at
         the evidence as a whole, giving each item of it such weight  as  he
         or she considers appropriate. That is unfortunate, and may in  some
         circumstances be difficult to manage.


         8. The impact of section 8 will no doubt be different in  different
         types of case. In cases where there  is  some  reason  to  doubt  a
         variety of elements of the Appellant's story, the effect of section
         8 may well be simply to reinforce the salutary principle that if  a
         person does not appear to be telling the truth on  those  parts  of
         his evidence that can be checked,  there  is  no  real  reason  for
         believing that he is telling  the  truth  in  those  parts  of  his
         evidence that cannot be checked. Where,  on  the  other  hand,  for
         example, a person appears to be  telling  the  truth  about  having
         passed through a number of countries on his or her journey  to  the
         United Kingdom, the effect of section 8  on  a  deciding  authority
         will be to draw clear and specific attention to certain features of
         the evidence as aspects which must  (by  statute)  be  regarded  as
         casting some doubt upon the credibility of the Appellant's claim to
         be a refugee.


         9. Given the terms of section 8, it is inevitable that the  general
         fact-finding process is somewhat  distorted,  but  that  distortion
         must be kept to a minimum. There is  no  warrant  at  all  for  the
         claim, made in the grounds, that the matters identified by  section
         8 should be  treated  as  the  starting  point  of  a  decision  on
         credibility. The matters mentioned in section 8 may or may  not  be
         part of any particular claim; and their importance will  vary  with
         the nature of the claim that is being made, and the other  evidence
         that supports it or undermines it. In some  cases,  (of  which  the
         most obvious are perhaps those where there  is  contested  evidence
         about the journey to the United Kingdom)  it  will  simply  not  be
         possible to know whether section 8 applies until a preliminary view
         has been taken on  the  credibility  of  some  other  part  of  the
         evidence.

         10. In our judgment, although section 8 of the  2004  Act  has  the
         undeniably novel feature of requiring  the  deciding  authority  to
         treat certain aspects of the evidence in a particular  way,  it  is
         not intended to, and does not, otherwise affect the general process
         of deriving facts from evidence. It is the task of the fact-finder,
         whether official or judge, to look  at  all  the  evidence  in  the
         round, to try and grasp it as a  whole  and  to  see  how  it  fits
         together and whether it is sufficient to discharge  the  burden  of
         proof. Some aspects of the  evidence  may  themselves  contain  the
         seeds of doubt. Some aspects of the evidence may cause doubt to  be
         cast on other parts of the evidence. Some aspects of  the  evidence
         may be matters to which  section  8  applies.  Some  parts  of  the
         evidence may shine with the light of credibility.  The  fact-finder
         must consider all these points together; and,  despite  section  8,
         and although some matters may go against and some matters count  in
         favour of credibility, it is for the fact-finder  to  decide  which
         are the important, and which are the less important features of the
         evidence, and to reach his view as a whole on  the  evidence  as  a
         whole."

16. The AIT emphasised the need for an holistic assessment  of  the  issues
    relating to credibility and that s.8 does not require that behaviour to
    which it applies should be  treated  as  a  "starting  point"  for  the
    assessment  of  credibility.   In  his  skeleton  argument,   Mr   Bass
    emphasises that latter point found in the AIT's determination at [9].

17. In JT, the Court of Appeal considered the proper application of s.8  to
    determining credibility issues. In his judgment,  Pill  LJ  (with  whom
    Laws and Carnwath LJJ agreed) said this at [19]-[21]:
         "19. Section 8 can, in my judgment, be construed  in  a  way  which
         does not offend against constitutional principles. It  plainly  has
         its dangers, first, if it is read as a direction as  to  how  fact-
         finding should be conducted, which in my judgment it is  not,  and,
         in any event, in distorting the fact-finding exercise by  an  undue
         concentration on minutiae which may arise under the section at  the
         expense of, and as  a  distraction  from,  an  overall  assessment.
         Decision-makers should guard against that. A global  assessment  of
         credibility is required (R (Sivakumar) v Secretary of State for the
         Home Department 2003 UKHL 14, [2003] 1 WLR 840).
         20. I am not prepared to read the word "shall"  as  meaning  "may".
         The section 8 factors shall be  taken  into  account  in  assessing
         credibility, and are capable of damaging it, but the  section  does
         not dictate that relevant damage to credibility inevitably results.
         Telling lies does damage credibility and the wording  was  adopted,
         probably with that in mind, by way of explanation. However,  it  is
         the "behaviour" of which "account" shall be taken and, in  context,
         the qualifying word "potentially" can be read into  an  explanatory
         clause which  reads:  "as  damaging  the  claimant's  credibility".
         Alternatively,  the  explanatory  clause  may  be  read  as:  "when
         assessing any damage to the claimant's credibility".  The  form  of
         the sub-section and Parliament's assumed regard for  the  principle
         of legality permit that construction.
         21. Section 8 can  thus  be  construed  as  not  offending  against
         constitutional principles. It is no more than a reminder  to  fact-
         finding tribunals that conduct coming within the categories  stated
         in section 8 shall be taken into account in assessing  credibility.
         If there was a  tendency  for  tribunals  simply  to  ignore  these
         matters when assessing credibility,  they  were  in  error.  It  is
         necessary to take account of them.  However,  at  one  end  of  the
         spectrum, there may, unusually, be cases in which  conduct  of  the
         kind identified in section 8 is held to carry no weight at  all  in
         the overall assessment of credibility on the particular facts. I do
         not consider the section prevents that finding  in  an  appropriate
         case.  Subject  to  that,  I  respectfully  agree   with   Baroness
         Scotland's assessment, when introducing the Bill, of the effect  of
         section 8. Where section 8 matters are held to be entitled to  some
         weight, the weight to be given to them is entirely a matter for the
         fact-finder."

18. At [24], Laws LJ added this brief point:

         "For my part I would read the  adverb  "potentially"  into  s.8(1),
         before the word "damaging". If that is done, the section  does  not
         affect the power and duty of the judicial decision-maker  in  every
         instance to reach his own conclusion upon the  credibility  of  the
         claimant. It therefore  offers  no  offence  to  the  integrity  of
         judicial impartiality. This approach,  moreover,  seems  to  me  to
         accord with the view of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  itself
         at paragraph 10 of its determination  in SM  (Iran) [2005]  UKAIT
         00116."

19. The Court of Appeal emphasised  that  the  decision-maker  must,  as  a
    result of s.8, consider the behaviour which is relied upon as  damaging
    of the individual's credibility - sub-section (1)  said  the  behaviour
    "shall" not "may" be taken into account.  However, the Court went on to
    make plain that such behaviour was only "potentially" damaging  of  the
    claimant's credibility depending upon the circumstances and an  overall
    assessment of the evidence and credibility issues.  Where the behaviour
    under s.8 is entitled to be given some  weight,  the  Court  of  Appeal
    emphasised that that was "entirely a matter for the fact finder".

20. The importance of taking into account any explanation by the individual
    for the behaviour potentially damaging of their credibility was pointed
    up by the Inner House of the Court of Session in AJ  (Pakistan)  [2011]
    CSIH 49.  The Court was concerned with the application of s.8(4) of the
    2004 Act because the individual had not claimed asylum in  Greece  -  a
    safe third country - before coming to the UK.  He relied upon the  fact
    that he was under the  control  of  an  agent.   The  judge  failed  to
    consider whether  the  individual  had,  in  the  terms  of  s.8(4)  "a
    reasonable opportunity to make an asylum claim" in Greece and concluded
    that the individual's failure to claim asylum in Greece was a  "serious
    credibility issue".  The Court concluded that the judge  had  erred  in
    applying s.8(4).  Lord Clarke (with  whom  Lords  Mackay  and  Wheatley
    agreed) said this at [9]:


         [9] The immigration judge does not  address  the  qualifying  words
         "reasonable opportunity" to be found in section 8(4). The applicant
         had claimed that he did not seek asylum before reaching the United
         Kingdom as he was  under  the  control  of  an  agent  -  see  the
         respondent's decision letter at  para.  17  and  para.  22  of  the
         immigration judge's determination. The immigration  judge  did  not
         address this explanation. Moreover it has, at least  in  the  past,
         been recognised that an asylum seeker is entitled to exercise  some
         degree of choice over the country of destination. In R v Uxbridge
         Magistrates' Court & Another ex  parte  Adimi [1999]  EWHC  Admin
         765, Simon Brown, LJ, as he then was, said at para. 18


              "... I am persuaded ... that some element of choice is indeed
              open to refugees as to where they may properly claim  asylum.
              I conclude that any merely short term stopover  en  route  to
              such intended sanctuary cannot forfeit the protection of  the
              Article, and that the main  touchstones  by  which  exclusion
              from protection should be judged are the length  of  stay  in
              the intermediate country,  the  reasons  for  delaying  there
              (even a substantial delay  in  an  unsafe  country  would  be
              reasonable were the time spent trying to acquire the means of
              travelling on), and whether or  not  the  refugee  sought  or
              found  their  protection de  jure or de  facto from  the
              persecution they were fleeing".


         It has to be noted, importantly,  that  those dicta pre-date  the
         passing of section 8 of the 2004 Act.  Nevertheless  their  content
         may still, to some extent, give some guidance as to the approach to
         be taken to the concept of "reasonable  opportunity"  contained  in
         section 8(4). It has to be noted, in addition, that the immigration
         judge described the failure to claim asylum  in Greece which  she
         described as "a safe country" as  a  "serious  credibility  issue".
         Section 8(4) does not describe any such factor as being  "serious".
         It simply directs that such a failure should be taken into  account
         as  damaging  the  claimant's  credibility.   No   explanation   or
         justification is given by the immigration judge for regarding  this
         matter as a serious credibility issue in  the  overall  context  of
         this case. She appears to have isolated this factor as having  some
         special status and effect of its  own  as  opposed  to  placing  it
         simply as one of the relevant factors in  determining  credibility.
         She thereby, in our judgment, has fallen into the error  identified
         in the case of JT (Cameroon) v Secretary of State for  the  Home
         Department [2008] EWCA Civ 878, in the judgment of Pill LJ  with
         whom the other judges in the Court of Appeal agreed. At para. 16 of
         his Lordship's judgment, he said:


              "I do, however, agree with the parties that there is  a  real
              risk that section  8  matters  were  given  a  status  and  a
              compartment of their own rather than taken into  account,  as
              they shall have been, as  part  of  a  global  assessment  of
              credibility."

21. The Court's approach mirrored, and  approved,  that  of  the  Court  of
    Appeal in JT.  Again, the need for a holistic approach to the  evidence
    in assessing credibility is recognised and that a s.8 point should  not
    be isolated as having "special status" in assessing credibility.

22. In this appeal, Judge Trevaskis dealt with s.8 at paras  59-63  of  his
    determination.  There, he said this:

         "59.  Section  8  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration  (Treatment  of
             Claimants, etc.) Act  2004  provides  that  certain  forms  of
             behaviour by an appellant are to  be  considered  as  damaging
             credibility.  The form of behaviour relevant to this appeal is
             that the appellant failed  to  make  a  claim  for  asylum  on
             arrival in the United Kingdom.

         60.   Even  where  it  is  found  that  Section  8  applies  to  an
             appellant's claim, it is necessary to look at the evidence  as
             a whole and decide which parts are more  important  and  which
             less; Section 8 does not require the  behaviour  to  which  it
             applies to be treated as the starting point of the  assessment
             of credibility.

         61.  The appellant's explanation for this failure is that  she  did
             not know anything about the asylum process, and she  had  been
             granted a student visa.  When she was  detained  seven  months
             after her arrival she was  ill  and  had  to  be  admitted  to
             hospital.

         62.  I am satisfied that she did fail to make an  asylum  claim  on
             arrival, and I do not consider that her  explanation  is  such
             that her failure cannot damage her credibility.  She fled from
             Namibia because she claimed to fear her uncle, and she had  no
             intention of returning there.  The  claimed  grounds  for  her
             fear were fully established at the time she left  Namibia  and
             therefore there was no reason why she could not have  made  on
             arrival the same claims that she eventually made over  a  year
             later.

         63.  I shall consider the extent of that damage to her  credibility
             in the context of my overall assessment of her credibility".

23. I do not accept Mr Bass' submission that the judge fell into  error  in
    his application of s.8.

24. In my judgment, Judge Trevaskis correctly directed himself  as  to  the
    application of s.8 of the 2004 Act in accordance with SM  and  JT.   He
    recognised that s.8 need not be treated as  the  starting  point  -  of
    course, a judge has to start somewhere and to set out  the  s.8  issues
    first is not in itself improper providing that the  judge  goes  on  to
    consider those issues in  the  context  of  all  the  evidence.   Judge
    Trevaskis did not "isolate" the s.8  point  and  specifically  directed
    himself at para 63 that it must consider its effect on the  appellant's
    credibility in the context of all the evidence.  Then, in  paras  64-74
    considered other aspects of the appellant's  evidence  before  reaching
    his overall finding that the appellant's account was not to be accepted
    as credible.  Indeed, the additional points raised by Judge  Adio  only
    feature in Judge Trevaskis' reasoning after the passage in paras  59-63
    concerned with s.8 of the 2004 Act.

25. Further, I do not accept Mr Bass' submission that the judge  failed  to
    consider properly or at all the appellant's explanation why she did not
    claim asylum until thirteen months after her arrival  and  some  months
    after she had been detained on the basis of her illegal entry.  Nothing
    in the case of R v Uxbridge Magistrates Court  ex  parte  Adimi  [1999]
    EWHC 765 (Admin) relied upon by Mr Bass in his  skeleton  required  the
    judge to accept her explanation.  Its  continued  relevance  after  the
    enactment of s.8 was acknowledge in AJ in  that  any  explanations  for
    behaviour potentially damaging of credibility must be assessed but  not
    necessarily accepted.

26. The judge dealt with the appellant's explanation  in  para  62  of  his
    determination.  It was the appellant's case  that  she  did  not  claim
    asylum because she did not know about the process and she  already  had
    leave to enter as a student.  The judge was not required to accept that
    explanation taken at face value or, having considered the remainder  of
    her evidence, looking at her explanation holistically  and  whether  or
    not she was to be believed.

27. In addition to the judge's assessment of her explanation  at  para  62,
    the judge returned to it as part of his reasons in para 64(iv) where he
    said this:

         "I find she has not made an asylum claim  or  sought  to  establish
         that she is a person eligible for humanitarian protection or made a
         human rights claim at the  earliest  possible  time,  and  has  not
         demonstrated a good reason for not having done so; the evidence  or
         attempts to report her uncle to the police and to  obtain  official
         confirmation regarding the  disappearance  of  her  claimed  sister
         lacks weight because of her failure to seek it at the time  of  her
         arrival and the consequent inability to verify the copy documents".

28. Mr Bass placed some reliance upon the judge's statement in para 62 that
    she had "no intention of returning" to Namibia.  Mr Bass submitted that
    that was unfair as she had not been given an opportunity to  deal  with
    that issue.  However, the appellant, she accepts, came  to  the  UK  to
    avoid the abuse by her uncle and ultimately to remain in the  UK  as  a
    recognised refugee if she could successfully do  so.   Apart  from  the
    fact that the appellant entered on a temporary student visa, the  whole
    of the appellant's claim is premised on her seeking to obtain refuge in
    the UK on a long term basis.  There  is  nothing  in  the  evidence  to
    suggest she intended to come to the UK only temporarily.  If that  was,
    indeed, part of her claim she had ample opportunity in her written  and
    oral evidence to say so but she did not.  It was properly open  to  the
    judge to infer that she was coming to the UK on a long  term  basis  to
    avoid the fear from her uncle and that that was relevant  in  assessing
    whether she had, in fact, a basis for claiming asylum  and  upon  which
    she did not seek to do so on entering the  UK.   Mr  Bass'  point,  and
    objection to  the  judge's  conclusion  based  upon  the  evidence,  is
    tantamount to a suggestion that the  appellant  did  not  claim  asylum
    because she was not seeking refuge in the UK.  That, as I have said, is
    contrary to her case that she fled Namibia in order to avoid  abuse  by
    her  uncle  and  that,  having  been  apprehended  in  the  UK  by  the
    authorities, was precisely what she did, namely claimed asylum.

29. For these reasons, I reject the sole ground upon  which  the  appellant
    sought permission to appeal.  The judge properly considered s.8 in  the
    context of all the evidence and was entitled reasonably  to  take  into
    account that the appellant's  behaviour  in  not  claiming  asylum  for
    thirteen months after she  arrived  in  the  UK  was  damaging  of  her
    credibility.

    2. Corroboration

30. It is  axiomatic  that  corroboration  is  not  required  in  order  to
    establish an asylum claim or a humanitarian protection claim or a human
    rights claim.  To require it would amount  to  an  error  of  law  (see
    Kasolo) (13190), IAT cited in  ST  (Corroboration  -  Kasolo)  Ethiopia
    [2004] UKIAT 00119).  However, requiring  corroboration  is  materially
    different from taking into  account  that  documentary  evidence  which
    could be produced has not been produced in assessing whether to believe
    an appellant or witness or in determining  what  weight  to  give  that
    evidence and whether the evidence is sufficient to discharge the burden
    of proof  upon the appellant.

31. It is  the  duty  of  an  individual  making  an  asylum,  humanitarian
    protection or human rights claim to substantiate their claim,  although
    the  absence  of  supporting   document   will   not   necessarily   be
    determinative (see para 339L of the Immigration Rules and art  4(5)  of
    the Qualification Directive (2004/83)).  The  legal  relevance  of  the
    absence of supporting documentation was recognised in the  case  of  TK
    (Burundi) v SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ 40.  At [20]-[21], Thomas  LJ  (as  he
    then was) (with whom Waller and Moore-Bick LJJ agreed) said this:
         "20. The importance of the evidence that emerged in this  Court  is
         to demonstrate how important it  is  in  cases  of  this  kind  for
         independent supporting evidence  to  be  provided  where  it  would
         ordinarily  be  available;  that  where  there   is   no   credible
         explanation for the failure to produce that supporting evidence  it
         can be a very strong pointer that the account being  given  is  not
         credible. It is clear in the circumstances of this  case  that  the
         Judge was in  fact  right  to  disbelieve  the  appellant.  If  the
         appellant had asked the mother of his second child, Ms  Ndagire  to
         give evidence, the truth about her immigration  status  would  have
         emerged and his claim to base an entitlement to family life on  his
         relationship with her and the child by her would have failed.  That
         that was the inevitable consequence was made clear by the fact that
         his counsel accepted before us that he could no  longer  rely  upon
         the relationship with Ms Ndagire and  her  daughter  and  the  sole
         ground on which an Article  8  claim  could  be  advanced  was  the
         relationship to his daughter by his first partner.
         21. The circumstances of this case  in  my  view  demonstrate  that
         independent supporting evidence which  is  available  from  persons
         subject to this jurisdiction be provided wherever possible and  the
         need for an Immigration Judge to adopt a cautious approach  to  the
         evidence of an appellant where independent supporting evidence,  as
         it was in this case, is readily available within this jurisdiction,
         but not provided. It  follows  that  where  a  Judge  in  assessing
         credibility relies  on  the  fact  that  there  is  no  independent
         supporting evidence where there should be supporting  evidence  and
         there is no credible account for its absence commits  no  error  of
         law when he relies on that fact for rejecting  the  account  of  an
         appellant."

32. In his skeleton argument, Mr Bass referred to a number of  passages  in
    Judge  Trevaskis'  decision  where  he  had  taken  into  account   the
    appellant's failure to provide documentary evidence.  Mr Bass submitted
    that the judge had wrongly overemphasised the absence of  documentation
    and required corroboration.

33. First,  at  para  34  the  judge  refers  to  evidence  concerning  the
    appellant's sister and that she disappeared following which  the  abuse
    shifted from her sister to the appellant.   The  judge  refers  to  the
    evidence in a newspaper article of a missing  girl.   At  para  34  the
    judge said this:

          "The appellant does not have any further evidence to  support  her
         claim that the woman mentioned in  the  newspaper  article  is  her
         sister".

34. In para 33, the immediately preceding paragraph, the judge  notes  that
    the newspaper report identified the father of the missing girl using  a
    name which was different from that which  would  be  expected  and  the
    appellant had said that "she explained that this was a sort  of  maiden
    name".

35. This was not a case of the judge requiring corroborative evidence.  The
    judge's point is that if the newspaper report is to have  any  cogency,
    it must be shown that it relates to the appellant's sister.  If it  did
    not then it would have no relevance given the nature of the appellant's
    claim.  Given that there  was  a  discrepancy  in  the  naming  of  the
    sister's claimed father, I see nothing improper in the judge observing,
    in determining what if any weight to give to the newspaper report, that
    there was no further evidence to link the  appellant's  sister  to  the
    woman referred to in the newspaper article.

36. Secondly, in para 37 of his determination Mr Bass criticised the  judge
    for taking into account  that  there  was  no  supporting  evidence  of
    threats made against the appellant by her uncle or a witness  statement
    from her boyfriend whom she had sought assistance  from  to  avoid  her
    uncle, including going to South Africa for  a  short  period  of  time.
    What the judge actually says in para 37, setting  out  the  appellant's
    evidence, is that despite stating that her  uncle  had  threatened  her
    boyfriend, she had not produced any evidence to support that claim  and
    observed that there  was  no  letter  or  witness  statement  from  her
    boyfriend whom she had left in Namibia and "with whom she no longer has
    contact".  It is far from clear that the judge is other than  observing
    the absence of this additional evidence but noting that she  no  longer
    has contact with her boyfriend.

37. Likewise in para 38, when setting out the appellant's evidence  in  her
    witness statement that her boyfriend had stayed in Namibia despite  the
    risk of being found by her uncle and accused of  kidnapping  her  (when
    they had both gone to South Africa) she "has no evidence  that  he  was
    threatened".  Again, set out in the judge's recitation of the evidence,
    it is, in truth, no more than a factual  statement  that  there  is  an
    absence of supporting evidence when assessing the appellant's account.

38. Mr Bass, however, relies upon what the judge said  in  para  64(ii)  in
    relation to the absence of  this evidence where he said this:

         "I find that all material factors at her  disposal  have  not  been
         submitted, any  satisfactory  explanation  regarding  any  lack  of
         relevant material has not been given;  she  has  not  attempted  to
         provide evidence from [her boyfriend] which would  corroborate  her
         account of her problems with her uncle.  Because of  her  delay  in
         making her claim, she says she has lost contact with him.  It would
         have been obvious to her that such evidence would be  important  to
         her claim".

39. Mr Bass placed some reliance upon this passage as indicating  that  the
    judge had wrongly had regard to the absence  of  evidence  despite  the
    fact that the appellant was no longer in contact  with  her  boyfriend.
    Whilst the judge's point may not have the  greatest  force,  it  was  a
    matter which the judge could take into account that the appellant -  on
    coming to the UK - could have  provided  evidence  from  her  boyfriend
    before she lost contact to support her claim, in  particular  that  she
    and her boyfriend had been threatened by her uncle.  Read in  isolation
    that reasoning might well not support, in itself, an adverse finding in
    relation to the credibility of the appellant's account but it  was,  as
    was accepted before me, one of a number of reasons given by  the  judge
    for not believing the appellant.

40. Following the approach in TK(Burundi), these were not matters which  it
    can properly be said were  irrelevant  to  the  judge's  assessment  of
    whether the appellant's account was to be  accepted.   Judge  Trevaskis
    was, himself, clearly aware of the proper approach to  the  absence  of
    supporting evidence when, at para 64(v), he said this:

         "The fact that corroboration was not required did not mean that the
         Adjudicator was required to leave out of  account  the  absence  of
         documentary evidence,  which  could  reasonably  be  expected:  the
         Adjudicator was entitled to comment that it  would  not  have  been
         difficult to provide the relevant documents in this case".

41. In my judgment, there is nothing in this  additional  point  raised  by
    Judge Adio in granting permission to appeal.

    3. Inconsistencies

42. Mr Bass criticised the judge for his conclusion in para 64(iii) that:

         "There are numerous inconsistencies between  her  various  accounts
         which  have  been  identified  above.   I   have   considered   her
         explanations for these inconsistencies and I do not find them to be
         convincing.   Those  inconsistencies  which  are  remitted  by  the
         appellant are not minor and I find the inconsistencies as  a  whole
         are damaging to the core of her claim".

43. Mr Bass submitted that the judge had failed to  give  adequate  reasons
    for  concluding  that  the  inconsistencies  were   relevant   to   the
    credibility of the appellant's account.   He  submitted,  relying  upon
    paras 21 onwards of his skeleton argument, that the  judge  dealt  with
    inconsistencies in paras 33-40 of his determination and, he  submitted,
    had failed to evaluate the  inconsistencies  before  taking  them  into
    account.  Mr Bass relied upon, in para 21  of  his  skeleton  argument,
    seven paragraphs of the judge's determination, namely paras 33-39.

44. In para 33, the judge noted the discrepancy between the  father's  name
    of her sister in the newspaper report and  that  that  which  would  be
    expected and her explanation that it was "a sort of maiden name".  Para
    34, as relied upon by Mr Bass in his  skeleton  argument,  repeats  the
    criticism of the judge's comment that there was no further evidence  to
    support the appellant's claim that the woman mentioned in the newspaper
    article was her sister.  That is not a challenge to  the  judge  taking
    into account inconsistencies.  Para 35, refers to  different  dates  in
    various parts of the evidence concerning when her  sister  disappeared.
    Para 35 says this:

         "The police statement referring to the disappearance states of that
         it took place on 18 September 2015.  The appellant  said  that  was
         incorrect and it was 15 August  2015.   The  newspaper  report  was
         dated 11 September 2015 and stated the disappearance occurred on 20
         August 2015.  The appellant explained that her sister's father  had
         not believed that she was missing and did not report it  until  two
         weeks later".

45.  There  are  clear  inconsistencies  in   the   dates   reporting   the
    disappearance of the appellant's sister.  The  appellant's  explanation
    that her sister's father (a different person from her own  father)  had
    not reported her missing for two weeks simply does not explain why  the
    police statement gave the disappearance of her sister as over  a  month
    after the date that the appellant said was correct, namely 18 September
    2015 rather than 15 August 2015.  Likewise, there was a different  date
    reported in the newspaper as 20 August 2015.  That is a date  different
    from that suggested by the appellant to be the  correct  date.   It  is
    difficult to see what evaluation could be made of this  evidence  other
    than it threw up inconsistencies  in  the  detail  of  the  appellant's
    account which was relevant to the assessment of whether her account was
    to be believed.

46. Mr Bass, in para 21 of his skeleton argument, also relies upon para  36
    and that there is "no evaluation" of inconsistencies in the appellant's
    evidence.  However, para  36  does  not,  on  its  face,  set  out  any
    inconsistency in the evidence.  It states:

         "The appellant was asked why her  mother  had  not  left  the  farm
         following the deaths of her father and both brothers by  2012  when
         the appellant was 19.  Instead it was left to her uncle who already
         had work in the diamond industry.  She said that she was in  school
         when her mother died and her mother had not given the  property  to
         her uncle.  She said that her culture expected that female children
         would continue to live with their parents until they were  married.
         However, she moved away with her boyfriend because she had  nowhere
         else to live and also lived with a female friend for  a  period  of
         time".

47. Without further explanation on behalf of the appellant, it is difficult
    to see what inconsistency the judge is said to have taken into  account
    but with "no evaluation" in this passage.

48. Reliance is also placed upon para 37 but, again, in  this  passage  the
    judge comments on the absence  of  any  supporting  evidence  from  her
    boyfriend as to threats to him or the appellant from her uncle.  It  is
    not concerned with inconsistencies in the evidence and has already been
    dealt with in relation to the 'corroboration' ground.

49. The criticism made of para 38 is that the judge  has  misinterpreted  a
    phrase in the appellant's statement.  At para 38 the judge says this:

         "In her written statement paragraph 20 she said that  she  and  her
         boyfriend had applied for visas for the United Kingdom but she  had
         travelled here alone.  She said  that  he  had  never  intended  to
         accompany her and she cannot remember saying that he had wanted  to
         do so.  It had been his decision to stay  in  Namibia  despite  the
         risk of being found by her uncle and  accused  of  kidnapping  her.
         She has no evidence that he was threatened".

50. Para 20 of her statement is as follows:

         "My boyfriend and I applied for a short term student  visa  to  the
         UK.  I didn't really know what I was going to do when I got  there,
         I was just scared of my uncle and needed to get away from him".

51. It is unclear what  is  said  to  be  the  "misinterpretation"  of  her
    statement.  If it is being suggested, implicitly  but  not  explicitly,
    that only she applied for a student visa and not her boyfriend as well,
    the point made by the judge in para 38 is,  of  course,  at  root  that
    despite claiming  to  be  at  risk  from  her  uncle,  the  appellant's
    boyfriend remained in Namibia whether or not he had sought to obtain  a
    visa to the UK.  The point is that, despite the claimed risk to him, he
    remained there.

52. Finally, in relation to para 39, Mr  Bass'  skeleton  argument  asserts
    that the judge made "no evaluation" of the inconsistency.  Para  39  is
    as follows:

         "It was put to her that if her uncle was in prison from January  to
         April 2019 for raping his girlfriend, that  makes  it  more  likely
         that the police would believe her  allegations  against  him.   She
         said that it was easy to bribe the police in Namibia and  the  fact
         that he was only imprisoned for three months shows that he was able
         to influence them.  His  girlfriend  had  been  able  to  make  her
         complaint because she had parents to stand up for her".

53. The point made by the judge has to  be  seen  in  the  context  of  his
    consideration of the background evidence,  set  out  in  the  US  State
    Department 2019 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices - Namibia  at
    paras 42-44 of his determination concerning the  Namibian  authorities'
    responses to allegations of rape and sexual abuse.

54. Then at para 72, the judge said this:

         "However, the country information referred  to  above  and  in  the
         bundles shows that the appellant's claim that she  could  not  seek
         protection from the police in Namibia is not plausible".

55. Then at para 73 the judge said this:

          "On her own evidence, police took action  against  her  uncle  for
         sexual crime, which is  consistent  with  country  information  and
         inconsistent with her own claim".

56. I will return to this point shortly under the  'implausibility'  ground
    but, for present, it suffices to note that at para 39  the  judge  sets
    out  the  evidence  concerning  her  claim  that  her  uncle  had  been
    imprisoned for raping his girlfriend but for only three months and that
    she remained fearful, and could not look to the police in  Namibia  for
    protection, because he would be able  to  influence  them.   The  judge
    dealt with this at para 70 as follows:

         "Her claim that her uncle has influence  lacks  plausibility.   She
         states that he was arrested for rape and attempted murder, which is
         inconsistent with having influence over  the  police,  as  well  as
         showing that police action is taken against perpetrators of  sexual
         crime.  She claims that she could not make her allegations  because
         she had no family support, but I find that she had the  support  of
         her friend and boyfriend and she could  have  contacted  her  elder
         married sister for additional support".

57. Although pleaded as an issue concerned with inconsistency, in fact para
    39  concerns  plausibility  and  reading  the  paras  of  the   judge's
    determination together including the background evidence at  paras  42-
    44, 70 and 72.   Mr Bass accepted in his submissions that the appellant
    had not said in her evidence that her uncle had been  released  because
    of his influence.  It is plain that the judge was  reasonably  entitled
    to find, based upon the evidence, that  it  was  implausible  that  the
    appellant's uncle would have influence over the police  such  that  she
    would not be able to obtain a sufficiency of protection from them.

58. The challenge made to the judge's evidence  under  the  'inconsistency'
    ground raised by Judge Adio is unsustainable.   The  weakness  of  this
    ground is, no doubt, reflected in the fact that the  appellant's  legal
    representatives did not  seek  to  raise  it  in  the  grounds  seeking
    permission to appeal.

59. It is clear  that  there  were  a  number  of  inconsistencies  in  the
    appellant's evidence which the judge was entitled to take into  account
    and reasonably reach his adverse credibility finding.  In  addition  to
    the discrepancies in the evidence concerning the name of the father  of
    the appellant's sister and the date of her disappearance, there  was  a
    further significant  inconsistency  concerning  the  older  sister  and
    whether she had married the mayor of Maharero.  The  judge  dealt  with
    this in para 40 of his determination.  In her asylum interview (at Q11)
    she had said that was who her sister had married.  However, before  the
    judge she said that was incorrect, her  sister  had  married  into  the
    Maharero clan but her sister's husband was  not  the  mayor.   Further,
    there were inconsistencies  in  her  asylum  interview  and  subsequent
    written evidence concerning when she had  last  had  contact  with  her
    sister: in her asylum interview in 2012, in her witness statement  when
    she left Namibia in 2011, and in her oral evidence in  2012.   None  of
    these inconsistencies are challenged in the skeleton argument.

60. For these reasons, I  reject  the  additional  ground  based  upon  the
    judge's reliance upon inconsistencies in the appellant's evidence.

    4. Implausibility

61. Mr Bass criticised the judge for taking an unreasonable view as to  the
    implausibility of aspects of the appellant's account.   In  particular,
    he relied upon para 29 of the judge's determination where the judge had
    found it implausible that the appellant had been abused by her uncle as
    she alleges.  There, the judge said this:

         "I find that she was leading an independent life during this period
         and she was not  reliant  on  her  uncle  for  her  maintenance  or
         accommodation.  I find it implausible that she was being abused  by
         her uncle as she alleges, or that she was harassed by  him  at  the
         times in the way she alleges.  Had she been so treated,  she  would
         have been able to go to the police and report his behaviour,  which
         would have resulted in action being taken".

62. The latter point of course relates to the appellant's  claim  that  her
    uncle had influence over the police as evidenced by the  fact  that  he
    was released after three months  having  been  arrested  for  rape  and
    attempted murder of his girlfriend.  I have  already  dealt  with  that
    issue above.

63.  In  relation  to  the  point  made  about  the  appellant  leading  an
    independent life during this period and not being reliant on her  uncle
    for her maintenance and accommodation, Mr Bass submitted  that  it  was
    not implausible that her uncle might sexually abuse her simply  because
    she was not reliant upon him or dependent upon him; dependence was  not
    a prerequisite of abuse.

64. Mr Bass placed reliance on what was said by Underhill LJ in MN at [127]
    as follows:

         "Likewise the term 'plausibility' is not a term  of  art.   To  say
         that  a  particular  account,  or  element  in  that  account,   is
         implausible is simply to say that it seems to the decision-maker to
         be inherently surprising or the kind of thing that  you  would  not
         normally expect to happen; and such an  assessment  will  obviously
         feed in to the overall assessment of credibility, though the weight
         to be given to it will depend on the degree of unlikelihood and how
         confident the decision-maker can be about it.  Perhaps both  points
         are too obvious to need making: but if terms are used too regularly
         they sometimes get in the  way  of  the  process  of  common  sense
         decision-making".

65. Mr Bass  accepted  that  the  judge  had  accurately  paraphrased  that
    approach at para 67 of his determination.

66. Whilst it is important for a judge not to assess the plausibility of an
    account by reference to considerations of the customs  and  ways  of  a
    different society to that from which the appellant originates (see Y  v
    SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ 1223), the improbability (or  indeed  probability)
    of an account can  be  taken  into  account  in  assessing  whether  an
    appellant or witness is to be believed.  In HK v SSHD [2006]  EWCA  Civ
    1153, Neuberger LJ (as he then  was),  whilst  counselling  caution  in
    adopting reasoning based upon improbability, said this (at [30]):
         "30. Inherent improbability in the  context  of  asylum  cases  was
         discussed at some length by Lord Brodie in Awala -v- Secretary  of
         State [2005] CSOH 73. At paragraph 22, he pointed out that it  was
         "not proper to reject an applicant's account merely on the  basis
         that  it  is  not  credible  or  not  plausible.  To  say  that  an
         applicant's account is not  credible  is  to  state  a  conclusion"
         (emphasis added). At paragraph 24, he  said  that  rejection  of  a
         story on grounds of implausibility  must  be  done  "on  reasonably
         drawn inferences and not simply on conjecture or  speculation".  He
         went on to emphasise, as did Pill LJ in Ghaisari, the  entitlement
         of the fact-finder to rely "on his common sense and his ability, as
         a practical and informed person, to identify  what  is  or  is  not
         plausible". However, he accepted that "there will  be  cases  where
         actions  which  may  appear  implausible  if  judged  by...Scottish
         standards, might be plausible when considered within the context of
         the applicant's social and cultural background"."

67. In para 69 of his determination, Judge Trevaskis was not saying that it
    was implausible that the appellant would be abused by her uncle because
    she was not reliant or dependent  upon  him.   Rather,  the  judge  was
    observing that the appellant was leading an independent  life  and  not
    living with her  uncle.   After  her  sister  left  in  2015,  and  the
    appellant claimed that her uncle then abused her, she moved out in 2016
    to live with a female friend.  She refused to return to live  with  him
    even though he sought to persuade her to do so.  The account,  set  out
    at para 68 of the determination, notes  that  her  uncle  then  stopped
    harassing her and she reported him to  the  police.   She  remained  in
    Namibia until late 2017 continuing to work but without further  contact
    from her uncle.  After she went to South Africa, she claimed  that  her
    uncle resumed harassing her until she left  in  April  2018.   At  this
    time, she had a boyfriend who was working as a lorry driver.  It was in
    that context that the judge considered that it was implausible that she
    was abused or harassed by her uncle "at the times or  in  the  way  she
    alleges".  In my  judgment,  that  was  not  a  conclusion  based  upon
    societal-specific criteria and was not one based upon a simple  premise
    that the appellant was neither reliant nor dependent  upon  her  uncle.
    Rather, it was based upon the  whole  of   her  personal  circumstances
    including that she was living independently, working and separated from
    her uncle's household where she had ceased to live in 2016.  That was a
    proper inference  that  the  judge  was  reasonably  entitled  to  draw
    adopting his own common-sense.

68. For these reasons, I reject  the  ground  based  upon  'implausibility'
    identified by Judge Adio in his grant of permission.

69. Standing back, I am satisfied that  Judge  Trevaskis  gave  sustainable
    reasons  for  concluding  that  the  appellant  was  not  credible  and
    rejecting her account to be at risk on return  to  Namibia  because  of
    previous abuse by her uncle.

Decision

70. For these reasons, the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  to  dismiss
    the appellant's appeal on all grounds did not involve the making of  an
    error of law.  That decision, therefore, stands.

71. Accordingly, the appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.



                                                                      Signed

                                                                Andrew Grubb

                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                                               21 April 2021
