
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11097/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 4th January 2018                    |On 9th February 2018                 |
|                                       |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KELLY


                                   Between

                                     m h
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Nicholson, Counsel instructed by Lawrence and
                  Co. Solicitors
For the Respondent:  Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS
Introduction

 1. I have decided to make an anonymity direction in the terms that  appear
    at the end of this decision. This is because I have concluded  that  it
    is necessary to protect the interests of the Appellant's  daughter  who
    is a child.

 2. This is an appeal by MH who was born on [ ] 1990 and is  a  citizen  of
    Afghanistan.  He appeals against the decision of Judge Woolf to dismiss
    his appeal against refusal of his protection and human  rights  claims.
    The basis of his protection claim was that he  was  at  risk  of  being
    killed by the Taliban on return to Afghanistan due to his  work  as  an
    interpreter for the Americans and because the Taliban believe  that  he
    is a British spy due to the fact that he has resided in  the  UK  since
    2010.

 3. The basis of his claim under Article 8 was and is that he is married to
    a Lithuanian national exercising European Community  treaty  rights  in
    the UK with whom he has a young daughter.  It was also  argued  on  his
    behalf that it was incumbent upon the  Tribunal  to  have  regard  when
    assessing his claim under Article 8 to the fact that the Respondent had
    unlawfully failed to give effect to an earlier decision by the Tribunal
    (dated 9th October 2014) in which  it  found  that  the  Appellant  had
    satisfied all the requirements for leave to remain as a student.

 4. The Appellant's protection claim was supported by an expert  in  Afghan
    affairs, Dr Giustozzi.  In broad terms, Dr Giustozzi concluded that the
    Appellant's account of the threats he claimed to have received from the
    Taliban was entirely plausible, that he was at risk on return from  the
    Taliban by reason thereof, and that he could  not  safely  relocate  to
    Kabul.

 5.  At  paragraph  65  of  her  decision,  the  judge  accepted  that  the
    Appellant's account was credible and that he  was  indeed  at  risk  of
    being killed as a collaborator were he to return to his  home  area  of
    Ghoroband district at Parwan province.  For the reasons she set out  at
    paragraphs 68 and  69,  however,  she  disagreed  with  Dr  Giustozzi's
    conclusion that it was unreasonable to expect the Appellant to relocate
    within Afghanistan, specifically, to a central Kabul.

 6. The judge further concluded (at paragraphs 70 and 73) that  given  that
    the outcome of the Appellant's application for an  EEA  residence  card
    had yet to be  determined,  it  was  not  appropriate  to  address  the
    appellant's argument that it would be unreasonable for him to  relocate
    with his Christian wife to a Muslim country, or indeed to carry out any
    meaningful assessment of the effect that removal would  have  upon  his
    family life for the purposes of considering the claim under Article  8.



The grounds of appeal

 7. With apologies to both Mr Chelvan (who settled  the  original  grounds)
    and to Mr Nicholson (who expanded upon them in his renewed  application
    for permission to appeal) I shall attempt to summarise the  appellant's
    arguments.

 8. Firstly, it is said  that  the  judge  ought  to  have  determined  the
    protection appeal on the basis that the Appellant's wife  would  return
    with him to Afghanistan given the Presenting Officer's argument in  the
    First-tier Tribunal that she "could" do so.

 9. Secondly that it was irrational to find that the Appellant could safely
    relocate to central Kabul given -

      a) the uncontradicted opinion of Dr Giustozzi that he could not; and

      b) that it was not known in which part of Kabul his  family  had  been
         staying at the time when they received the so-called 'night letter'
         threatening the Appellant's life

10. Thirdly, the judge failed to have regard to the Respondent's failure to
    give effect to the Appellant's successful appeal on  9th  October  2014
    against refusal to grant his application for limited leave to remain as
    a student when carrying out the Article 8 assessment.

Discussion

11. The first ground is in my view misconceived. So far as  the  protection
    claim is concerned, the critical question was not whether the  wife  of
    the appellant could follow him to Afghanistan, but rather  whether  she
    would  do  so.   In  stating  that  the  appellant  "could"  return  to
    Afghanistan with his wife, the Presenting Officer was simply adopting a
    shorthand form of the usual  argument  under  Article  8  that  it  was
    reasonable for family life to be enjoyed outside  the  United  Kingdom.
    However, for the purposes of the protection appeal, the  judge's  error
    was if anything in failing to make findings concerning the  credibility
    of his wife's  claim  that  she  would  not  follow  the  appellant  to
    Afghanistan under any circumstances rather than in failing to make  the
    assumption that she would do so.

12. Turning to the second ground, Dr Giustozzi had this to say at paragraph
    32 of his report dated 12th May 2017:

         "In  summary  the  case  of  Mr  Mohammad   is   fully   plausible.
         Interpreters  are  one  of  the  categories  at  highest  risk   in
         Afghanistan.  Alleged spies are another such  category.   The  risk
         will be greatest in his home district of  Ghoroband  which  is  now
         quite heavily infiltrated by Taliban.  In Kabul too however he will
         be at risk unless he manages to earn  enough  money  to  settle  in
         central Kabul.  Given his profile the only way he could do so would
         be to resume his job as an interpreter which would again place  him
         at risk whenever he left the central  neighbourhood  of  Kabul  for
         work or for whatever reason.  The uncle is unlikely to let  him  to
         live in his house given the risk associated with him."

13. This is what the judge said about the matter at paragraphs 66 to 69  of
    her decision:

         "66. The  issues  regarding  whether  there  is  a  sufficiency  of
             protection and/or whether the Appellant can safely relocate to
             Kabul remain to  be  considered.   Having  accepted  that  the
             Appellant's family were in receipt of a  night  letter  whilst
             staying with his uncle there I conclude that he cannot go  and
             live with his uncle.  Dr Giustozzi states at paragraph  29  of
             his report relocating would reduce the risk to  the  Appellant
             from the Taliban  only  in  certain  conditions.   The  safest
             location will be in central Kabul  however  if  the  Appellant
             relocated  finding  accommodation  will   be   difficult   and
             expensive.  As of early 2011  even  in  the  most  remote  and
             inaccessible parts  of  Kabul  (at  the  mountain  sides)  the
             average family house was rented for $220 to $300 a month  with
             no running water or  electricity  provided.   The  cost  of  a
             single bedroom apartment in Kabul was  estimated  in  2014  at
             about  $175  outside  the  city  centre.   Often  young   male
             labourers share a flat or a house.  It is not uncommon to  see
             even four such people living in a single room.  The cost of  a
             bed in such accommodation will be of some tens  of  dollars  a
             month  depending  on  the   location   and   the   conditions.
             Dormitories with up to ten people sharing a  room  also  exist
             even at lower rates of $10 to $12 dollars  per  month.  As  of
             September 2015 the cost of a single bed in a hostel  is  about
             $70 to $100 a month ...  In safe central areas  of  Kabul  the
             typical cost of a small flat with two bedrooms, a kitchen  and
             a bathroom range between $350 to $400.  A three  bedroom  flat
             costs $600 to $700 because it is  rare  for  Afghans  to  live
             alone and it is common  to  have  rather  large  families  one
             bedroom flats are almost non-existent.

         67.  At paragraph 30 [Dr Giustozzi] states  "Unless  the  Appellant
             resumes working as an interpreter earning a  livelihood  could
             be a challenge for the Appellant as he would have to deal with
             a shrinking job market and a deep economic and  social  crisis
             while lacking a  social  and  kin  network  to  support  him."
             Towards the end of the same paragraph he states that a  single
             man would need at least $200 to survive.  He mentions  various
             occupations  and  daily  rates  for  labourers  and  unskilled
             workers.

         68.  On this issue I am inclined  to  depart  from  Dr  Giustozzi's
             conclusion that the Appellant would have to take up  low  paid
             work that would not provide him with a sufficient income.  The
             Appellant is an educated man  who  previously  found  work  in
             Kabul in a clerical capacity working as an information officer
             working for UCAC dealing with the college admissions in Kabul.
              Dr Giustozzi comments on the general decline in  the  economy
             and  low  wages  for  unskilled  but  does  not  address   the
             Appellant's previous experience in relation  to  finding  more
             skilled work which clearly sustained him in the  past  or  the
             qualifications he obtained whilst in  the  UK.   I  appreciate
             some seven years have passed since the Appellant came  to  the
             UK  and  the  situation  for  someone  with  the   Appellant's
             education  characteristics  might  have  changed  but  as   Dr
             Giustozzi does not address the Appellant's  particular  skills
             and previous experience of working in Kabul I am not satisfied
             that his report is supportive of the Appellant's  claims  that
             he will be unable to  support  himself  if  he  lived  in  the
             central area of Kabul.

         69.      The Appellant maintains he would  not  be  safe  in  Kabul
             because of the fact that the  Taliban  found  his  family  and
             issued the second night letter throwing it  into  his  uncle's
             compound.  Dr Giustozzi was  made  aware  of  the  Appellant's
             claims and in his final paragraph  notes  that  his  uncle  is
             unlikely  to  let  him  live  in  his  house  given  the  risk
             associated with it but  does  not  indicate  anywhere  in  his
             report that this will place the Appellant at risk  in  central
             Kabul.  I appreciate that the Appellant has a subjective  fear
             of being killed or abducted due to the targeting of his cousin
             who returned to Afghanistan to go to a wedding and  of  course
             due to the abduction of his family on their way to Jalalabad I
             accept that those incidents and  that  Dr  Giustozzi's  report
             would suggest that it would be unsafe  for  the  Appellant  to
             travel outside  Kabul.   However  I  see  no  reason  why  the
             Appellant would choose or be obliged to do so."

14. When assessing an issue of internal relocation, the  ultimate  question
    is whether  the person can (a) relocate to an area where he  would  not
    have a well-founded fear of harm, and (b)  reasonably  be  expected  to
    stay in that part of the county  [paragraph  339O  of  the  Immigration
    Rules].  Whilst it is true  that  Dr  Giustozzi  did  not  address  the
    question of the Appellant's current  skills-set  when  considering  his
    prospects of gaining employment in central Kabul, neither was there any
    evidence that clerical work of the type in which he had previously been
    engaged remained available. Moreover, the appellant was plainly at risk
    in the event of him leaving the confines of central Kabul  and,  whilst
    it was not clear in which district it had  occurred,  it  was  accepted
    that family members had been targeted by the Taliban whilst  they  were
    in that city. Considering all these matters in the round, it  does  not
    seem to me to have been reasonably open to the judge to  conclude  that
    the  appellant  could  safely  and  reasonably  be  expected  to   stay
    indefinitely in central Kabul.

15. The way in which Mr Nicholson put his argument in support of the  third
    ground was that, whilst section 117B(4) of the Nationality, Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002 requires the Tribunal to attach  little  weight  to
    private life established  at  a  time  when  a  person  is  in  the  UK
    unlawfully, to do so in the case of Appellant  would  be  unfair  given
    that this situation had only come about as a result of the Secretary of
    State's wrongful refusal of his application for leave  to  remain.  The
    judge's failure to factor this into the Article  8  balancing  exercise
    had thus been a material error of law.  However, this does  not  appear
    to be the way in which the argument was put in the First-tier Tribunal.
    Rather, it seems to have been put on the basis that the Appellant ought
    to be compensated, by a grant of leave to remain on private and  family
    life grounds, for the historic injustice that he had  suffered  due  to
    the failure to grant him leave to remain as a student. In  relation  to
    this particular argument, the judge found (at  paragraphs  76  and  77)
    that the appellant had failed to establish that  he  had  suffered  any
    detriment as a result of the failure  to  grant  him  leave  to  remain
    following his successful appeal. This  finding  that  was  in  my  view
    reasonably open to her.

16. However, there is in my judgment a far more fundamental difficulty with
    the judge's assessment of the appellant's claim  under  Article  8.   I
    mentioned at paragraph 10 (above) the judge failed when considering the
    appellant's protection claim to assess the credibility of the claim  by
    the appellant's wife that she would  not  follow  him  to  Afghanistan.
    Moreover, when considering the appellant's claim under Article  8,  the
    judge also failed to deal with the question of whether the  appellant's
    wife could follow him to Afghanistan; that is to say, whether it  would
    be reasonable to expect her to do so.   She  instead  side-stepped  the
    issue:

         "70. There is an added complication by reason  of  the  Appellant's
             marriage to a European national who is a Christian.  No  doubt
             that is why Judge Oliver was persuaded  that  the  Appellant's
             application for an EEA residence  card  should  be  determined
             before consideration was given to his protection claim.   Some
             clarity with regard  to  the  Respondent's  decision  on  that
             application would have made  my  decision  a  little  simpler.
             Nevertheless at the date of  this  hearing  it  has  not  been
             established that he qualifies for  a  residence  card  nor  is
             there any requirement  that  he  leaves  the  UK.   Should  he
             succeed in his EEA application there is no requirement for him
             to leave the UK.  In those circumstances I find it  impossible
             to assess whether  or  not  he  will  be  required  to  go  to
             Afghanistan with his wife  and  his  infant  daughter.   I  am
             therefore not satisfied that the fact that he has a  Christian
             European wife will act as a barrier to his return  to  central
             areas of Kabul at the date of the hearing.

         ...

         73. The Appellant has sought to argue the Respondent's decision  is
             unlawful under Article 8 of the ECHR by reason of  his  family
             and  private  life  here.   Unless  and  until  the  Appellant
             established a right to remain as a spouse of an EEA national I
             cannot be satisfied that he will be separated  from  his  wife
             and  infant  daughter  by  reason  of  this  decision.    This
             necessitates that  I  restrict  my  consideration  to  matters
             relating to his private life."

17. In many ways, the question to be considered under the Article 8 was the
    converse of that under the protection  claim.  The  question  that  the
    judge ought to have addressed in relation to the former was whether  it
    was reasonable for the appellant and his wife  to  enjoy  their  family
    life outside the United Kingdom. The answer to that  question  was  not
    dependent upon whether or not  the  appellant's  wife  was  willing  to
    relocate to Afghanistan, and it was certainly not  dependent  upon  the
    outcome of the appellant's application for an EEA  Residence  Card.  It
    was however dependent upon the judge's view  of  whether  it  would  be
    reasonable for a person from an entirely different social, cultural and
    religious background  to  relocate  to  a  country  that  she  had  not
    previously visited, whether the Appellant had a genuine and  subsisting
    parental relationship with his child and, if so, whether would it would
    be reasonable to expect that  child  to  leave  the  territory  of  the
    European Union in order to follow his father to Afghanistan or for  the
    child's relationship with his father to be  effectively  severed  as  a
    consequence of his remaining in  the  United  Kingdom.  None  of  these
    highly pertinent questions were  addressed  by  the  judge.   This  was
    clearly a material error  of  law  which,  though  not  raised  in  the
    grounds,  was  one  that  Mr  Clarke  readily  conceded  was  'Robinson
    obvious'.

Remaking the decision

18. Having just handed down my decision in respect of the errors of law,  I
    have  heard  further  representations  in  relation  to  remaking   the
    decision, both on protection claim grounds and Article  8  family  life
    grounds. I have been persuaded that it is appropriate for me to  remake
    both decisions without a further hearing.

19. Judge Woolf found that there was a general risk  to  the  appellant  on
    return to Afghanistan. That finding is preserved.  The only outstanding
    issue is whether the appellant could safely and reasonably be  expected
    to relocate to central Kabul. Given that I have already held  that  the
    finding that he could do so  was  unsustainable  on  the  evidence,  it
    follows that I remake the decision by allowing the appeal on protection
    grounds.

20. So far as Article 8 is concerned,  I  was  initially  concerned  as  to
    whether it was appropriate for me to  remake  the  decision  given  the
    absence of any material findings of fact by the First-tier Tribunal.  I
    have nevertheless been persuaded that I can do so upon the basis of the
    known facts and the existing evidence.  One of the known facts is  that
    the Appellant's appeal against refusal of his application  for  an  EEA
    residence card has been allowed since the  time  that  his  appeal  was
    heard by Judge Woolf. I trust that on this occasion  the  Secretary  of
    State will make good that decision by issuing the appropriate document.
    One of the consequences of doing so would be that if the Appellant were
    to be removed to Afghanistan then he could immediately  return  to  the
    United Kingdom using the EEA Residence Permit that I assume will now be
    issued to him. It may be, therefore, that what I am  about  to  say  in
    relation to  the  Appellant's  Article  8  claim  will  prove  somewhat
    academic.

21. It is not disputed that the appellant enjoys family life with his  wife
    in the United Kingdom and that the  consequences  of  his  removal  are
    therefore sufficiently serious to engage  the  potential  operation  of
    Article 8. Subject only to the operation of  section  6  of  the  Human
    Rights Act 1998, any decision to remove the Appellant would  be  lawful
    and made in furtherance of the legitimate objective of maintaining  the
    economic wellbeing of the country through the consistent application of
    immigration controls. The remaining question is whether  removal  would
    be proportionate to that end.

22. The appellant's wife is a  Christian  and  a  Lithuanian  national  who
    speaks the language of her country origin. I infer that she also speaks
    English to a reasonable level given that it is the only  language  that
    she has in common with the  Appellant.   She  does  not  however  speak
    Pashtu,  or  any  of  the  other  languages  spoken   in   Afghanistan.
    Afghanistan is thus a country that would be totally alien to her  at  a
    social and cultural level.  I therefore conclude that it would  not  be
    reasonable to expect her to enjoy her family life with the Appellant in
    Afghanistan.

23. The best interests of the Appellant's daughter (a citizen of Lithuania)
    are a primary consideration.  Those interests require her to be  raised
    by both her parents in a stable environment. It  follows  that  if  the
    Appellant were to be removed to Afghanistan, her best  interests  could
    only be met by both her and her mother following him to  that  country.
    The effect of his removal would thus be to require a  child  who  is  a
    citizen of the European Union to leave its  territory.  This  would  be
    contrary to European  Union  law  as  well  as  contrary  to  the  best
    interests of the Appellant's daughter. The alternative would be for the
    appellant's wife and daughter to remain in the United Kingdom,  thereby
    effectively severing their respective familial relationships  with  the
    Appellant.   As  has   been   repeatedly   stated   in   the   relevant
    jurisprudence, this will  rarely  be  a  proportionate  consequence  of
    removal in furtherance of immigration control.  One example of where it
    might be proportionate is in a case involving a foreign criminal.  That
    is not however suggested in this appeal.

24. I therefore conclude that the Appellant's removal would  not  strike  a
    fair balance between the public interest in immigration control and the
    right of the appellant to respect for private and family life.

Notice of Decision

      1. The appeal is allowed and the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
         to dismiss the appeal on all grounds is set aside.

      2. The decision is remade by substituting  a  decision  to  allow  the
         appeal on  grounds  that  the  appellant's  removal  would  be  (a)
         contrary to the obligations of the United Kingdom under the Refugee
         Convention, and (b) unlawful under section 6 of  the  Human  Rights
         Act 1998.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any member of their  family.  Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date: 7th February 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Kelly

