
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/11118/2019 (P)




                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Decided under rule 34 (P)          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 24 September 2020               |On 29 September 2020               |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEKI?



                                   Between

                                    SMDF

                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and



                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



                            DECISION AND REASONS



Representation   (by way of written submissions)

For the appellant:     Mr J Howard, Fountain Solicitors

For the respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



Background

1. This appeal comes before me following the grant of permission  to  appeal
by Upper Tribunal Judge Finch on 19  June  (promulgated  on  30  June)  2020
against the determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Parkes,  promulgated
on 12 February 2020 following a hearing at Birmingham on 27 January 2020.

2. The appellant is a Yemeni national who appeals the respondent's  decision
of 7 November 2019 to refuse to grant him protection. He has, however,  been
granted humanitarian protection until November 2024 due to the  ongoing  war
but argues that he would be at risk on  return  on  asylum  grounds  on  the
basis that he was a journalist who is wanted for the  anti  Houthi  articles
he wrote on Facebook in Turkey where he had attended university.  He  claims
to have worked at news agencies whilst and after studying.  He  claims  that
the rebels threatened him by phone and forced his mother to disown  him.  He
also claims that there are 'wanted' posters of him displayed  in  public  in
Yemen.

3. The appellant overstayed his student visa  in  Turkey  and  was  detained
pending deportation. He then flew to Khartoum from  where  he  travelled  to
Egypt, Mauritania, Mali, Algeria, Morocco, Spain, France, Belgium  and  then
the UK, arriving here by lorry in March 2019.

4. The  respondent  found  the  appellant's  claim  to  be  speculative  and
inconsistent and rejected its credibility.

5. An appeal was lodged and came before First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Parkes.
The judge heard oral evidence. He noted that the appellant had  been  unable
to provide any evidence that he had worked as a journalist and that  he  had
made no attempts to obtain such information from Al Jazeera  and  the  other
agencies in Turkey  he  claimed  to  have  worked  for.  He  considered  the
pictures of wanted posters showing the appellant's face with Arabic  writing
and a date written  in  English.  He  found  that  in  the  absence  of  any
identifying features, these could have been anywhere. He considered that  it
was not credible that with an ongoing war, the rebels would be  chasing  the
appellant who had been out of the country for many years or  that  they  had
not returned to the appellant's mother's home after a single visit  if  they
really were interested in the appellant. He found that the  court  document,
sentencing him to  three  years  in  prison  and  being  passed  off  as  an
original, was a photocopy. He noted that the  appellant  seemed  content  to
leave his wife in Yemen living with a group of  women.  He  noted  that  the
appellant had not mentioned  a  wife  when  asked  for  family  details.  He
dismissed the appeal.

6. The appellant sought permission to appeal on the following  grounds:  (i)
that the judge made no findings on whether the appellant wrote the  articles
claimed  (at  AB:130-132)  and  on  the  impact  they  would  have  on   the
persecutory risk he fears on return to  Yemen;  (ii)  that  having  accepted
that the appellant had been a student of journalism  in  Turkey,  the  judge
misdirected himself in the assessment of the persecutory risk the  appellant
faces; (iii) that it was unreasonable for the judge to expect the  appellant
to have obtained evidence of his work for journalist  agencies   because  of
"the  appellant's  factual  matrix";  (iv)  that  the  judge  erred  in  his
assessment of the evidence of posters of the appellant by expecting  to  see
geographical identifying features; (v) that no reasons were  given  for  why
the judge did not attach weight to the evidence of the appellant's  witness;
and (vi) that the judge did not explain why weight could  not  be  given  to
the court document.

7. Permission was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Finch on  the  basis  that
the judge had arguably erred in making findings without  taking  account  of
the articles in the appellant's name, the evidence of  the  witness  and  by
failing to consider the evidence of posters in the context of the  situation
in Yemen.

Covid-19 crisis

8. Normally, the matter would have been listed for hearing after  the  grant
of  permission,  but  due  to  the  Covid-19  pandemic  and  need  to   take
precautions against its spread, this did  not  happen.  Instead,  directions
were sent to the parties by Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington on 13 July  2020.
They were asked to present any objections to the matter being dealt with  on
the papers and to make any further submissions on the  error  of  law  issue
within certain time limits.

9. Mr Melvin's submissions for the respondent were received on 21 July  2020
and the submissions for the appellant from Mr Howard  were  received  on  24
July 2020. I now proceed to consider the matter.

10. In doing so I have regard to the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008 (the UT Rules), the judgment of Osborn v The Parole Board  [2013]
UKSC 61, the Presidential Guidance Note No 1 2020: Arrangements  during  the
Covid-19 pandemic (PGN) and the Senior President's Pilot Practice  Direction
(PPD). I have regard to the overriding objective which is defined in rule  2
of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 as  being  "to  enable
the Upper Tribunal to deal with cases fairly and  justly".  To  this  end  I
have considered that  dealing  with  a  case  fairly  and  justly  includes:
dealing with it in ways that are proportionate  to  the  importance  of  the
case, the complexity of the issues, etc; avoiding unnecessary formality  and
seeking flexibility in the proceedings; ensuring,  so  far  as  practicable,
that the parties are able to participate fully  in  the  proceedings;  using
any special expertise  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  effectively;  and  avoiding
delay, so far as compatible with proper consideration of  the  issues  (Rule
2(2) UT rules and PGN:5).

11. The appellant seeks an oral hearing but gives no  reasons  for  why  the
matter cannot be determined on the papers despite being  specifically  asked
to address it. In the absence of any reasons, and given that  the  arguments
for the appellants are clearly made by way of  the  grounds  for  permission
and in the  submissions,  I  see  no  reason  why  the  appellant  would  be
disadvantaged by a paper determination. I am satisfied that  I  am  able  to
fairly and justly deal with this matter on the papers before me  and  I  now
proceed to do so.

Submissions

12.  For the respondent, Mr Melvin  submits  that  in  the  absence  of  any
evidence from the two news agencies in Turkey  to  confirm  the  appellant's
claim of employment, the judge was entitled to reject the claim that he  was
a  journalist.  It  is  submitted  that  given  that  finding,  the  claimed
published articles carry no weight  and  the  evidence  falls  away.  It  is
submitted that the appellant's witness only met him  after  his  arrival  in
the UK and whatever he has said about the appellant's  activities  were  not
as a result of first hand knowledge. It is  submitted  that  the  judge  was
aware that the appellant had been granted  humanitarian  protection  and  so
was alert to the situation in Yemen. It was open to the judge to  note  that
the appellant had failed to show  that  the  posters  were  displayed  in  a
Houthi controlled area in Yemen and to note that the date was  displayed  in
English. The judge had considered  the  evidence  holistically  and  reached
sustainable conclusions.

13.  For the appellant, Mr Howard submits that the judge accepted  that  the
appellant had been a student of journalism in Turkey but he failed  to  make
any findings on whether the appellant had written  the  newspapers  articles
that had been adduced and on how they would impact upon  him  on  return  to
Yemen given that they highlighted problems  in  Yemen  in  relation  to  the
Houthi militia. It is submitted that no findings were made on  the  evidence
of the witness or on the enhanced risk the appellant  faced  on  account  of
the general country conditions in Yemen. It  is  submitted  that  the  judge
erred with respect to his assessment of  the  evidence  from  the  appellant
showing posters bearing his face. It is submitted  that  these  should  have
been considered in the context of streets in  Yemen  rather  than  expecting
local identifying features. It is submitted  that  had  the  judge  properly
considered all the evidence, he would have reached a  different  conclusion.


Discussion and conclusions

14.  According to the documentary evidence in  the  appellant's  bundle,  he
obtained a degree in journalism from Gazi Antep University on 28  June  2017
and had permission to remain in Turkey until 9 November 2017 but  overstayed
until the Turkish authorities arrested him for deportation  and  he  made  a
voluntary departure to Sudan in March 2018. During his  time  in  Turkey  he
claimed to have worked for two news  agencies,  Qasion  and  Al-Jazeera.  No
evidence of his work for either agency has been  put  forward.   Whilst  the
judge accepted that the  appellant  had  been  a  student  (there  is  ample
evidence  of  that),  he  was  entitled  to  expect  a  similar  amount   of
confirmatory  evidence  about  the  appellant's  employment.   The   grounds
complain that such an  expectation  was  unreasonable  due  to  the  factual
matrix but that is not explained. The burden is on  the  appellant  to  make
out his case to the required standard. It should have been a  simple  matter
to establish his journalistic credentials; for example, by evidence of  news
agency ID cards, proof of salary payments, a letter from the agency or  from
others with whom he worked, but nothing has  been  adduced.  The  judge  was
entitled to have concerns about the lack of such evidence.
15. The only evidence of the appellant's writings are the  few  articles  he
wrote with another student as part of a graduation  project:  'Lens'  (these
appear in the appellant's bundle at 121-130 and are duplicated at  131-135).
They do not bear his full name or  any  other  form  of  identification  and
although the appellant maintains that  they  were  posted  on  his  Facebook
page, no evidence of that has been adduced and  given  the  absence  of  any
prior political profile it is unclear  how  this  would  have  been  spotted
almost immediately by the rebels. Only two articles refer to Yemen  and  one
of those is about Yemeni students abroad. So the appellant's claim  is  that
all the efforts by the Houthis  to  find  him  were  prompted  by  a  single
article, which it has to be said is not written in the  clearest  of  terms,
in a student project in Turkey.

16. The pictures of posters said to have been displayed in  different  areas
in Yemen were sent to him by a friend but there is no evidence of  that.  If
sent by WhatsApp, as appears to have been the  case,  the  appellant  should
have details of the message even if deleted by the sender.  The  appellant's
case was that these were displayed in Yemen but the  judge  found  that  had
not been established. Despite the fact that the  judge  was  criticized  for
pointing out  that  there  were  no  signs  to  establish  the  geographical
location where the posters were displayed, it was open to the judge to  find
that the appellant had not made  out  his  claim  that  these  posters  were
displayed in Yemen. That is  essentially  all  the  judge  was  saying.  The
anomaly of a date on the poster being the only part not in Arabic  was  also
highlighted by the respondent and the  judge  but  remains  unaddressed  (at
24). There is also no attempt to address how the rebels would have  obtained
the appellant's photograph and he does not identify the photograph as  being
one that might have been in the public domain.

17. The judge considered the fact that the appellant was not in  Yemen  when
the interest in him was first expressed and it was  open  to  the  judge  to
highlight the oddity of the rebels expending time and  resources  to  locate
him for an article when engaged in a ferocious war (at 27).

18. The lack of interest in the appellant's mother, even  as  a  source  for
finding the appellant, was also noted by the  judge  who  found  it  strange
that the Houthi had not been back to her (at 28).  There  is  no  suggestion
that they have approached  any  other  member  of  the  appellant's  family,
including his father who lives in Sanaa.

19. The grounds are correct to point out that the judge  did  not  make  any
findings on the evidence of the appellant's witness but although this is  an
error it cannot in any way be material to the outcome of the appeal  as  the
appellant and his witness only met recently in the UK. The witness  did  not
even know if the appellant was  married  and  anything  he  said  about  the
appellant's work and fears would have come from the appellant. Although  the
witness claimed to have visited Yemen in 2018 (before he met the  appellant)
he had no contact with the appellant's family  there.  Therefore  whilst  it
would, of course, have been preferable for the judge to have  addressed  the
relevance of the evidence and the weight, if any, to be  given  to  it,  the
failure to do so does not render the determination unsustainable.

20. There was no need for the judge to consider whether the appellant  would
be at risk as a result of the general problems  in  Yemen  as  he  has  been
granted humanitarian protection.

21. No article 8 claim has been pursued.

22. When considering all the evidence holistically, as one  is  required  to
do, the judge's findings are reasoned  and  sustainable.   The  decision  to
dismiss the appeal is upheld.

Decision

23. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain errors  of  law.
The appellant's appeal is dismissed.

Anonymity

24. I make an anonymity order pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008. Unless the Upper Tribunal or  a  court  directs
otherwise, no reports of  these  proceedings  of  any  form  of  publication
thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the appellant. This  direction
applies to, amongst others, the appellant and the  respondent.  Any  failure
to comply  with  this  direction  could  give  rise  to  contempt  of  court
proceedings. I do so in order to avoid a likelihood of serious harm  arising
to the appellant from the content of the protection claim.



Signed



R. Keki?
Upper Tribunal Judge

Date: 24 September 2020










