
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11293/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 21 May 2019                       |On 05 June 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK
                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FROOM


                                   Between

                                     J K
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Jones, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. The appellant is an asylum seeker from Afghanistan who  arrived  in
         the UK in 2009 aged 16. The anonymity direction made by the  First-
         tier Tribunal has been continued.

      2. In a decision promulgated on 21 March 2019  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal
         Judge Froom set aside the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  to
         the extent it had dismissed the appellant's appeal  on  the  ground
         that removing him to Afghanistan would breach Article 15(c) of  the
         Qualification Directive ("QD").

      3. However, the challenge to the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  to
         dismiss the appeal on Refugee Convention grounds was dismissed.

      4. The First-tier Tribunal's decision to allow the appeal on Article 3
         ECHR (health) grounds and Article 8 ECHR (private life) grounds was
         not the subject of legal challenge and stands.

      5. A copy of the decision on error of law is attached to this decision
         as an annex for ease of reference.

      6. For the avoidance of doubt, we record that Mr Jones agreed that the
         First-tier Tribunal's decision to allow the  appeal  on  Article  3
         ECHR  grounds  does  not  provide  an  answer  to  the   issue   of
         humanitarian  protection  because  Article  15(b)  is   not   fully
         coterminous with Article 3. The ECtHR held in M'Bodj v  �tat  Belge
         (Case  C-542/13)  that  the  fact  Article  3  precluded  in   very
         exceptional cases a third-country national suffering from a serious
         illness from being  removed  to  a  country  in  which  appropriate
         treatment was not available did not mean that that person should be
         granted subsidiary protection. The scope for arguing for subsidiary
         protection was enlarged in MP v SSHD (Case C-353/16)  but  only  in
         respect of victims of torture or inhuman  and  degrading  treatment
         who would be intentionally deprived of medical treatment on return.

      7. The sole issue before us is whether the appellant's  appeal  should
         be allowed on Article 15(c) grounds, applying paragraphs  339C  and
         339CA of the Immigration Rules, HC395.

      8. The appellant's solicitors' letter of representations in support of
         a  fresh  claim,  dated  23  January  2017,  set  out  a  case  for
         consideration under Article 15(c) on the basis that  the  appellant
         was at an enhanced risk from indiscriminate violence as a result of
         his personal profile and vulnerability, although  the  letter  also
         argued that the existing country guidance contained in AK  (Article
         15(c)) Afghanistan CG [2012] UKUT 00163 (IAC)  ("AK"),  which  held
         that the indiscriminate violence in the country as a whole was  not
         at such a high level as to qualify any civilian  present  there  to
         humanitarian protection, should no longer be followed.

      9. The respondent's refusal letter, dated 18 October 2017,  relied  on
         AK. The respondent's position was that the documents submitted with
         the application had  not  shown  that  the  security  situation  in
         Afghanistan had deteriorated to such an extent that  the  level  of
         indiscriminate violence was high enough to reach the  threshold  of
         Article 15(c). The letter said the respondent  had  considered  the
         appellant's individual circumstances but not specifically in  terms
         that he might be at an enhanced risk  of  indiscriminate  violence.
         The letter focused instead on whether the appellant would  be  able
         to obtain treatment for his heart condition.

     10. The appellant's  solicitors  filed  a  bundle  in  accordance  with
         directions. Mr Jones handed us a skeleton argument and updates from
         the appellant's GP, Dr Marco Bocchino, and Ms Maya Pritchard,  from
         the  South  London  Refugee  Association.  In  discussion  at   the
         beginning of the hearing, it became clear that Mr  Walker  did  not
         wish to challenge any of  the  evidence  which  the  appellant  was
         putting forward. We were therefore able to  proceed  on  the  basis
         that the following facts were agreed:

          1) The appellant is now 25 years of age;

          2) He is from Baghlan province in the north of Afghanistan;

          3) He left Afghanistan at the age of 15;

          4) He has not managed to make contact with his  remaining  family
             members in Afghanistan;

          5) He is not at  a  real  risk  of  being  targeted  or  forcibly
             recruited by the Taliban in his home area;

          6) He suffers from chronic rheumatic heart  disease  and  he  has
             undergone surgery to  replace  his  heart  valves  with  metal
             valves as a consequence of which he must take Warfarin for the
             rest of his life to prevent clots forming in heart,  lungs  or
             brain, which could be fatal;

          7) His condition requires frequent and  regular  blood  tests  to
             adjust the dose of his medication, without which the appellant
             would be at risk of a  heart  attack,  pulmonary  embolism  or
             stroke;

          8) An excessive dose of Warfarin would  place  the  appellant  at
             risk of severe bleeding, which could prove fatal;

          9) His condition causes tiredness and breathlessness such that he
             cannot walk any significant distance and he cannot run;

         10) Having these conditions has an adverse  impact  on  his  mood,
             making management of his health very complex;

         11) He would be very  unlikely  to  be  able  to  access  adequate
             treatment for his conditions in Afghanistan;

         12) At the time of the hearing in  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  the
             appellant was receiving counselling and there was  psychiatric
             evidence showing that he  fitted  a  diagnosis  of  adjustment
             disorder and also mixed anxiety and depressive reaction;

         13)  There  is  social  stigma  in  Afghanistan  regarding  people
             suffering from mental health difficulties;

         14) He  is  very  unlikely  to  be  able  to  find  employment  in
             Afghanistan in order to support himself;

         15) Without employment he would not be able to find accommodation;

         16) He has no support structures available to him  in  Afghanistan
             and would be isolated; and

         17) There would be very significant obstacles to  the  appellant's
             reintegration in Afghanistan.

     11. In the light of  the  above,  we  agree  with  Mr  Jones  that  the
         appellant is a vulnerable individual. We now turn to  consider  the
         background evidence of prevailing conditions in Baghlan.

     12. The most recent country guidance  decision  on  Afghanistan  is  AS
         (Safety of Kabul) Afghanistan CG [2018] UKUT  00118  (IAC)  ("AS"),
         which focused on the risks from the Taliban in Kabul  and  internal
         relocation to Kabul. The earlier decisions in AK and AA (unattended
         children) Afghanistan CG [2012] UKUT 00016  (IAC)  were  confirmed.
         The general position, as set out  in  particular  in  AK,  is  that
         Afghanistan is undergoing an internal armed conflict but the levels
         of indiscriminate violence are  not  such  that  that,  within  the
         meaning of Article 15(c), a civilian, solely by  being  present  in
         the country, faces a real risk which threatens his life or person.

     13. The status of  AS  as  country  guidance  is  doubtful  at  present
         following the judgment  of  the  Court  of  Appeal  given  after  a
         preliminary hearing (AS (Afghanistan) v SSHD [2019] EWCA  Civ  208.
         In the section in AS on the  security  situation,  the  figure  for
         casualties in Kabul in 2017 were miscalculated when expressed as  a
         percentage of the population. However, for  the  purposes  of  this
         appeal we are content to proceed on the  basis  that  the  position
         remains that the level of indiscriminate violence in the country as
         a whole is not at such a high level that a civilian  faces  a  real
         risk merely as a result of his or her presence.

     14. We recognise that  is  not  the  case  being  put  forward  by  the
         appellant but the general position is  our  starting  position  for
         considering the individual risk.

     15. The First-tier Tribunal found that the evidence showed Baghlan  was
         "volatile". It relied on  a  report  by  Dr  Antonio  Giustozzi,  a
         country expert, which  showed  that  the  Taliban  stepped  up  its
         operations in Baghlan in 2016 and intense fighting took  place.  It
         also relied  on  a  report  by  EASO,  dated  January  2016,  which
         confirmed  that  several  armed  groups  were  found  in   Baghlan,
         particularly the Taliban.

     16. Mr Jones relied on the UNHCR Eligibility Guidelines  for  Assessing
         the  International  Protection   Needs   of   Asylum-Seekers   from
         Afghanistan, dated 30 August 2018.  These  state  that  the  Afghan
         security forces have ceded significant ground  to  the  Taliban  in
         rural areas. As at January 2018 the Taliban was reported to control
         or contest 43.7% of all districts of Afghanistan. The  Taliban  had
         intensified its attacks on Kabul and other major  urban  areas.  It
         had caused high numbers of casualties among Afghan security forces.
         Throughout  2017  the   Taliban   launched   multiple   large-scale
         operations aimed at capturing district administration  centres.  At
         the same time the  Taliban  consolidated  its  control  over  rural
         areas, enabling them to undertake more attacks, particularly in the
         north.

     17. Additionally, Islamic State  continued  to  clash  with  government
         forces and the Taliban. Islamic State reportedly conducted  attacks
         against military and foreign  military  targets  and  the  civilian
         population, including religious sites.

     18. The security situation remains volatile with  civilians  continuing
         to bear the brunt of the conflict. The continued  deterioration  in
         the  security  situation  and  the  intensification  of  the  armed
         conflict has been observed since the  withdrawal  of  international
         military forces since 2014. The conflict continues  to  affect  all
         parts of the country. In 2017 UNAMA documented the  highest  number
         of civilian casualties from combined IED tactics  since  2009.  The
         use of IED, such as suicide bombs  and  pressure-plate  devices  in
         civilian populated area, accounted for 4,151  civilian  casualties,
         40% of all civilian casualties in 2017. This trend continued in the
         first six months of 2018. The  second  leading  cause  of  civilian
         casualties in the first six months of 2018 was ground  engagements,
         followed by targeted  killings,  aerial  operations  and  explosive
         remnants of war.

     19. As said, we were not asked to depart from the country  guidance  on
         Article 15(c) as to the position in Afghanistan in general  and  we
         were not directed to any materials on the situation in Baghlan.  We
         accept, however, that the background materials paint a picture of a
         deteriorating  security  situation  with   increasing   levels   of
         indiscriminate violence  and  civilian  casualties  throughout  the
         country.

     20. We were asked to find that the appellant's vulnerabilities entitled
         him to humanitarian protection notwithstanding the agreed  position
         that the general position remains as set out in country guidance.

     21. We now turn to the law.

     22. Article 2 QD defines a "person eligible for subsidiary  protection"
         as

         "a third country national  or  a  stateless  person  who  does  not
         qualify as a refugee but in respect  of  whom  substantial  grounds
         have been  shown  for  believing  that  the  person  concerned,  if
         returned to his or her country of origin,  or  in  the  case  of  a
         stateless  person,  to  his  or  her  country  of  former  habitual
         residence, would face a real risk  of  suffering  serious  harm  as
         defined in Article 15, and to whom Article 17(1)  and  (2)  do  not
         apply, and is unable, or, owing to such risk,  unwilling  to  avail
         himself or herself of the protection of that country;"

     23. Article 15 QD defines "serious harm" as,

         "...

         (c)  serious and individual threat to a civilian's life  or  person
         by reason of indiscriminate violence in situations of international
         or internal armed conflict"

     24.  These  provisions  were  transposed  into  domestic  law  by   the
         Immigration Rules, which read as follows:

         "339C. A person will be  granted  humanitarian  protection  in  the
         United Kingdom if the Secretary of State is satisfied that:

             (i)  they are in the United Kingdom or have arrived at a  port
             of entry in the United Kingdom;

             (ii) they do not qualify as a refugee as defined in regulation
             2 of The Refugee or Person in Need of International Protection
             (Qualification) Regulations 2006;

             (iii)    substantial grounds have  been  shown  for  believing
             that the person concerned,  if  returned  to  the  country  of
             return, would face a real risk of suffering serious  harm  and
             is  unable,  or,  owing  to  such  risk,  unwilling  to  avail
             themselves of the protection of that country; and

             (iv) they are  not  excluded  from  a  grant  of  humanitarian
             protection.

         339CA. For the purposes of paragraph 339C,  serious  harm  consists
         of:

             ...

             (iv) serious and individual threat to  a  civilian's  life  or
             person by reason of indiscriminate violence in  situations  of
             international or internal armed conflict.

     25. Article 15(c) QD was analysed in the ECJ Grand  Chamber's  judgment
         in Elgafaji v Staatssecretaris van Justitie (Case - C465/07) [2009]
         All ER (EC) 651, [2009] INLR 235, 1 WLR 2100. The following passage
         is helpful:

             "33. ... the harm defined in Article 15(c) of the Directive as
             consisting  of  a  'serious  and  individual  threat  to  [the
             applicant's] life or person' covers a  more  general  risk  of
             harm.

             34.  Reference is made, more generally, to a 'threat ... to  a
             civilian's life or person' rather than  to  specific  acts  of
             violence. Furthermore, that threat is inherent  in  a  general
             situation  of  'international  or  internal  armed  conflict'.
             Lastly, the violence in question  which  gives  rise  to  that
             threat is described as 'indiscriminate', a term which  implies
             that it may extend to people irrespective  of  their  personal
             circumstances.

             35.  In that context, the word 'individual' must be understood
             as covering harm to civilians irrespective of their  identity,
             where the degree of indiscriminate violence characterising the
             armed conflict taking place assessed by the competent national
             authorities  before  which  an  application   for   subsidiary
             protection is made, or by the courts  of  a  Member  State  to
             which a decision refusing  such  an  application  is  referred
             reaches such a high level that substantial grounds  are  shown
             for believing  that  a  civilian,  returned  to  the  relevant
             country or, as the case may be, to the relevant region, would,
             solely on account of his presence on  the  territory  of  that
             country or region, face a real risk of being  subject  to  the
             serious threat referred in Article 15(c) of the Directive.

             36.  That interpretation,  which  is  likely  to  ensure  that
             Article  15(c)  of  the  Directive  has  its  own   field   of
             application, is not invalidated by the wording of  recital  26
             in the preamble to the Directive, according to which  '[r]isks
             to which a population  of  a  country  or  a  section  of  the
             population is generally exposed  do  normally  not  create  in
             themselves an individual threat which would qualify as serious
             harm'.

             37.  While that recital implies  that  the  objective  finding
             alone of a risk linked to the general situation in  a  country
             is not, as a rule, sufficient to establish that the conditions
             set out in Article 15(c) of the Directive  have  been  met  in
             respect of a specific person, its wording nevertheless  allows
             by the use of the word 'normally' for the  possibility  of  an
             exceptional situation which would be characterised by  such  a
             high degree of risk that substantial grounds  would  be  shown
             for believing that that person would be  subject  individually
             to the risk in question.

             38.   The  exceptional  nature  of  that  situation  is   also
             confirmed  by  the  fact  that  the  relevant  protection   is
             subsidiary, and by the  broad  logic  of  Article  15  of  the
             Directive, as the harm defined in paragraphs (a)  and  (b)  of
             that article requires a  clear  degree  of  individualisation.
             While it is admittedly true that  collective  factors  play  a
             significant role in the application of Article  15(c)  of  the
             Directive, in that the person concerned  belongs,  like  other
             people, to a circle of  potential  victims  of  indiscriminate
             violence in situations  of  international  or  internal  armed
             conflict, it is nevertheless the case that that provision must
             be subject to a coherent interpretation  in  relation  to  the
             other  two  situations  referred  to  in  Article  15  of  the
             Directive  and  must,  therefore,  be  interpreted  by   close
             reference to that individualisation.

             39.  In that regard, the more the applicant is  able  to  show
             that  he  is  specifically  affected  by  reason  of   factors
             particular to his personal circumstances, the lower the  level
             of indiscriminate violence required for him to be eligible for
             subsidiary protection.

             40.  Moreover, it should be  added  that,  in  the  individual
             assessment of an application for subsidiary protection,  under
             Article 4(3) of the Directive, the following may be taken into
             account:

                  the geographical scope of the situation of  indiscriminate
                  violence and the actual destination of  the  applicant  in
                  the event that he is returned to the relevant country,  as
                  is clear from Article 8(1) of the Directive, and

                  the existence, if any, of a  serious  indication  of  real
                  risk, such as that referred to  in  Article  4(4)  of  the
                  Directive, an indication in the light of which  the  level
                  of indiscriminate violence required  for  eligibility  for
                  subsidiary protection may be lower."

     26. The reference in paragraph 39 of the judgment to the possibility of
         an individual being specifically affected by factors such that  the
         level of indiscriminate violence which must be shown to qualify for
         subsidiary protection is lower has become  known  as  the  'sliding
         scale'. This  appellant  argues  that  he  should  be  entitled  to
         subsidiary protection because  he  is  at  greater  risk  from  the
         indiscriminate violence, (which we accept prevails at  the  present
         time   throughout   Afghanistan),   because   of    his    personal
         circumstances.

     27. The personal circumstances on which he  relies  are  primarily  his
         health conditions which mean that:

           . His mental health condition will deteriorate without treatment
             such that he will become  depressed  to  the  point  that  his
             ability to make rational decisions about keeping himself  safe
             would be compromised;

           . His heart condition affects his mobility to the extent that he
             cannot walk far due to breathlessness and he  cannot  run  any
             distance; and

           . His dependence on Warfarin, a blood-thinning agent, makes  him
             vulnerable to serious and possibly fatal bleeding in the event
             of an injury.

     28. We accept  Mr  Jones's  argument  that  the  combination  of  these
         conditions  places  the  appellant  in  a  particularly  vulnerable
         situation in the event of an outbreak of indiscriminate violence of
         the kinds  mentioned  in  the  UNHCR  Guidelines.  The  appellant's
         parlous circumstances without employment, secure housing or  family
         support are likely to mean he spends  his  time  outdoors  with  no
         physical protection against attacks. His low mood  would  make  him
         less able  to  recognise  risks  and  the  fact  that  a  dangerous
         situation was developing. It would also compromise his  ability  to
         react to warnings and  advice.  The  appellant's  limited  mobility
         would mean he would  be  unable  to  remove  himself  quickly  from
         dangerous  situations,  even  if  he  had  heeded  a  warning.  His
         vulnerability to serious bleeding  means  that  any  cut  of  minor
         injury could be far more serious than it might otherwise be.

     29. For these reasons, we conclude the level of risk of serious harm by
         reason of indiscriminate violence which qualifies this appellant to
         protection has been reached. Mr Walker confirmed  that  he  was  in
         agreement that the appeal should be allowed on  the  basis  of  the
         arguments advanced in the appellant's skeleton argument.

     30. We therefore allow the appellant's appeal on Article 15(c) grounds.
         The appellant is entitled to a  grant  of  humanitarian  protection
         under  paragraph  339C  of  the  Immigration  Rules.  No  issue  of
         exclusion arises.

     31. We wish to make clear that this decision  should  not  be  read  as
         establishing any matter of principle or as providing  any  guidance
         on current levels of indiscriminate violence or country  conditions
         in Afghanistan in general or Baghlan province in particular. It  is
         a decision taken on the unique facts of the case and on  the  basis
         of the evidence put before us

NOTICE OF DECISION

    The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal made a material error of  law  and
    her decision dismissing  the  appeal  on  Article  15(c)  Qualification
    Directive grounds is set aside. The following decision is substituted:

    The appellant's appeal is allowed on humanitarian protection grounds.

    Anonymity

    The First-tier Tribunal made an  order  pursuant  to  Rule  13  of  the
    Tribunal  Procedure  (First-tier  Tribunal)  (Immigration  and   Asylum
    Chamber) Rules 2014.

    We continue that order pursuant to rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.

    Unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  Appellant
    is granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
    indirectly identify him or any member of his  family.   This  direction
    applies both to the Appellant and to the Respondent.  Failure to comply
    with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date 23 May 2019

[pic]

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Froom




                        ANNEX: Error of law decision




      1. The appellant appeals with the permission  of  the  Upper  Tribunal
         against a decision of  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Beach,
         promulgated on 28 September 2018, allowing his appeal on article  3
         (health)  grounds  and  article  8  (private  life)   grounds   but
         dismissing his appeal on protection grounds.

      2. The respondent has not cross-appealed  against  the  parts  of  the
         decision allowing the appeal.  However,  the  appellant  wishes  to
         pursue his claim to recognition under the Refugee Convention or  to
         a grant of humanitarian protection.

      3. The appellant is an Afghan national who arrived in  the  UK  on  26
         November 2009, which was his sixteenth birthday. He was taken  into
         the care of the local  authority  as  an  unaccompanied  minor.  He
         claimed asylum but his application was refused and his  appeal  was
         dismissed by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Baldwin.  After  his
         further representations were also rejected, the appellant travelled
         to Ireland to claim asylum but he was returned to the UK under  the
         Dublin Regulation.  He  made  further  representations  which  were
         refused but which were treated as a fresh claim so as to  give  the
         appellant a right of appeal.

      4. The decision under appeal is dated 18 October 2017. The reasons for
         refusal letter relied on the findings  of  Judge  Baldwin.  He  had
         found there were material discrepancies as between the account  the
         appellant gave to social workers at an age assessment made  on  the
         day  he  was  apprehended  in  the  UK  and  the  account  he  gave
         subsequently. The judge concluded that the appellant  had  come  to
         the UK for no other reason than to obtain treatment for  his  heart
         condition. He found the appellant was at no risk  from  the  Afghan
         authorities and he was not at a real risk of forced recruitment  by
         the Taliban. If there  were  a  risk  from  the  Taliban  he  could
         relocate to Kabul.

      5. The refusal letter considered the three reports the  appellant  had
         obtained from Dr Giustozzi. The letter accepted that he is a highly
         qualified expert on Afghanistan. However, it was  not  accepted  he
         was  qualified  to   authenticate   documents   from   Afghanistan.
         Therefore, little weight was given to the  reports  to  the  extent
         they  were  presented  as  evidence  authenticating  the  documents
         submitted by the appellant. However, the letter also noted that  Dr
         Giustozzi had stated in his report that there was no evidence  that
         the Taliban actually practised forced recruitment. In terms of  the
         ability of the Taliban to track people down in Kabul, Dr  Giustozzi
         said their ability was limited and the appellant  would  be  a  low
         priority target.

      6. The letter considered Article 15(c) of the Qualification  Directive
         and found no reason to depart from the country guidance provided in
         AK (Article 15(c)) Afghanistan CG [2012] UKUT 00163 (IAC).  In  any
         event, Judge Baldwin had found the appellant was able  to  relocate
         internally to Kabul.

      7. At his appeal before  Judge  Beach  the  appellant  maintained  his
         account of fearing persecution in Afghanistan. He said his brother,
         who worked for  the  Taliban,  had  been  arrested  by  the  Afghan
         authorities and released following  the  payment  of  a  bribe  and
         weapons. The appellant said the Taliban had raided his family home,
         which is in Baghlan province, killed his brother and  abducted  his
         other two brothers. He left Afghanistan because he  was  afraid  of
         being forcibly recruited or suffering reprisals from the Taliban as
         a result of his family's history. He said he had lost  all  contact
         with his family. Relocating to Kabul would be unduly harsh  because
         of his personal circumstances, including his medical condition.

      8. The  appellant  gave  oral  evidence  and,  in  the  light  of  the
         psychiatric evidence, Judge  Beach  treated  him  as  a  vulnerable
         witness. She also heard evidence from a friend  of  the  appellant.
         Reliance  was  placed  on  the  expertise  of  Dr  Giustozzi.   The
         respondent relied on the recent country  guidance  decision  in  AS
         (Safety of Kabul) Afghanistan CG [2018] UKUT 00118 (IAC).

      9. Judge Beach treated the decision of Judge Baldwin as  her  starting
         point. She directed herself in terms of Devaseelan (Second  Appeals
         - ECHR - Extra-Territorial Effect) Sri Lanka Starred  [2002]  UKIAT
         00702.  She  recognised  there  was  other  evidence  which   could
         potentially address the discrepancies relied on by Judge Baldwin as
         between the age assessment and the later asylum interview. The  age
         assessment recorded that the appellant stated that he came  to  the
         UK because he was  unwell  and  had  a  heart  condition.  The  age
         assessment was conducted on the date of arrival. However, the judge
         rejected the appellant's claim that he had not  said  that  he  had
         come to the UK because he was unwell, although this  did  not  mean
         that the rest of the account was not credible. There was a  further
         discrepancy as to how many of the appellant's brothers were  living
         at home at the time the appellant left Afghanistan.

     10. A medical report stated that the appellant had been suffering  from
         low mood and was contemplating suicide. Subsequent medical evidence
         suggested the appellant's  symptoms  best  fitted  a  diagnosis  of
         adjustment disorder, mixed anxiety and depressive  reaction.  Judge
         Beach rejected the argument that the medical evidence  threw  light
         on the inconsistency given in the appellant's account  because  the
         2014 report stated there was no evidence to suggest  the  appellant
         would struggle to recall events.

     11. Judge Beach next  considered  the  documents  which  the  appellant
         stated  he  had  obtained  from  Afghanistan.  In  particular,  she
         discussed the letter  said  to  have  been  issued  by  the  police
         headquarters of Baghlan  province  certifying  the  attack  by  the
         Taliban had taken place on the appellant's house. She noted that Dr
         Giustozzi had not purported to authenticate  the  document  himself
         but had recorded the results of research undertaken in the field in
         Afghanistan, in this case by a Mr Kakar. The judge noted  that  the
         original letter did not state the date on which the attack was said
         to have taken place. With respect to  the  research  by  Mr  Kakar,
         there was no reference to the date the appellant's father made  his
         complaint. It appeared that the police letter was the response to a
         complaint but, if that were the case, it had  taken  four  or  five
         years to make. She found little weight could  be  attached  to  the
         documents.

     12.  Turning  to  Dr  Giustozzi's  evidence  on  the  general   country
         conditions, this  showed  that  the  Taliban  presence  in  Baghlan
         increased in 2008. However, he said that there was no evidence that
         the Taliban actually practised forced recruitment.  In  communities
         deemed hostile to the Taliban, the Taliban would force young men to
         serve as porters or support staff. The  Taliban  offered  financial
         incentives to recruits and employed psychological  pressure.  Where
         tribal leadership groups had negotiated deals with the  Taliban  in
         exchange for support against their rivals,  a  family  refusing  to
         contribute to the militia could  be  fined  or  expelled  from  the
         community. There had been press reports of the Taliban  going  from
         home to home asking each family to contribute a son to the jihad.

     13. In  Dr  Giustozzi's  opinion,  the  appellant's  account  could  be
         plausible. He conjectured that the raid on the  appellant's  family
         home may have gone wrong or the Taliban may have  been  seeking  to
         punish the appellant's brother as a defector.  However,  the  judge
         was concerned over the development of the appellant's account since
         the   original   evidence   at   his   age   assessment   interview
         notwithstanding the fact it was recorded  he  appeared  unwell  and
         tired from his journey. She  did  not  find  his  account  of  what
         happened in Afghanistan credible.

     14. In terms of Article 15(c), Judge Beach noted that  the  appellant's
         home area remained volatile. She considered whether  the  appellant
         was at risk as a result of indiscriminate violence in  the  context
         of  internal  armed  conflict.  She  found  the  evidence  was  not
         sufficient to show such a risk because much of the violence was the
         result of targeted vendettas or against women.

     15. Permission to appeal  against  the  decision  of  Judge  Beach  was
         refused by the First-tier Tribunal. In fact,  the  application  was
         not admitted because it was out of time and it was considered there
         was no basis for extending time. However, permission to appeal  was
         subsequently granted by the Upper Tribunal on all three grounds  as
         put forward. Time was extended due  to  the  vulnerability  of  the
         appellant. I shall now summarise the grounds.

     16. Firstly, Judge Beach had materially erred in her assessment of  the
         expert evidence in relation to the verification of  the  documents.
         The grounds suggested the  judge's  approach  was  irrational.  The
         researcher employed by Dr Giustozzi had made contact  with  General
         Gulbari, the chief of police in  Baghlan  province,  who  confirmed
         that the police report  was  consistent  with  police  records  and
         accepted that the attack had taken place. On any proper view,  this
         evidence is sufficient to show  the  appellant's  family  had  been
         targeted by the Taliban. There was an arguable case that,  as  past
         victims of persecution, there was a future risk of repetition.

     17. Secondly, Judge Beach had erred in attributing  substantial  weight
         to the discrepancy in the age assessment report.  That  report  was
         not designed to articulate the protection claim. The appellant  was
         a seriously ill and traumatised child on the day of his arrival  to
         the UK.

     18. Thirdly, in finding the appellant did  not  qualify  under  Article
         15(c), the judge should have considered whether the  appellant  was
         in an enhanced risk  category.  As  a  result  of  his  mental  and
         physical health needs and his general vulnerability, there  was  an
         elevated risk of exposure to incidental violence.

     19. There has been no rule 24 response from the respondent.

     20. I heard submissions from the  representatives  as  to  whether  the
         decision of Judge Beach should be set aside because it contains one
         or more material errors of law.

     21.  Mr  Magennis  very  much  adopted  the  grounds  prepared  by  his
         colleague, Mr Jones. In relation to the  first  ground,  he  argued
         that  the  approach  of  the  judge  to  the  expert  evidence  was
         irrational.  At  paragraph  53  of  her  decision,  in  which   she
         considered the reports of Dr  Giustozzi,  Judge  Beach  was  silent
         about the issue of verification and failed to give  reasons  as  to
         why the expert's  opinion  should  not  be  followed.  Instead,  in
         paragraph 55, she took issue with the contents of the document  and
         concluded, in paragraph 57, that little weight could be  placed  on
         them. As the grounds point out, contact  had  been  made  with  the
         chief of police who confirmed the attack had taken  place.  On  any
         proper view, this was evidence was sufficient to find there  was  a
         real likelihood of the incident taking place.

     22. On the second ground, Mr Magennis argued that paragraph 59  of  the
         judge's decision, in which she concluded she  should  rely  on  the
         discrepancy between the age assessment and the later evidence,  had
         failed to address all the points raised in  the  skeleton  argument
         provided at the hearing by  Mr  Jones.  Crucially,  she  failed  to
         consider the absence of any transcript of an interview at  the  age
         assessment. He confirmed that the challenge contained in ground two
         was essentially that the  judge  had  failed  to  provide  adequate
         reasons.

     23. The third ground was distinct because it  did  not  relate  to  the
         adverse  credibility  finding  made  by   Judge   Beach.   In   her
         consideration of humanitarian protection, she considered  the  risk
         of indiscriminate violence as a result of internal  armed  conflict
         but, in doing so, failed to consider  the  arguments  made  at  the
         hearing about the appellant's vulnerability. The latter was not  in
         doubt because it led to the judge allowing the appeal on article  3
         grounds.

     24. In reply, Mr Tarlow argued that there was no material error of  law
         in the approach of Judge Beach to the asylum  claim.  Her  findings
         were open to her. However, he did not argue against  Mr  Magennis's
         submissions on the Article 15(c) point.

     25. In my judgement, there is no error in Judge Beach's approach to the
         asylum claim with respect to the matters  clearly  set  out  by  Mr
         Jones in grounds 1 and 2 of the written grounds seeking  permission
         to appeal and  eloquently  elaborated  on  at  the  hearing  by  Mr
         Magennis.

     26. It is important to keep in mind that the issue for Judge Beach  was
         whether  she  should  depart  from  the  unsuccessfully  challenged
         findings made by Judge Baldwin. He heard the  appeal  in  September
         2013 and, at that time, the appellant put forward the claim that he
         had had to leave Afghanistan after two of his brothers  were  taken
         by the Taliban and another one was shot (at).  He  said  he  feared
         recruitment by the Taliban. Judge Baldwin found none of  the  claim
         was credible. At the hearing before Judge Beach the  appellant  was
         essentially seeking to reargue the same claim with the  benefit  of
         fresh evidence. The judge was right to direct herself in  terms  of
         paragraph 39 of the starred decision of Devaseelan.

     27. With that in  mind,  I  turn  to  consider  the  substance  of  the
         complaints about Judge Beach's assessment. Ground 1 boils  down  to
         an absence of reasons for rejecting the expert report or, at least,
         not regarding it as  evidence  of  such  weight  as  to  justify  a
         positive finding that the Taliban raid on the appellant's home  had
         taken place in 2009, as claimed.

     28. There are a number of documents but attention was focused  on  what
         purports  to  be  a  certificate  provided  by  Brigadier   General
         Assadullah Sherzad, commander of  police  headquarters  of  Baghlan
         province, the translation of which appears  at  page  B206  of  the
         appellant's bundle. It is dated simply 1392 (2013/2014). It  refers
         to the petition of  the  appellant's  father  and  states  that  it
         "certifies the issue of the attack of the Taliban ban on the  house
         of [the appellant] which resulted in martyrdom of a brother of [the
         appellant] and the capture of his other two brothers by the Taliban
         and the escape of [the appellant]".

     29. At page A94  of  the  appellant's  bundle  is  the  section  of  Dr
         Giustozzi's  report  of  19  December   2016   dealing   with   the
         authenticity  of  the  police  documents.  He  explains  that   the
         appellant's solicitors provided him with scanned  black  and  white
         copies of the police documents which he sent to his researcher,  Mr
         Silab Mangal, based in Kabul. I note that Mr Mangal's CV  has  also
         been provided. Dr Giustozzi  sets  out  something  of  Mr  Mangal's
         extensive experience as a journalist and explains that Mr Mangal in
         turn relies on his colleague, Mr Javed Kakar, a journalist based in
         the appellant's home area. It was Mr Kakar who  sought  to  confirm
         the authenticity or otherwise of the police documents  by  visiting
         the chief of Baghlan police, who is now General Noor Habib Gulbari.
         The latter confirmed that the appellant's father did  petition  the
         police headquarters and the stamp and  signature  on  the  response
         letter belong to the previous head  of  police,  Brigadier  General
         Sherzad. That  is  the  extent,  as  far  as  I  can  see,  of  the
         authentication provided.

     30. It is clear that Dr Giustozzi's role was  simply  to  instruct  his
         researcher in Kabul who, in turn, instructed  a  colleague  in  the
         appellant's home area. I accept that the fact that Dr Giustozzi  is
         an acknowledged expert  on  Afghanistan  whose  evidence  has  been
         accepted in many cases means that his employment  of  a  researcher
         can be assumed to have been made in  good  faith.  However,  it  is
         quite another thing to suggest that the outcome  of  the  enquiries
         made should be considered as expert evidence. It is evidence  which
         has the potential to corroborate the appellant's  account  but  the
         fact it was delivered through the vehicle of a report in  the  name
         of Dr Giustozzi does not, in my judgement, place it in the category
         of expert evidence. To the extent the grounds appear to argue  that
         Judge Beach  failed  to  give  reasons  for  not  accepting  expert
         evidence, they are misconceived.

     31. In any event, I regard Judge Beach as being perfectly entitled  not
         to give significant weight to  the  confirmation  provided  in  the
         police certificate for the reasons  she  gave.  As  mentioned,  she
         noted the absence of a precise date on the police  certificate  and
         the absence of any reference to the date of the  complaint  by  the
         appellant's father. As she pointed out, if the complaint  had  been
         made in 2009, the police had apparently taken some 4 to 5 years  to
         reply, which had evidently not been explained.

     32. As for the second ground, regarding the judge's  treatment  of  the
         age assessment, the case that was put to Judge Beach appears to  me
         to have been a repeat of the arguments rejected  already  by  Judge
         Baldwin. I accept that Judge Beach did not express a view  on  each
         and every argument arrayed in Mr Jones's skeleton argument but I do
         not accept there was any obligation on her to do so.  She  referred
         to the skeleton argument so it can safely be assumed that she  read
         it. She  was  evidently  fully  conscious  of  the  fact  that  the
         appellant was young and was reported to have  been  unwell  at  the
         time of the age assessment interview. She also considered carefully
         the medical evidence as far as it threw light  on  the  appellant's
         condition at the relevant time. The evidence  before  her  did  not
         support the view that the appellant's mental health state  was  any
         impediment to  recalling  past  events.  There  was  later  medical
         evidence, part of which the judge set out at paragraph  47  of  her
         decision, but this only showed that the appellant's  mental  health
         had deteriorated. That assessment has not been challenged. I see no
         error in the judge's approach.

     33. I dismiss the appellant's  appeal  insofar  as  it  challenges  the
         judge's decision  to  dismiss  the  asylum  claim.  However,  I  do
         consider the judge erred with respect to her consideration  of  the
         separate Article 15(c) ground. My reasons are as follows.

     34. Article 15(c) was not expressly considered  by  Judge  Baldwin  and
         would, in any event, be open to fresh consideration in the light of
         the changing situation on the ground  in  Afghanistan  since  2013.
         There is, as Judge Beach acknowledged, current country guidance  on
         the level of risk of indiscriminate violence in Afghanistan set out
         in AS. This states that there has been no change to the position as
         set out in the earlier country guidance  decision  in  AK  (Article
         15(c)) Afghanistan CG [2012] UKUT 00163(IAC). In that case  it  was
         held that,

             "Despite  a  rise  in  the  number  of  civilian  deaths   and
             casualties and  (particularly  in  the  2010-2011  period)  an
             expansion of the geographical scope of the armed  conflict  in
             Afghanistan, the level  of  indiscriminate  violence  in  that
             country taken as a whole is not at such a  high  level  as  to
             mean  that,  within  the  meaning  of  Article  15(c)  of  the
             Qualification Directive, a civilian, solely by  being  present
             in the country, faces a real risk which threatens his life  or
             person."

     35.  Judge  Beach  recognised  that  the  appellant's  home  area   was
         "volatile". Mr  Magennis  pointed  out  that  there  was  extensive
         background evidence in the appellant's supplementary  bundle  about
         the conflict. The judge set out  Dr  Giustozzi's  evidence  of  the
         Taliban insurgency in Baghlan and she set out some  short  extracts
         from the background evidence in  her  decision.  She  concluded  as
         follows in paragraph 70:

             "I have found that the appellant will not be  targeted  as  an
             individual so he does not qualify for Humanitarian  Protection
             on that basis. I have also considered whether he is at risk as
             a result of indiscriminate violence as a  result  of  internal
             armed conflict. The evidence does show that the area has  been
             a volatile area but I find that it is not sufficient  to  show
             that there is a risk of indiscriminate violence as a result of
             internal armed conflict. In fact, the evidence shows that much
             of the violence is  as  a  result  of  targeted  vendettas  or
             against women. I find that the appellant does not qualify  for
             Humanitarian Protection."

     36. It is clear from the above that there is no  consideration  of  the
         argument put forward by Mr  Jones,  as  set  out  in  his  skeleton
         argument, that this  appellant  should  nonetheless  be  considered
         eligible for a grant of  humanitarian  protection  because  of  his
         particular vulnerabilities. This argument was based on the 'sliding
         scale' concept developed  by  the  CJEU  in  paragraph  39  of  its
         judgment in (C-285/12) Elgafaji  v  Staatssecretaris  van  Justitie
         [2009] 1 WLR 2100. The Court held that the existence of  a  serious
         and individual threat to the life or person  would  only  be  shown
         where the degree  of  indiscriminate  violence  characterising  the
         armed conflict reached a  sufficiently  high  level  of  intensity.
         However, the more an individual is able to show that he is affected
         by reason of factors particular to his personal circumstances,  the
         lower the level of indiscriminate violence required for him  to  be
         eligible for  subsidiary  protection.  The  personal  circumstances
         invoked by the appellant in this case included  his  mental  health
         problems which would mean that he was less likely to react in a way
         to ensure  his  protection,  his  problems  with  mobility  and  in
         particular his inability to run, and, his dependence  on  Warfarin,
         which would mean that in the event he was injured  he  would  bleed
         severely.

     37. I consider that this was an aspect of the case which the judge  was
         obliged to consider and her failure to do so leads me to find  that
         her decision to  dismiss  the  appeal  on  humanitarian  protection
         grounds should be set aside and re-made.

     38. Having considered the Senior President's Practice Direction  of  15
         September 2012 and section  12(2)  of  the  Tribunals,  Courts  and
         Enforcement Act 2007, I consider this is an  appropriate  case  for
         the Upper Tribunal to remake the decision, limited to consideration
         of Article 15(c). To that end, I make the following directions:

          1. There will be a continuation hearing on a date and at  a  time
             to be notified at Field House which will consider  afresh  the
             issue of whether the appellant  is  entitled  to  humanitarian
             protection on the ground of Article 15(c) of the Qualification
             Directive.

          2. The appellant's solicitors should prepare a  fresh  bundle  of
             evidence which relates to this issue, which should be filed at
             the tribunal and served on the respondent  no  later  than  14
             days before the hearing date. This bundle should  contain  all
             the documents relied on in support of the Article 15(c) claim.



          3. It is not anticipated that the appellant  will  need  to  give
             oral  evidence  but  if  an  interpreter  is   required,   the
             appellant's solicitors should inform the tribunal.

          4. The tribunal would be assisted  by  brief  skeleton  arguments
             setting out the respective submissions of the parties,  cross-
             referencing the evidence and case law.
