
[pic]

The Upper Tribunal
Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Appeal Number: PA/11271/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 20 June 2017                        |On 21 June 2017                     |
|Prepared on 20 June 2017               |                                    |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HOLMES


                                   Between

                                    A. E.
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Cleghorn, Counsel for Halliday Reeves Law Firm
For the Respondent:    Ms Petterson, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


   1. The Appellant is a citizen of Libya who entered the UK legally  on  25
      November 2015  as  a  student,  accompanied  by  his  wife  and  three
      children. He made an application for protection on 14 June 2016 on the
      basis the situation within Libya had deteriorated to the point that he
      did not consider that it was safe for his family to return.

   2. The Respondent refused that protection  application  on  29  September
      2016, and the Appellant's appeal to the First  tier  Tribunal  ["FtT"]
      against that decision was heard on 2 March 2017. It was  dismissed  on
      all grounds, in a decision promulgated on 27 March 2017 by First  Tier
      Tribunal Judge G Robson.

   3. The Appellant was granted permission to appeal  that  decision  on  20
      April 2017 by First tier Tribunal Judge Landes on the  basis  that  it
      was arguable the Judge had failed to properly assess the  risks  faced
      by the family in the course of any return to Libya, and in  particular
      to the home of relatives who lived  in  Tripoli.  Thus  there  was  no
      adequate analysis of the ability to enter Libya by air, or,  by  road,
      and then to travel from the point of  entry  to  the  home  of  family
      members. It was also considered arguable  that  the  Judge  failed  to
      consider the position of the children, whether by reference to section
      55, or, more broadly within his assessment of the  proportionality  of
      the decision under appeal.

   4. The Respondent filed a Rule 24 Notice dated 4 May 2017 in relation  to
      the grant of permission. Neither party has made formal application  to
      adduce further evidence. Thus the matter comes before me.


   Error of Law?

   5. It is accepted by Ms Cleghorn that this appeal turns upon the  Judge's
      approach to the Article 8 claim and  to  the  humanitarian  protection
      claim. The asylum claim is not made out; the claim relating to  events
      at the appellant's place of work was  geographically  limited  to  the
      oilfields in the south of Libya where he formerly worked, and  had  no
      bearing on his ability to live in safety in Tripoli. As  she  accepts,
      upon reflection, the rejection of the asylum claim must stand.

   6. The main focus of  the  Appellant's  case  derived  however  from  the
      breakdown in security within Libya and the  general  lawlessness  that
      had followed from the continuing conflict in that  country.  His  case
      was that he and his family (including his three young children)  could
      not in fact be returned by air from the UK to Tripoli, and  that  even
      if they physically could travel by air to Tripoli they would be unable
      to travel from the airport to his sibling's home in  safety.  If  they
      could not return to Tripoli by air  then  it  followed  they  faced  a
      lengthy journey overland to Tripoli which he  argued  they  could  not
      undertake in safety as a result of the  conflict  and  the  associated
      lawlessness.

   7. Ms Petterson, who like Ms Cleghorn also appeared below, accepted  that
      the Judge had failed to adequately engage with the  Appellant's  case.
      There was no adequate  analysis  of  the  content  of  the  background
      evidence relied upon, and a mere recital of the existence of  some  of
      it, did not suffice for that. Thus she  accepted  that  there  was  no
      adequate analysis  of  whether  the  situation  in  Libya  passed  the
      relevant threshold, and if it did, either how the  Appellant  and  his
      young family were going  to  travel  through  Libya  to  the  home  of
      relatives, or, having done so live there in safety.

   8. Both were agreed  that  the  decision  discloses  no  engagement  with
      section 55, or the position of the children beyond the bald  statement
      that the best interests of the children  were  served  by  being  with
      their parents.

   9. In the circumstances the decision discloses  material  errors  of  law
      that renders unsafe  the  dismissal  of  the  appeal  on  humanitarian
      protection and human rights grounds, and the decision in that  respect
      must in the circumstances be set aside and remade.  I  have  in  these
      circumstances considered whether or not to remit  the  appeal  to  the
      First Tier Tribunal for it to be reheard, or  whether  to  proceed  to
      remake it in the Upper Tribunal.

  10. There are  in  my  judgement  two  factors  to  consider.  Firstly  no
      interpreter has been booked for the hearing today, and  the  Appellant
      is not present, so an adjournment would be required in  any  event  in
      order for there to be a fair  hearing  of  the  appeal.  Second,  both
      parties accept that this is an appeal that should be  the  subject  of
      remittal because of the need for evidence  upon  the  ability  of  the
      family to travel internally within Libya, and, to live in safety  with
      relatives in Tripoli, to be considered and assessed. In  circumstances
      where it would appear that the relevant evidence has not properly been
      considered by the First Tier Tribunal, the effect of that error of law
      has been to deprive the Appellant of the opportunity for his  case  to
      be properly considered by the First Tier Tribunal; paragraph 7.2(a) of
      the Practice Statement of 25 September 2012. Moreover  the  extent  of
      the judicial fact finding exercise is such that having regard  to  the
      over-riding objective, it is appropriate that  the  appeal  should  be
      remitted to the First Tier Tribunal; paragraph 7.2(b) of the  Practice
      Statement of 25 September 2012.

  11. Having reached that conclusion, with the agreement of  the  parties  I
      make the following directions;

       i) The decision upon the asylum appeal is confirmed.

      ii) The decision upon the humanitarian  protection  and  human  rights
          appeals is set aside, and the appeal is remitted to the First Tier
          Tribunal for rehearing. The appeal is  not  to  be  listed  before
          Judge G Robson.

     iii) An Arabic interpreter is required for the hearing of the appeal.

      iv) There is presently anticipated to be the Appellant  and  no  other
          witness, and the time estimate is as a result, 3 hours.

       v) It is not anticipated by the Respondent that she has  any  further
          evidence to be filed. The Appellant anticipates that a  review  of
          the  evidence  is  required  and  that  a  short  further  witness
          statement may be filed. The Appellant is  therefore  to  file  and
          serve any further evidence to be relied upon at his appeal by  5pm
          11 July 2017

      vi) The appeal may be listed at short notice as a filler on the  first
          available date at the North Shields hearing centre after  18  July
          2017.

     vii) No further Directions  hearing  is  presently  anticipated  to  be
          necessary. Should  either  party  anticipate  this  position  will
          change, they must inform the Tribunal immediately, providing  full
          details of what (if any) further evidence they seek to rely upon.

    viii) The Anonymity Direction previously made by the First Tier Tribunal
          is preserved.




Decision


  12. The decision promulgated on 27 March 2017 did involve the making of an
      error of law sufficient to require the decision upon the  humanitarian
      protection and human rights appeals  to  be  set  aside  and  reheard.
      Accordingly, and to that limited extent, the appeal is remitted to the
      First Tier Tribunal with the directions set out above.




Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal JM Holmes


Dated 20 June 2017

