
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11023/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice Centre      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 17 October 2019                            |On 13 November 2019           |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between

                                 Mr E M I A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Aziz, Lei Dat & Baig solicitors (Renshaw House)
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Sudan born in 1974.  He arrived  in  the
    UK on 18 March 2018 and claimed asylum the same day, on the basis  that
    he is a member of the Berti tribe having been  born  in  North  Darfur,
    that he had been arrested twice in 2016 and 2018, and  that  he  had  a
    well-founded fear of persecution if he were  returned  to  Sudan.   His
    asylum application was refused in a decision dated  3  September  2018.
    The Appellant appealed against that decision.  His appeal  came  before
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Malik for hearing on 15 October  2018.
    In a decision and reasons promulgated on 26  October  2018,  the  judge
    dismissed the appeal.

 2. Permission to appeal was sought in time on the basis that the judge had
    erred in law.  Given that there was no dispute as  to  the  Appellant's
    Darfuri ethnicity, the judge had departed  from  the  country  guidance
    cases of AA (Non-Arab Darfuris - relocation) Sudan CG [2009] UKAIT 0005
    and MM (Darfuris) Sudan CG [2015] UKUT 00010.  There  had  to  be  very
    strong grounds supported by cogent evidence to depart  from  a  country
    guidance case and no cogent or good reasons had been provided  in  this
    case as the Judge's reasons  were  simply  based  on  the  Home  Office
    Country of Origin Information Report.

 3. Permission to appeal was granted on 20 November 2018.

     Hearing

 4. Prior to the hearing on 15 October 2019 the Appellant's representatives
    sent to the Respondent and the Tribunal a  supplementary  bundle  which
    included a copy of a decision of the Upper Tribunal in AAR and AA (Non-
    Arab Darfuris - return) Sudan [2019] UKUT 00282 (IAC) promulgated on  7
    August 2019 where the Upper Tribunal held:

         "The situation in Sudan remains volatile after civil protests
         started in late 2018 and the future is unpredictable.  There is
         insufficient evidence currently available to show that the guidance
         given in AA (non-Arab Darfuris etc.) [2009] and MM (Darfuris)
         [2015] requires revision.  Those cases should still be followed".

 5. Mr Bates accepted in light of this new decision from the Upper Tribunal
    and in the absence of any further country  information  emanating  from
    the Respondent's sources to contradict the position taken therein  that
    the judge had erred materially in law.

 6.  The  further  skeleton   argument   contained   in   the   Appellant's
    supplementary bundle asserted that in light of the country guidance and
    given the acceptance the Appellant would be at risk on return to  Sudan
    due to his ethnicity and that there was  no  safe  internal  relocation
    alternative that the Appellant was entitled to refugee  status  on  the
    basis of his ethnicity.

     Decision and Reasons

7.   Both parties accepted that in light of AAR (op cit) the correct  course
of action would   be for the appeal to be  allowed  outright  on  the  basis
that the Appellant is a refugee.  I     so find that the Appellant would  be
at risk of persecution if returned to Sudan due to    the fact that he is  a
non-Arab Darfuri of Berti ethnicity.

     Notice of Decision

     The appeal is allowed on refugee grounds.

     Direction Regarding Anonymity -  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper   Tribunal) Rules 2008

     Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  Appellant
is granted    anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him    or any member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to the     Respondent.  Failure to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court   proceedings.


Signed   Rebecca Chapman                         Date 10 November 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman



