
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11616/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Employment Tribunal  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 25 September 2017                     |On 27 October 2017                  |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

                                   Between

                                    [E I]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Toal, Counsel, instructed by Duncan Lewis & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Singh, Home Office Presenting Officer

                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

1.   The subject of the challenge brought by the appellant  with  permission
    is the decision of First-tier Tribunal (FtT) Judge Broe sent on  4  May
    2017 dismissing the appellant's appeal against a decision made  by  the
    respondent  on  15  September  2016  refusing   his   application   for
    international protection.

2.   The appellant, a national of Kenya,  had  applied  for  asylum  on  the
    basis that he was a former civil servant who would be at risk on return
    because he had acted as a government informer and would be at  risk  of
    similar harms as had befallen others working with him.  The  judge  did
    not find that the appellant had given a credible account.

3.   I am grateful to both representatives for  their  careful  submissions.
    Mr Toal conceded at the outset that the appellant could not succeed  in
    his ground of appeal relating to the risk on return  arising  from  the
    appellant's health difficulties.

4.   It is unnecessary for me to set out the submissions of the  parties  in
    any detail because I am satisfied that the judge did materially err  in
    law.  The essence of his error was his failure to give adequate reasons
    for rejecting the assessment made in the expert report prepared  by  Dr
    Benjamin Knighton.  That report had found that the appellant had  given
    a plausible account in key respects and that he would  be  at  risk  on
    return.

5.   The judge's treatment of the expert report  appears  in  paragraphs  27
    and 28 of his decision:

    "27. I note that in interview he said that  after  the  new  government
         came into office in 1982 (an error because  the  correct  date  was
         2002) the government did not want informers. He  said  "John  Maina
         was an informer and he got lost and he was found floating in a  dam
         in a bag, he was killed". He said that he asked himself if he could
         be the next one and thought that he should go away. In  his  report
         Dr Knighton summarises  the  account  given  by  the  Appellant  as
         follows: "The Appellant has in mind Nicholas, who he says got  lost
         in (he ventured 1902 (I accept that may be a typing error) and 1983
         first) 2003, who was found floating in dam near Kajiado in a  sack.
         Johnson and John Maina also disappeared but  he  did  not  wait  to
         follow up these cases or any others that may happen, but  ran  away
         to seek  anonymity".  These  accounts  cannot  be  reconciled.  The
         Appellant has given contradictory accounts of the  event  which  he
         says was the catalyst for his departure from Kenya. I find this  to
         cause significant damage to his credibility.


    28.   I  accept  that  the  Appellant  may  have  provided  an  account
         consistent with some of the background evidence  and  it  is  clear
         that was a factor in Dr Knighton's findings. I  note  however  that
         the names given by the Appellant are those of people with a  public
         profile. I find it likely that they would have been known to anyone
         in Kenya with an  interest  in  politics.  I  have  no  doubt  that
         information about them could have been found  by  the  simplest  of
         internet research. I am not persuaded that the knowledge  exhibited
         by the Appellant establishes that he was an informer as he claims."



6.   There are two main difficulties with the  judge's  assessment  of  this
    report.  First, the judge does not provide any  clear  explanation  for
    why he disagrees with  the  expert's  assessment.   It  is  just  about
    possible to glean from the first sentence  of  paragraph  27  that  the
    judge considered that the report only showed  that  the  appellant  had
    provided an account consistent with "some of the background  evidence";
    but  the  judge  does  not  identify  specifically  anything   in   the
    appellant's account that was inconsistent.  It is just  about  possible
    as well to  glean  that  the  judge  considered  the  report  contained
    mistakes: earlier, at paragraph 21 he noted that Dr Knighton  had  said
    the appellant had provided the names of those he had investigated  when
    working as an informer in an interview said to have taken place  on  17
    July 2017, which "must be an  error".   And  indeed,  as  became  clear
    during submissions, there are a number of other  examples  of  mistakes
    which appear to be the result of failure on the part of Dr Knighton  to
    check the draft of the report before sending it.  However, if the judge
    relied on there being errors of this sort in the report, then it is odd
    he felt sure enough to count  against  the  appellant  a  contradiction
    between his own account at  interview  and  that  he  was  said  by  Dr
    Knighton to have given  concerning  who  precisely  were  the  two  co-
    informants who had come to harm.  The appellant said they were  Johnson
    and John Maina, whereas in one passage of the report (the one relied on
    by the judge) the expert described the appellant saying that one of the
    victims was Nicholas.  Attempted reliance on this claimed contradiction
    was all the more questionable because elsewhere in the same report,  it
    is clear that the expert had recorded the appellant's evidence as being
    that the two victims were Johnson and John Maina.

7.   In submissions before the judge the respondent's representatives  asked
    him to view adversely the fact that, "[t]here was no transcript of  the
    appellant's interview with his  expert".   It  is  impossible  to  say,
    however, that this was one factor the judge weighed against the report,
    since no mention of it is made at paragraphs 27-28 or anywhere else.

8.   In any event, in my experience it is very rare for such transcripts  to
    be available and their absence has not prevented  the  respondent  from
    accepting many an expert report.

9.   Reading the judge's reasons, it is clear that in rejecting  credibility
    he did not rely solely on  the  asserted  "contradiction"  between  the
    appellant's account at interview and that recorded (at  one  point)  by
    the expert.  Nevertheless it is impossible  to  say  that  the  judge's
    assessment would have been the same even if he had treated  the  report
    as evidence weighing in the appellant's favour.

10.  For the above reasons I conclude that the  judge  materially  erred  in
    law and that his decision is to be set aside.

11.  The case is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal because the  effect  of
    the judge's error is that none of his findings of fact can stand.   The
    fact that I have found a material error in the judge's decision  should
    not  be  taken  to  indicate  anything  regarding  the  merits  of  the
    appellant's claim.  They will be exclusively a  matter  for  the  judge
    dealing with the case on remittal.

Direction

12.  In light of Mr Toal's identification during his submission of a  number
    of mistakes in the expert's report, I hereby direct that the expert  be
    asked to  produce  a  revised  version  addressing  those  mistakes  as
    identified by Mr Toal and briefly explaining why (if they are mistakes)
    they were made (an  email  sent  by  Dr  Knighton  to  the  appellant's
    solicitors on 23 September does not address  all  of  them).   The  new
    report as amended should be sent to the First-tier Tribunal with copies
    to the respondent within 28 days for the sending out of this  decision.



13.  No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date: 26 October 2017

                   [pic]
Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

