

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11005/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 1st August 2017                        |On 1st August 2017               |
|                                          |                                 |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER

                                   Between

                                     AB
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms R Moffat, instructed by ATLEU
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
   (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal  or  a
   Court directs otherwise, no report of these proceedings or  any  form  of
   publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  the  original
   Appellant/parties in this determination identified as AB. This  direction
   applies to, amongst others, all parties. Any failure to comply with  this
   direction could give rise to contempt of court proceedings





   1. AB, an Albanian citizen, appealed a decision to remove  her  following
      refusal of her claim for asylum/humanitarian protection/protection  on
      human rights grounds. Her appeal  was  heard  by  First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge A D Baker on  13th  March  2017  and  dismissed  in  a  decision
      promulgated on 10th May 2017.


   2. AB's claim was that she had been trafficked to work as a prostitute in
      Brussels, had managed to escape and had returned  to  Albania  but  on
      hearing that the traffickers were after her she fled Albania and  came
      to the UK. After a period of time she had a relationship  with  a  man
      with whom she had a child.  That  child  is  her  dependant  in  these
      proceedings. That man then rejected her and she  then  sought  asylum.
      She  was  referred  to  the  NRM  but  although  an  initial  positive
      reasonable grounds decision was taken on 18th February 2016 a decision
      was taken by the NRM on  19th  August  2016  that  she  had  not  been
      trafficked. That decision of the NRM was, at the date  of  the  First-
      tier Tribunal hearing, the subject of a judicial review application.


   3. The First-tier Tribunal judge  sets  out  with  clarity  the  evidence
      before her and  concludes,  drawing  all  the  findings  together  and
      concludes that the adverse findings go the "very" core of her account.
      And that


             "No part of her account can be relied on save for the admitted
             facts as to  her  nationality,  age,  name,  that  she  has  a
             daughter and that the appellant suffers from PTSD."


   4. Permission to appeal was  sought  and  granted  on  the  grounds  that
      despite the First-tier Tribunal judge stating that the  psychologist's
      report was reliable and should be given weight, she has not placed any
      weight upon that report at all and has not made any  findings  on  the
      report in the context  of  the  appellant's  claim  for  international
      protection. It was arguable that no reasons had been given  to  reject
      the conclusions of the Psychologist.


   5. Permission was also granted on the grounds


   a) that it was arguable the  First-tier  Tribunal  judge  had  failed  to
      provide reasons for accepting some but not other parts of the  country
      expert report
   b) that it was arguable the  First-tier  Tribunal  judge  had  failed  to
      consider the appellant's claim against the background material but had
      rejected  elements  of  her   claim   on   the   basis   of   inherent
      implausibility.
   c) It was arguable the First-tier Tribunal judge failed to engage at  all
      with the possible risk on return of the appellant with a  young  child
      born out of wedlock, and
   d) That it was arguable the First-tier Tribunal judge had failed to  make
      any findings under paragraph 276ADE  and  in  particular  whether  she
      would face very significant obstacles to reintegration.


   6. The First-tier Tribunal judge has phrased her findings in terms of  it
      being "not inherently  not  credible".  This  is  a  rather  confusing
      formulation. Although the judge has made  specific  findings  on  many
      elements of the appellant's account she has not, in reaching her final
      conclusion referred to the weighty evidence of the  psychologist  that
      the appellant's symptoms were consistent with the  trauma  claimed  of
      sexual abuse and the  emotional  trauma  of  being  abandoned  by  her
      partner. No adverse submissions were made by  the  respondent  on  the
      psychologist's report which considered the appellant's symptoms in the
      context of the psychologist's  accepted  experience  of  dealing  with
      victims of sexual abuse, those who have been  trafficked  and  whether
      the appellant was exaggerating or making up her symptoms. The  failure
      of the judge to consider this and place weight upon  it,  as  she  had
      said she should, is a material error of law.


   7. The report by the expert was not challenged  by  the  respondent.  The
      evidence she gave has again not been engaged with  in  any  meaningful
      way, particularly when considered in the  context  of  the  background
      evidence  overall  and  the  country  guidance  case  of  TD  and   AD
      (trafficked women) Albania CG [2016] UKUT 00092  (IAC).The  First-tier
      Tribunal judge has provided no reasons for discounting elements of the
      expert's report.


   8. Ms Isherwood conceded there were material errors of law such  tha  the
      decision be set aside to be remade. There is without doubt a  lack  of
      adequate reasoning for  the  conclusions  reached  by  the  First-tier
      Tribunal judge.


   9. I set aside the decision to be remade.


  10. The nature and extent of any judicial fact finding which is  necessary
      in order for the decision in the appeal to be re-made  is  such  that,
      having regard to the overriding objective, it is appropriate to  remit
      the case to the First-tier Tribunal.


          Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

     I set aside the  decision  and  remit  the  appeal  to  the  First-tier
Tribunal.

    Anonymity


    The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of  the
    Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


    I continue that order (pursuant to rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).

                                    Date 1st August 2017
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
