
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11475/2019 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decision Under Rule 34               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Without a hearing                    |On 11th September 2020               |
|7th September 2020                   |                                     |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER


                                   Between

                                     YJ
                           (anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal
    or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any
    form of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  the
    appellant in  this  determination  identified  as  YJ.  This  direction
    applies to, amongst others, all parties. Any  failure  to  comply  with
    this direction could give rise to contempt of court proceedings.

      1. FtT Judge Juss dismissed YJ's appeal against  the  refusal  of  her
         international protection and human rights claim for reasons set out
         in a decision promulgated  on  4th  February  2020.  Permission  to
         appeal was granted by FtT Judge Bird on 16th March 2020. Directions
         for the further conduct of the appeal were sent on 17th April  2020
         and, in the circumstances surrounding COVID 19, provision was  made
         for the question of whether there was an error of  law  and  if  so
         whether the decision of the FtT judge should be  set  aside  to  be
         determined on the papers.

      2. The appellant's representatives sought  an  extension  of  time  to
         early July 2020 to make submissions. That has now  passed,  and  no
         submissions have been received  by  the  Upper  Tribunal  from  the
         appellant and no further request for time submitted. There has been
         no objection to a decision being taken  on  the  papers  by  either
         party. The respondent made written submissions on 6 May  2020.  The
         respondent did not object to a decision being taken on the  papers.
         The appellant has not responded,  as  she  was  provided  with  the
         opportunity to, to those submissions. The  appellant  was,  on  the
         date of the making of this  decision,  aware  of  the  respondent's
         position but has not chosen to respond.

      3. I  am  satisfied  that  the  submissions  made  on  behalf  of  the
         respondent together with the papers before me[1] are sufficient  to
         enable me to be able to take a decision  on  whether  there  is  an
         error of law in the decision of the  FtT  and  if  so  whether  the
         decision should be set aside, on the  papers  and  without  hearing
         oral submissions.

         FtT Decision

      4. The First-tier Tribunal judge set out in the  appellant's  evidence
         and refers to her having returned to Zimbabwe three times after she
         first arrived in the UK and that she had not had  any  problems  on
         her arrival or stay in Zimbabwe. He sets out that she last went  to
         Zimbabwe in 2008 and that she joined ROHR in November 2019 and that
         the evidence of attendance at  demonstrations  was  all  from  2019
         onwards. In reaching his decision the judge concluded that although
         she had previously claimed previous political  activity  from  2002
         she had been able to travel to Zimbabwe without any risk. The judge
         addressed her sur place political activity and concluded  this  was
         opportunistic. He refers to Danien  [2000]  Imm  AR  and  that  the
         commission of activities in bad faith had to be understood  in  the
         context that nothing in it should be read as  giving  any  kind  of
         green light to bogus asylum seekers. The judge found that  she  was
         neither a prominent member of R0HR or Zimbabwe Vigil and  that  she
         had not received any threats at any stage even after  embarking  on
         her sur place activities.

      5. The judge endorsed paragraph 34 of the reasons for  refusal  letter
         which reads as follows:

             "You claimed that you began to be  politically  active  whilst
             you were residing in the UK. You  stated  that  in  2016,  you
             began following discussions on the situation in  Zimbabwe  and
             began to become interested. You were asked  what  specifically
             happened that brought out your political interest to which you
             stated "well you know, just how you  see  a  lot  of  innocent
             people being persecuted and being killed just  for  expressing
             their views and not agreeing with the current  government  and
             just, you know, wanting it for a lot of things".  You  further
             stated, when asked how you started to become active, "well, on
             Facebook, some activists used to  share  a  lot  about  what's
             going on at home and encouraging fellow  diaspora  Zimbabweans
             to take part and take back and support those who are home from
             here so I just felt I needed to do  my  part  as  well".  When
             asked why you had not become involved  earlier  to  which  you
             responded that you were mainly focused on your  son  and  that
             you  weren't  really  interested.  Your  reasoning  for   your
             political investment in 2016 is considered  vague,  as  it  is
             unclear what specifically motivated you to become involved  in
             2016, considering you displayed awareness  for  demonstrations
             and political activity in the UK since 2002.  Furthermore  you
             were requested numerous times to provide more detail into what
             raised your interest yet failed to do so."

         Error of law

      6. The appellant sought and was granted permission to  appeal  on  the
         grounds that it was arguable the First-tier Tribunal judge erred in
         his definition of "bad faith" and that the core of the  appellant's
         claim was the sur place activities and whether  there  would  be  a
         risk of persecution on return. It was submitted that the  Court  of
         Appeal in Danian found no basis for applying the principle of  good
         faith in asylum claims and that the Court of Appeal concluded  that
         if there was a real  chance  of  persecution  then  the  Convention
         applies even if an  asylum  seeker  had  fabricated  a  claim.  The
         grounds  refer  to  relevant  factors  for  determining  sur  place
         activity and submit that the First-tier Tribunal  judge  failed  to
         address these in the context of Zimbabwe.

         Consideration and findings

      7. The appellant made a number of trips to Zimbabwe between  2002  and
         2008. She was not at risk on those trips despite claiming  at  some
         point to have been involved politically prior to those trips.  This
         is a matter the FtT judge is  entitled  to  take  into  account  in
         assessing the impact of her sur place activities,  which  consisted
         of some attendance at some demonstrations after  2019.  The  letter
         dated 14th December 2019 is a general letter which in so far as  it
         refers to the appellant, states that she  signed  the  register  in
         September 2008 although she may have attended prior to then without
         signing in. The evidence before the First-tier  Tribunal  judge  of
         her attendance dated from November 2019. Although the letter states
         that "supporters such as [Y] help draw attention... She comes early
         to help set up and stays to the end to help pack up...". the letter
         is non-specific and vague as to the number of times  the  appellant
         attended; if there is a register it is difficult to  understand  on
         what basis it was  not  produced.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  judge
         refers in his decision to the evidence produced from the writer  of
         that letter and in particular refers to that  evidence  as  general
         and speculative. It is incorrect, as submitted by the appellant  in
         the grounds  of  appeal,  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  made  no
         reference to the corroborative  letter.  In  any  event  the  judge
         states that he is taking account  of  all  the  evidence  and  that
         letter is listed as one of the documents before him,  it  being  on
         pages 37 and 38 of the bundle. Furthermore it is to be  noted  that
         the appellant did not in her  previous  appeal  in  2019  make  any
         reference to any political activity whatsoever.

      8. As identified in the grounds  seeking  permission  to  appeal,  sur
         place activity, even if undertaken for  opportunistic  reasons  may
         still lead to a real risk of being persecuted. The essential  issue
         is the identification of the activity and the risk  posed  by  that
         activity in the context of the country conditions.  The  First-tier
         Tribunal judge identified clearly  and  plainly  the  very  limited
         activity of the appellant in terms  of  her  recent  attendance  at
         demonstrations and her lack of any real political understanding  or
         commitment. The skeleton argument relied on by the appellant at her
         hearing before the First-tier Tribunal judge,  draws  attention  to
         the  current  country  guidance  case  and   submitted   that   the
         appellant's sur place activities were likely to be known by the CIO
         on return because surveillance at the airport was  an  intelligence
         lead process. Reference was made in the skeleton  to  the  military
         coup and a change of  President  but  that  there  was  nothing  to
         suggest that there has  been  a  change  in  the  attitude  of  the
         authorities to those who  opposed  Zanu-PF.  Although  the  country
         guidance case relied upon is nearly 10 years old and  although  the
         military coup is far more recent, there was no evidence put  before
         the First-tier Tribunal to support the submission that a person  as
         low-level in  activity  of  this  appellant  whose  credibility  is
         significantly  damaged  through  her  previous  claims  and   whose
         understanding  and  activity  within  the  Zimbabwean  diaspora  is
         generalised and very limited, would now be at  risk  on  return  to
         Zimbabwe particularly given that she had  previously  travelled  to
         Zimbabwe at a time of heightened threat to political activists.

      9.  That  is  not  to  say  that  an  appellant  in  this  appellant's
         circumstances cannot rely upon the country guidance case but, given
         the time that has elapsed and the nature of her activity, the First-
         tier Tribunal judge was correct in concluding that  her  activities
         were not such as to place her at risk of being persecuted on return
         to  Zimbabwe.   Given   the   appellant's   lack   of   ideological
         understanding,  commitment  and  the  low  level  of  opportunistic
         political activity against the  government,  her  response  to  any
         questioning whatsoever is likely to be that she has been in the  UK
         because of failed family and private life applications and appeals.
          She cannot with any real accuracy describe herself as a  political
         activist. The possibility of her attendance at a few demonstrations
         being  noted,  recorded  and  identified  as  antagonism   to   the
         government is remote.

     10. The conclusion by the First-tier Tribunal judge that the  appellant
         was not at risk of being persecuted is not  infected  by  error  of
         law. The judge has considered Danian and although he refers to "bad
         faith" that is in the context of an assessment of the  totality  of
         evidence before him.

    Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

    I do not set aside the decision; the decision of the FtT stands and the
    appeal is dismissed.

    Anonymity

    The First-tier Tribunal made an  order  pursuant  to  rule  13  of  the
    Tribunal  Procedure  (First-tier  Tribunal)  (Immigration  and   Asylum
    Chamber) Rules 2014.

    I continue that order (pursuant to rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).


Jane Coker
Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
Date 07 September 2020
-----------------------
[1] (a) the respondent's bundle; (b) the bundle filed on behalf of the
appellant received by the Tribunal on 28th January 2020; (c) the decision
of FtT Judge Juss; (d) The application for permission to appeal; and (e)
the grant of permission to appeal.

