
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11280/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at the Royal Courts of Justice          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 25 February 2019                           |On 14th March 2019            |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

                                     U A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Bandegani, Counsel, instructed by Duncan Lewis
                    & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
2008 I make an order prohibiting  the  disclosure  or  publication  of  any
matter likely to lead members of the  public  to  identify  the  Appellant.
Breach of this order can be punished as a contempt of court.  I  make  this
order because the Appellant is an asylum seeker and publicity might  create
a risk to his safety.

2. This is an appeal by a citizen of Afghanistan  against  the  decision  of
the First-tier Tribunal dismissing his appeal against the decision  of  the
Secretary of State refusing him asylum and humanitarian protection.

3. The matter can be dealt with shortly because  of  an  entirely  realistic
and responsible position taken by Mr Jarvis for the Secretary of State upon
consideration of Counsel's grounds.  The short point is that although  this
is in many ways a careful  determination,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
erred in her assessment of the medical evidence relied upon  to  show  that
the appellant has post-traumatic stress disorder and as  a  consequence  an
inability to record things in a correct chronology which can give an unfair
appearance of dishonesty.

4. The appeal was largely lost because the appellant was disbelieved  and  I
can see no answer to the contention that the First-tier Tribunal Judge,  on
this occasion, misdirected herself in consideration of the medical evidence
and reached a conclusion that was not open to her at least for the  reasons
given.  First-tier Tribunal  Judges  are  not  obliged  to  accept  medical
evidence but when the medical evidence is prima facie credible, which  this
certainly is, a proper reason must be given for rejecting it and the reason
that was given here, namely that the doctor had simply  accepted  what  the
appellant had said uncritically, is not justified.  That is not how medical
practitioners work and particularly not how medical  practitioners  dealing
with mental health issues work and the judge has not appreciated the  value
of the evidence and has reached an unsustainable conclusion.

5. This error impacts on all the other findings with the result that I  must
set aside  the  decision  and  order  that  the  case  be  reheard.   As  a
consequence of this decision there has been no proper consideration of  the
case and therefore the proper venue is the First-tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

6. The First-tier Tribunal erred. I set aside its decision and  direct  that
the appeal be heard again in the First-tier Tribunal.


|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 11 March 2019                  |



