
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11370/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 11th January 2019                         |On 6th February 2019          |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ZUCKER


                                   Between

                                    [M K]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Nath instructed by Liyon Legal Ltd
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka whose date of birth is recorded
    as  8th  June  1988.   On  20th  July  2016  he  made  application  for
    international protection as a refugee.   On  13th  September  2018  the
    Secretary of State refused that application and the Appellant appealed.
     His appeal was heard on 24th October 2018 by Judge of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Bulpitt sitting at Hatton Cross.  Judge Bulpitt dismissed  the
    appeal on all grounds.

 2. Not content with that decision, by notice  dated  13th  November  2018,
    application was made for permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal.
    There were six grounds.  Permission was  granted  by  Designated  Judge
    McCarthy in what has to be  said  is  a  very  considered  reasons  for
    decision in the grant.

 3. I am very grateful to Ms Everett who accepts that the cumulative effect
    of the flaws identified and pursued in the grounds are  such  that  the
    decision simply  cannot  stand  and  that  the  proper  course  in  the
    circumstances will be to set  aside  the  decision  with  no  preserved
    findings and for the matter to be remitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal
    for the reasons set out in the grant.  It is not necessary  for  me  to
    say more as the judge in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  before  whom  this
    matter will be re-listed will have the benefit of seeing the  grant  of
    permission to the Upper Tribunal which should assist in  ensuring  that
    that judge does not fall into error for the same reasons, and hopefully
    not at all.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained a number of errors of  law
such that the decision is to be set aside to be re-made  in  the  First-tier
Tribunal, not before Judge Bulpitt, to be listed at Hatton  Cross  with  the
benefit of a Tamil interpreter.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date: 28 January 2019




Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Zucker
