
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11792/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 25 April 2017 and 6 July 2017              |On 10 August 2017             |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LATTER


                                   Between

                                     lsl
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Briddock, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer (25
April 2017)
     Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer (6 July 2017)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   This is an appeal by the appellant against a  decision  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal dismissing her appeal against the  respondent's  decision
    of 12 October 2016 refusing her application for asylum and humanitarian
    protection.

Background

2.   The appellant is a citizen of Malaysia  born  on  [  ]  1969.   At  the
    beginning of his submissions Mr Briddock indicated that  the  appellant
    identifies as a male and preferred  to  be  referred  to  by  the  male
    pronoun and accordingly I have done so in  this  decision,  although  I
    have not amended the passages cited from the decision of the First-tier
    Tribunal.   He first came to the  UK  on  19  August  2003  with  entry
    clearance as a visitor.  After his leave expired,  he  overstayed.   In
    2008 he made an  application  for  an  EEA  residence  card  which  was
    rejected.  In February 2016 he made an application for leave to  remain
    on the basis of his long residence but was subsequently  notified  that
    his application was invalid.  On 14 April 2016  the  appellant  claimed
    asylum.  His claim was based on a fear of  persecution  as  a  lesbian.
    The respondent accepted that the appellant's nationality  and  identity
    were as claimed and that he had demonstrated a genuine  and  subjective
    fear of returning to Malaysia because of his sexual identity.  However,
    it was the respondent's view that the appellant had never attracted any
    interest from the authorities and it was  considered  possible  for  an
    LGBT person to live in Malaysia with a reasonable  degree  of  openness
    not dissimilar to how he had conducted himself in both Malaysia and the
    UK in the past (para 57 of the decision letter).

3.   The respondent considered  the  test  set  out  in  HJ  (Iran)  and  HT
    (Cameroon) v Secretary of State [2010] UKSC 31 but found that an openly
    gay person would not  face  persecution  because  of  their  sexuality.
    Although  the  objective  information  showed  that  homosexuality  was
    illegal in Malaysia, there was no evidence of recent  prosecutions  and
    it appeared that, when brought, they  tended  to  relate  to  political
    considerations.  The objective information also showed that there was a
    vibrant and flourishing gay scene in Malaysia and no evidence of recent
    prosecutions for homosexual activity.  For these  reasons  it  was  not
    accepted that the appellant had a well-founded fear of persecution  and
    the respondent found that it  was  reasonable  for  him  to  return  to
    Malaysia and relocate within Kuala Lumpur to avoid  problems  with  his
    family and to continue his life there.

The Hearing Before the First-tier Tribunal

4.   At the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal the appellant  gave  oral
    evidence adopting his witness statement dated 21 November 2016 where he
    set out the basis for his claim and at para 50 said  that  he  did  not
    want to live as a woman but as  a  man.   He  had  stopped  associating
    himself as a woman and has been living as a transgender man in the  UK.



5.   At the hearing Mr Briddock asked the appellant what he meant by  saying
    that he was a transgender man and he replied "physically I am  a  woman
    but mentally speaking I feel that I am a man" and when asked whether he
    was happy with the way he is and whether he wanted to change  anything,
    he replied "I am quite satisfied with what I can do currently -  I  can
    dress like a man".  On this issue the judge said at [32]:

     "A self description as a 'transgender man' is likely to mean  different
         things to different people, and  Mr  Briddock  sensibly  asked  the
         appellant  to  expand  on  what  that  meant  to  her  during   her
         examination-in-chief.  I took it from her response to his questions
         that her expression of this at the present time was to dress  as  a
         man, and indeed this has been a consistent  theme  in  her  witness
         evidence, from describing herself as a 'tomboy' as a child.  I take
         it, therefore, that the primary relevance of this to my decision is
         that she wishes to (and does) dress as a man.  I accept  that  this
         is her wish and  her  expression  of  her  self  description  as  a
         transgender man, and it is on that  basis  that  I  shall  consider
         whether she is at risk both as a lesbian and as a transgender man."

6.   The judge then referred to the country materials at  [33]-[39]  and  at
    [40] he said it was apparent from this information that:

         "(i) Same-sex sexual activities are against the  law  in  Malaysia,
             although actual prosecutions appear to be very rare.


         (ii) 'Cross-dressing' is at least to some extent against the law in
             Malaysia, although again actual incidents  of  prosecution  do
             not seem to be common.


         (iii)    That criminalisation provides a background  against  which
             politicians will  occasionally  engage  in  rhetoric  directed
             against LGBT people in Malaysia.  Similar sentiments  will  be
             expressed in society, including occasional harassment, against
             LGBT people in Malaysia.


         (v)  The difficulties are typically greater for those  from  Muslim
             societies in Malaysia (which would not include the appellant).




         (vi) There is no legal recourse  for  LGBT  people  who  have  been
             discriminated against."


7.   The judge accepted that the appellant would be  returning  to  Malaysia
    as a lesbian who dresses as a man.  He said that the country  materials
    he had considered suggested  to  him  that  the  appellant  would  face
    discrimination on  return  but  such  that  it  reached  the  level  of
    persecution.  He referred to the nature of persecution as discussed  by
    Lord Hope at [10]-[16] of HJ (Iran) and in LH and IP  (Gay  men:  risk)
    Sri Lanka CG [2015] UKUT 73. The  judge  concluded  at  [43]  that  the
    appellant would be at real risk of discrimination on return to Malaysia
    but not such as to amount to persecution under the  Refugee  Convention
    and his appeal against the respondent's decision on  her  asylum  claim
    must be dismissed.  The judge went on to consider article  8  and  para
    276ADE of HC 395 as amended but found that the appellant could not meet
    the requirement  of  showing  that  there  would  be  very  significant
    obstacles to his integration into Malaysia and there was no other basis
    on which article 8 required leave to remain to be granted.


The Grounds and Submissions

8.   In the grounds it is argued that the judge had  not  explained  why  he
    found that the treatment the appellant would  face  in  Malaysia  would
    amount to discrimination but not  persecution.   The  reference  to  HJ
    (Iran) and LH and IP did not assist with understanding  why  the  judge
    had found that there was no  real  risk  of  persecution.   The  second
    ground argues that the judge's finding that  the  appellant  would  not
    face persecution was not open to him  on  the  facts  and  evidence  as
    accepted.  The appellant's evidence, which had not been challenged  and
    was not rejected by the judge, included  the  fact  that  he  had  been
    subjected to an exorcism ritual due  to  being  boyish  which  included
    being beaten and sent to a  psychologist,  he  had  not  felt  able  to
    disclose his sexuality to anyone at all  until  he  left  Malaysia  for
    Singapore, when he returned to Malaysia he and his partner  kept  their
    relationship a secret as it would not be accepted by their families and
    they would face serious problems, when the relationship was  discovered
    the appellant and her partner were badly beaten and the  appellant  had
    been arrested for being dressed as a man.  The grounds argue  that  the
    country materials indicated that the appellant would  not  be  able  to
    live openly in Malaysia as a lesbian or as a person who  identified  as
    transgender.

Submissions

9.   Mr Briddock submitted that the judge had failed to  give  any  adequate
    reasons for his decision and that the accepted facts should have led to
    a  finding  that  there  was  a  real  risk  of  persecution.   In  the
    respondent's decision, it had been accepted that the  appellant  had  a
    subjective fear and this was based on his  objective  experiences.   He
    argued that the judge had  failed  to  take  account  of  those  actual
    experiences when assessing whether the appellant would be at real  risk
    on return.  The judge had focused  solely,  so  he  submitted,  on  the
    objective  evidence  without  taking  into  account   the   appellant's
    particular circumstances.

10.   Mr  Clarke  submitted  that  there  was  a  clear  threshold   between
    discrimination and persecution.  Discrimination had to reach a point at
    which the appellant could not reasonably be expected  to  tolerate  it.
    The judge had been well aware of the basis of  the  appellant's  claim.
    The background evidence indicated that there were only three states  in
    Malaysia where it was an offence for a woman to cross-dress as  a  man.
    The judge had considered  the  incidents  of  prosecution  in  Malaysia
    noting that the law had only been resorted to on  seven  occasions  and
    four of them in relation to the former deputy prime minister and  these
    had been politically  motivated.   He  submitted  that  the  judge  was
    clearly aware that the evidence potentially amounted to persecution but
    it was for him to assess whether it did.  He had looked at the  picture
    as a whole and reached a decision open to him on the evidence.

11.  Mr Clarke argued that ground 2 went too far.   The  factors  identified
    in the grounds did not in themselves entitle the appellant  to  asylum.
    He accepted that it was unfortunate that the judge had made no specific
    findings on those matters, neither  had  he  considered  the  issue  of
    internal relocation in so far as the appellant might be  at  risk  from
    her family.  However, this was not fatal to the decision, so he argued,
    as the judge had been entitled to find that the facts did not take  the
    appellant beyond the threshold of persecution.

12.  In reply, Mr Briddock submitted that the judge had failed  properly  to
    consider [77] to [78] of HJ (Iran).  The issue  of  persecution  was  a
    matter of fact to be assessed in the circumstances of  each  individual
    appellant.  He submitted that the judge had failed to  explain  in  the
    light of the country material submitted why the appellant would not  be
    facing persecution on return.

Consideration of Whether the First-tier Tribunal Erred in Law

13.  I must assess whether the First-tier Tribunal erred in  law  such  that
    the decision  should  be  set  aside.   The  judge  has  clearly  taken
    considerable care with this decision and it  is  with  some  hesitation
    that I have come to the view that there is an error of law.  In  ground
    1 it is argued that the judge did not explain why  he  found  that  the
    treatment  the  appellant  would  face  in  Malaysia  would  amount  to
    discrimination but not persecution.  The respondent had  accepted  that
    the appellant had a subjective fear of returning and the first issue to
    be considered was whether that  fear  was  well-founded.   Mr  Briddock
    submitted that the appellant's  genuine  fear  was  based  on  his  own
    objective experiences and that the judge's conclusions set out at  [40]
    drawn from the country materials supported his argument that  he  would
    be at real risk of persecution on return.

14.  I do not accept as argued in ground 2 that  the  appellant's  objective
    experiences considered in the light of the findings at [40] meant  that
    his claim would necessarily succeed but I do accept the submission that
    it is not clear that the judge took proper account of what had happened
    to the appellant at the hands of his family and, subsequently, when the
    relationship was discovered and, in consequence, the assessment of risk
    on return has not taken full  account  of  the  appellant's  individual
    circumstances.  I, therefore, accept that either  the  judge  has  left
    relevant matters out of account by failing to consider  the  impact  of
    the appellant's experiences on  whether  his  fear  of  persecution  on
    return is well-founded or he has failed to explain  adequately  how  in
    the light of those experiences he would not be at risk  of  persecution
    on return.

15.  I am also satisfied that the judge failed to  take  proper  account  of
    the guidance in HJ (Iran) when  assessing  whether,  if  the  appellant
    lived openly in Malaysia that  would  give  rise  to  a  real  risk  of
    persecution as opposed to discrimination and, if  that  risk  could  be
    avoided by living discreetly, whether he would do so because of  family
    or social pressures or because of a fear of persecution.  In summary, I
    am not satisfied that the judge's analysis of the  evidence  has  taken
    proper account of the appellant's individual circumstances  or  of  the
    guidance in HJ (Iran) on how he can reasonably be expected to  live  on
    return to Malaysia.

16.  I am, therefore, satisfied that the decision should be set  aside.   As
    Mr Clarke pointed out in his submissions, the judge did  not  make  any
    specific findings on whether the appellant would be at continuing  risk
    from her family or on internal relocation.  For the avoidance of doubt,
    it will be open to the parties to raise these issues when the  decision
    is re-made.

17.  Following further directions the hearing was relisted for the  decision
    to be re-made.  Mr Briddock has produced a skeleton  argument  dated  6
    July 2016 and Mr Melvin further written submissions also dated  6  July
    2017.  Mr Briddock also produced and relied on the UNHCR Guidelines  No
    9 on claims to refugee status based on sexual orientation and/or gender
    identity.  The hearing proceeded by way of submissions  only  as  there
    has been no challenge to the First-tier Tribunal  judge's  findings  of
    primary fact.

Further Submissions

18.  Mr Briddock submitted that the respondent had not  applied  the  proper
    test when assessing whether the appellant had a  well-founded  fear  of
    persecution in Malaysia.  The references  in  the  decision  letter  to
    there being a  reasonable  level  of  tolerance  towards  homosexuality
    within society as well as from the authorities failed  to  take  proper
    account of the approach set out by the Supreme Court in HJ (Iran.   The
    core issue was whether the appellant would be able  to  live  his  life
    openly  and  freely  in  Malaysia  without  fear  of  persecution.   He
    submitted that the appellant fell within [33] of UNHCR Guidelines No 9.
     The evidence accepted by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  amounted,  so  he
    argued, to past persecution and  there  was  evidence  in  the  country
    information to show a real risk of persecution for  transgender  people
    in Malaysia.

19.  The appellant's situation could not be considered in a  vacuum  but  in
    the context of his previous experiences.   He  referred  to  the  Human
    Dignity Trust Report that laws criminalising homosexuality in  Malaysia
    were rarely enforced but transgender  individuals  were  often  charged
    under the Minor Offences Act for "indecent behaviour" and  "importuning
    for  immoral  purposes"  and  that  the   criminalisation   laws   gave
    opportunities to some officials to exercise  extortion  and  created  a
    general feeling of uneasiness where an individual's  sexual  attraction
    and  gender  identity  was  criminalised.   The  respondent  relied  on
    evidence that there was "a thriving gay scene" in  Malaysia.   Even  if
    there was such a gay scene, that  did  not  indicate,  so  Mr  Briddock
    argued, that the appellant would be able to live his  life  openly  and
    freely in all parts of Malaysia, as opposed to just in bars and saunas.



20.  Mr Melvin submitted that evidence did not go further than supporting  a
    finding that at  its  highest  the  risk  to  the  appellant  was  from
    discrimination and  not  persecution  and  that  any  problems  in  any
    particular local area could be remedied by moving to Kuala Lumpur where
    the position for the LGBT community was more  relaxed.   The  appellant
    had produced very little evidence to support the contention that he had
    been the victim of past acts  of  persecution,  and  whilst  there  was
    evidence of intolerance and discrimination,  it  did  not  follow  that
    people from the LGBT  community  were  at  real  risk  of  persecution.
    Taking into account the COI report that there was  some  evidence  that
    the difficulties were greater within the Muslim community which did not
    apply to the appellant, there was insufficient evidence that  the  LGBT
    community as a whole were at risk of persecution.

Country Information

21.   The  background  information  before  the   First-tier   Tribunal   is
    summarised in [33]-[39] of the decision.  From  this  information,  the
    judge accepted that same-sex sexual activities were against the law  in
    Malaysia, although  actual  prosecutions  appeared  to  be  very  rare.
    "Cross-dressing" was at  least  to  some  extent  against  the  law  in
    Malaysia, although actual incidents of prosecution did not seem  to  be
    common.   Criminalisation   provided   a   background   against   which
    politicians would occasionally engage in rhetoric directed against LGBT
    people in Malaysia and similar sentiments were expressed by clerics and
    religious  leaders.   There  was  general  discrimination  in  society,
    including occasional harassment, against LGBT people in Malaysia.   The
    difficulties were typically greater for those from Muslim societies  in
    Malaysia but this did not include the appellant.  There  was  no  legal
    recourse for LGBT people who had been discriminated against.

22.  In [50] of his skeleton  argument  Mr  Briddock  refers  to  the  Human
    Dignity Trust Report that:

     "According to the United States Human Rights Country  Report,  the  law
        is rarely enforced.  However, transgender  individuals  were  often
        charged under the Minor Offences Act for 'indecent  behaviour'  and
        'importuning for immoral purposes'."

     In [51] he cites from the International Gay and  Lesbian  Human  Rights
    Commission Report of 1 September 2015 as follows:

     "The Malaysian Government along with  Brunei  and  Singapore,  rejected
         the inclusion of sexual orientation  and  gender  identity  in  the
         ASEAN Human Rights Declaration, resulting  in  the  adoption  of  a
         regional human rights instrument that intentionally excluded  human
         rights protections for LGBT persons.  Within Malaysia Razak's  [the
         Malaysian   Prime   Minister]   statement   fuels   discrimination,
         disrespect and even physical assaults against LGBT people.

     During his tenure as Prime Minister, LGBT students  have  been  rounded
         up and sent to camps for 'conversion' of gay and  effeminate  boys,
         the Human Rights Arts and Education  Festival  Seksuality  Merdeka,
         was shut down and banned in 2011 and religious officers  have  been
         shown to repeatedly abuse Mak Nyah (female to male transsexuals and
         transgender persons).

     Malaysia criminalises 'carnal intercourse against the order of  nature'
         (s.   377,  Malaysian  Penal  Code).   Several   provisions   under
         Malaysia's Sharia laws  criminalise  gender  non-conformity  ('male
         posing as woman' or 'female  posing  as  a  man'),  lesbianism  and
         sexual relations between men."

23.  In a report "Erasing 76 Crimes, 4 July 2016" it is said that:

     "In Malaysia, the  system  causes  and  reinforces  the  targeting  and
         discrimination of transpeople.   Transpeople  are  not  allowed  to
         change  their  name,  gender  and   the   last   digit   in   their
         identification card number or in any other  legal  documents.   The
         Government's refusal to allow  transpeople  to  change  details  in
         their identification documents to reflect  transpeople's  authentic
         identities makes transpersons vulnerable to stigma,  discrimination
         and  violence,  including  denial  of   employment   opportunities,
         humiliating experiences when forced to use identification card, and
         arbitrary arrests among others".

24.  I have also been referred to the UNHCR Guidelines No 9  which  at  [33]
    reads as follows:

     "Being compelled to conceal  one's  sexual  orientation  and/or  gender
         identity may also result in  significant  psychological  and  other
         harms.  Discriminatory and disapproving attitudes, norms and values
         may have a serious effect on the  mental  and  physical  health  of
         LGBTI  individuals  and  could  in  particular  cases  lead  to  an
         intolerable predicament amounting to persecution.  Feelings of self-
         denial, anguish, shame, isolation and even  self-hatred  which  may
         accrue in response to an inability to be open about one's sexuality
         or gender identity are factors to consider, including over the long-
         term."

The Guidance in HJ (Iran)

25.  The approach to be followed by the Tribunal when  assessing  claims  by
    gay men was set out by Lord Roger in HJ (Iran) at [82].  This reads  as
    follows:

         "When an applicant applies for asylum on  the  ground  of  a  well-
         founded fear of persecution because he is gay,  the  Tribunal  must
         first ask itself whether it is satisfied on the evidence that he is
         gay, or that he would be treated as gay by potential persecutors in
         his country of nationality.


         If so, the Tribunal must then ask itself whether it  is  satisfied
         on the available evidence that gay people who lived  openly  would
         be  liable  to  persecution  in   the   applicant's   country   of
         nationality.


         If so, the Tribunal must go on to  consider  what  the  individual
         applicant would do if he were returned to that country.


         If the applicant would in fact live openly and thereby be  exposed
         to a real risk of persecution, then he has a well-founded fear  of
         persecution  -  even  if  he  could  avoid  the  risk  by   living
         'discreetly'.


         If, on the other hand, the Tribunal concludes that  the  applicant
         would in fact live discreetly and so avoid persecution, it must go
         on to ask itself why he would do so.


         If the Tribunal concludes that the applicant would choose to  live
         discreetly simply because that was how he himself  would  wish  to
         live, or because of social pressures, e g, not wanting to distress
         his parents or embarrass his friends, then his application  should
         be rejected.  Social pressures of  that  kind  do  not  amount  to
         persecution and the Convention does not offer  protection  against
         them.  Such a person  has  no  well-founded  fear  of  persecution
         because, for reasons that have nothing to  do  with  any  fear  of
         persecution, he himself chooses to adopt a way of life which means
         that he is not in fact liable to be persecuted because he is gay.


         If, on the other hand, the  Tribunal  concludes  that  a  material
         reason for the applicant living discreetly on his return would  be
         a fear of the persecution which would follow if he  were  to  live
         openly  as  a  gay  man,  then,  other  things  being  equal,  his
         application should be accepted.  Such a person has a  well-founded
         fear of persecution.  To reject his application on the ground that
         he could avoid the persecution by living discreetly  would  be  to
         defeat the very right which the Convention exists to protect - his
         right to live freely and openly as  a  gay  man  without  fear  of
         persecution.  By admitting him to asylum and allowing him to  live
         freely and openly as a gay man without fear  of  persecution,  the
         receiving state gives  effect  to  that  right  by  affording  the
         applicant a surrogate for the protection  from  persecution  which
         his country of nationality should have afforded him."

26.  Lord Roger indicated at [83] that the same approach must be applied  to
    applications by lesbian women and it must  follow  that  it  should  be
    applied in all cases involving sexual orientation and gender  identity.
    It is also important to note as Lord Walker made clear in [98] that the
    analysis is an individual and  fact-specific  inquiry.   The  issue  is
    whether this particular appellant in his particular circumstances would
    be at real risk of persecution on return to Malaysia.

27.  In carrying out that assessment I  must  take  into  account  what  has
    happened to the appellant before he  left  Malaysia.   In  summary,  at
    school he was told that he needed to behave "like a girl" and was  sent
    for counselling.  He felt alienated, was not seen as a normal person at
    school, and experienced derogatory name-calling at school.  Due to  his
    boyish behaviour his family believed he was possessed by spirits and he
    was subjected to exorcism which included being beaten with a  cane  and
    being sent to a psychologist.  Later, his partner was badly  beaten  by
    her own family when the relationship  was  discovered  and  her  family
    verbally abused him in front of his  family,  at  which  point  he  was
    attacked by his father and brother and "literally  kicked  out  of  the
    house".  Later he was arrested for "dressing like a male".  He was  not
    charged with an offence but the police asked a lot of  questions  about
    why he was dressing as he did and was told that the way he dressed  was
    incorrect and that he was a  woman  and  dressing  as  a  man  was  not
    permitted in a Muslim country like Malaysia.

28.  The respondent  accepted  that  the  appellant  would  be  at  risk  of
    discrimination, but found that the evidence did not support  a  finding
    that the discrimination would be such  as  to  amount  to  persecution.
    This may be the case for some, but I must consider the position of  the
    appellant in his particular circumstances.  The appellant's  claim  was
    assessed by the respondent on the basis that  he  was  a  lesbian  (and
    understandably so as the issue of gender identity does  not  appear  to
    have been fully formulated at that stage).  The issue on  the  evidence
    available now is whether the appellant would be at risk of  persecution
    as a transgender man or whether because of his birth  assigned  gender,
    he would be perceived to be  a  lesbian  in  Malaysia.   Following  the
    approach in  HJ  (Iran),  I  am  satisfied  that  the  appellant  is  a
    transgender man who would be perceived as a lesbian  by  the  Malaysian
    authorities. I must go on to consider whether if  the  appellant  lived
    openly as such, he would be liable to persecution?.

29.  On the issue of discrimination or persecution, I remind myself of [77]-
    [78] of HJ (Iran) and of the provisions of art 5(1) of the  Refugee  or
    Person in Need of International Protection (Qualification)  Regulations
    2006 that an act of persecution must be:

         (a)  sufficiently serious  by  its  nature  or  repetition  as  to
         constitute  a  severe  violation  of  a  basic  human  right,   in
         particular a right from which  derogation  cannot  be  made  under
         article 15 of the Convention for the Protection  of  Human  Rights
         and Fundamental Freedoms; or


         (b)  an accumulation of various measures including a violation  of
         a human right  which  is  sufficiently  severe  as  to  affect  an
         individual in a similar manner as specified in (a).

30.  The country information shows that prosecutions  are  infrequent  under
    the laws criminalising homosexual behaviour but I accept that there  is
    a real risk of prosecution under the Minor Offences Act.  The  evidence
    also satisfies me that the appellant would not be able to  live  freely
    and openly as a transgender man.  The contrary is suggested by the fact
    that a number of states have introduced a specific law  against  cross-
    dressing and there is no indication of any change of attitude generally
    or by the authorities in Malaysia which could indicate  any  increasing
    tolerance on issues of sexual identity.  When this is  considered  with
    the evidence about the  system  in  Malaysia  causing  and  reinforcing
    targeting  and  discrimination  of  trans-people  by  the  restrictions
    identified in "Erasing 76 Crimes 4 July  2016"  (see  [24]  above)  and
    taking into account the appellant's background and his account  of  the
    way he was treated when in Malaysia, I am satisfied, at  least  to  the
    lower standard of proof required in international protection cases that
    the fact that the appellant would be unable to live freely  and  openly
    as a transgender man without  being  at  real  risk  of  treatment  and
    discrimination sufficiently severe to amount to persecution.

31.  The only way the appellant could live  openly  in  Malaysia  without  a
    risk of persecution is by acting discreetly and concealing  his  sexual
    orientation and gender identity but I am satisfied that his reason  for
    doing so would be because he genuinely feared that otherwise  he  would
    be persecuted.  For these reasons the evidence satisfies  me  that  the
    appellant, who was accepted to have a subjective fear  of  persecution,
    has shown that his fear is objectively justified.

32.  In these circumstances, I need not deal  with  the  alternative  claims
    made under para 276ADE and article 8.


Decision

33.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal disclosed an error of  law  and
    has been set aside.  I re-make the decision by allowing the  appeal  on
    asylum grounds.  The anonymity order made by  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    remains in force until further order.




Signed   H J E Latter                            Date: 7 August 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Latter




