
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11937/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham CJC                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 16th November 2018                   |On 2 January 2019                   |
|                                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                     MSS
                         (ANONYMITY direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr H Samra (Solicitor)
For the Respondent:    Miss H Aboni (Senior HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Dean Kershaw, promulgated on 9th January 2018, following a  hearing  at
    Birmingham on 15th December 2017.  In the decision, the judge dismissed
    the appeal of the Appellant, following which the Appellant subsequently
    applied for, and  was  granted,  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Afghanistan, and was born on 15th
    May 1990.  He appealed against the decision of the Respondent dated 3rd
    November 2017 refusing  his  claim  for  asylum  and  for  humanitarian
    protection, pursuant to paragraph 339C of HC 395.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The essence of the Appellant's claim  is  that  he  joined  the  Afghan
    Territorial Forces (ATF), after attending an open day for  recruitment,
    and he was placed in training barracks.  He finished  his  training  in
    July 2012.  He was based in Helmand.  He worked alongside  the  British
    Army, but not for them.  He did not have any direct contact with senior
    British officers (paragraphs 7 to 9).  In 2013 he was  moved  to  Logar
    Province, close to his family.  He was  subsequently  attacked  by  the
    Taliban.  He was beaten up.  Some  of  his  family  members  (brother's
    wife's cousins) were actively involved with the Taliban.  He  has  been
    falsely accused by them for being involved in murders  (paragraph  13).
    He had provided an identification card for the armed forces which has a
    photograph of him on it (paragraph 22).

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge accepted the Appellant's credibility on a  number  of  issues
    (see paragraphs 46 to 48) and  also  accepted  the  evidence  from  the
    Ministry of Interior Affairs, containing a photograph of the Appellant,
    such that he concluded that, "I am prepared to accept his claim that he
    was part of the Afghan  Army  or  ATF"  (paragraph  50).   The  judge's
    conclusion  was  that  the  Appellant  "falls  into  a  potential  risk
    category" (paragraph 63).  However, he had not been affected and he had
    left the country for entirely personal and economic reasons  (paragraph
    63).  A return to  Kabul  did  not  involve  a  general  risk  and  the
    Appellant could be returned there (see paragraphs 64 to  65).   He  had
    not established that he was at risk when he was in Afghanistan  and  is
    not at risk now (paragraph 66).

The Grounds of Application

 5. The grounds of application state  that  the  judge  made  a  number  of
    findings of fact in  the  Appellant's  favour,  and  these  included  a
    photograph of the Appellant in a  uniform  of  the  Afghan  Territorial
    Forces, alongside the British Army.  The judge had  also  accepted  (at
    paragraph 50) the ID document that the Appellant had produced from  the
    Ministry of Interior Affairs.  Accordingly, the judge made an error  of
    law in failing to assess the risk to the  Appellant  arising  from  the
    Taliban on account of these two factors.

 6. On 12th February 2018 permission to appeal was granted.





Submissions

 7. At the hearing before me on 16th November 2018, Mr Samra, appearing  on
    behalf of the Appellant, made the following submissions.   First,  that
    there had been a number of findings of fact made by the  judge  in  the
    Appellant's favour (paragraphs 46 to 48) and also the  acceptance  that
    the Appellant was in a uniform standing alongside British Army officers
    (paragraph 50).  However, what the judge did not do, was to address the
    risk to the Appellant arising from his employment in the ATF.  Yet, the
    judge's attention had been taken (see the grounds at paragraphs 4 to 5)
    to case law demonstrating risk in this respect.  The case of RQ (Afghan
    National Army - Hizb-i-Islami  -  risk)  Afghanistan  CG  [2008]  UKAIT
    00013, which it was said  was  before  the  judge  in  the  Appellant's
    bundle, makes it quite clear that "It is not difficult to track  people
    down in Afghanistan,  although  it  might  take  time"  (see  paragraph
    28.08).  However, the judge had said (at paragraph 56) that there would
    have been greater repercussions for the Appellant's brother  on  return
    to Afghanistan (the brother having left Afghanistan in 2006 and secured
    asylum in  this  country  long  before  the  Appellant),  if  what  the
    Appellant was saying was true, however, in so saying the  judge  failed
    to appreciate the case law that states that it would  be  a  matter  of
    time that the Taliban are able to track people down.

 8. Second, the case of RQ also makes it clear (at paragraph 101) that:

         "where an individual was 'wanted' by the Taliban or  Hizb-i-Islami,
         then the evidence was that the  situation  in  Afghanistan  remains
         sufficiently lawless that if he were found, there would be  nothing
         to prevent them dealing with him as they thought fit".

 9. The judge did not have regard to this.  In the same way, the judge  did
    not have regard  to  the  case  of  PM  &  Ors  (Kabul,  Hizb-i-Islami)
    Afghanistan CG [2007] UKAIT 0089 which was placed before the judge  (at
    page 212), and confirms the risk to the Appellant from the Taliban  due
    to his association of being a perceived supporter of the Government.

10. Third, Mr Samra submitted that, given that  the  Appellant  comes  from
    Kabul, he cannot really be internally relocated to any  other  part  of
    Iraq, given that the general position in the country guidance cases  is
    that only Kabul is safe, and the rest of  the  country  is  unsafe  for
    people in the Appellant's position.  Sufficient protection,  therefore,
    cannot be shown to him in any other part of the country.   However,  if
    the Appellant can only be sent to Kabul, then there is a  risk  to  him
    because he is at high risk of persecution  on  account  simply  of  his
    profile.  Mr Samra submitted that the recent  case  of  AS  (Safety  of
    Kabul) Afghanistan CG [2018] UKUT 00118, which  had  only  been  handed
    down on 18th April 2018, makes it clear that risk attaches on the basis
    of the profile of a person.  The judge did not consider the Appellant's
    profile as a soldier in the ATF, and as a person who had  been  working
    alongside British Army officials, such as to place him  at  risk.   The
    matter needed consideration.  Without it being considered, it could not
    be said that the Appellant could safely return,  even  to  the  capital
    city in Kabul.

11. For her part, Miss Aboni relied upon the fact that the  judge  did  not
    accept that the Appellant was  at  continuing  risk,  although  it  was
    accepted that he had been in the Afghan Army.  The Appellant's account,
    however, had been comprehensively rejected in many respects,  with  the
    judge observing at one point that:

         "I find it incredible that he did  not  seek  help  from  the  army
         himself.  He was a serving officer with them at the time.  He would
         have been obliged to report what took place it seems to me.  He was
         already fighting against the Taliban.  I  did  not  accept  on  the
         evidence given by him that he was attacked in the  way  he  claims"
         (paragraph 53).

12. In reply, Mr Samra submitted that no finding was ever made with respect
    to the Appellant's profile as  a  serving  officer  in  the  ATF.   His
    brother had left Iraq more than a decade ago in 2006  and  had  secured
    asylum in the UK.   The  judge  could  well  have  concluded  that  the
    Appellant was simply a low-level official, in his occupation, and  that
    there would be no risk to him on account of his  employment.   However,
    no such findings were made.  Given that no  such  findings  were  made,
    there had to be an error of  law.   This  was  particularly  given  the
    positive findings made in their favour, against which there had been no
    cross-appeal by the Respondent Secretary of State.

Error of Law

13. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007), such that I should set aside the decision.  My  reasons  are  as
    follows.

14. First, the judge did not consider the risk to the Appellant on  account
    of his being a serving officer in the Afghan  Army  or  ATF.   Nor  was
    there a consideration of the risk to him on the basis that there was an
    ID card  produced,  and  a  Ministry  of  Interior  Affairs  photograph
    submitted on his behalf.  This was an Appellant who, had made it  quite
    clear that "he was saying he worked for  the  Afghan  Army  but  worked
    alongside the British forces" (paragraph 46).  He had  produced  photos
    of his official position in Afghanistan which was accepted by the judge
    (paragraph 47).  The judge  was  clear  in  his  finding  that,  "I  am
    prepared to accept, looking at the photos, that  they  are  of  British
    army fighters.  To what level he worked alongside them I am  unable  on
    the evidence to conclude to any degree" (paragraph 48).

15. This brings one to the second  reason  for  why  this  appeal  must  be
    allowed.  This is that in these circumstances, the Appellant's  profile
    as a serving officer in the ATF, working alongside  the  British  Army,
    needed to be assessed, with a view to evaluating the risk to  him  from
    the Taliban, were he to be returned back to Afghanistan.

16. Third, the judge did not address the risk to the Appellant  on  account
    of his being wanted by the opposing forces as is clear from  the  cases
    in RQ and PM.  In the same way, the recent case of AS (Safety of Kabul)
    Afghanistan CG [2018] UKUT 00118, now also falls to be  considered,  in
    the light of the errors that I have identified above.



Notice of Decision

17. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside  the
    decision of the original judge.  I  remake  the  decision  as  follows.
    This appeal is allowed to the extent that it is remitted  back  to  the
    First-tier  Tribunal,  other  than  Judge  Dean  Kershaw,  pursuant  to
    Practice Statement 7.2(a) of the Practice Directions.

18. An anonymity direction is made.

19. The appeal is allowed.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 18th December 2018











