
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11648/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 7 August 2019                     |On 16 August 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J M HOLMES


                                   Between

                                    K. C.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation;
Appellant:    Ms Brakaj, Solicitor, Iris Law Firm
Respondent:   No attendance


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      0. The Appellant, an Albanian national, entered the UK illegally and
         then made a protection claim in 2017 which was refused on 19
         September 2018. The Appellant's appeal against that decision was
         heard and dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge K Henderson in a
         decision promulgated on 23 January 2019. In the meantime the
         Appellant was referred through the National Referral Mechanism for
         a decision upon whether she was a victim of trafficking, as she had
         claimed to be. A positive decision to that effect was made on 16
         July 2018 (on the balance of probabilities - a higher standard than
         was required of her to establish the factual elements of her
         protection claim), and the Appellant was granted discretionary
         leave to remain in the UK as a result, which expired on 15 January
         2019.

      0. The Appellant's application for permission to appeal was granted by
         Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley on 22 May 2019. The Respondent has
         not replied to that grant with a Rule 24 response. Neither party
         has applied pursuant to Rule 15(2A) to introduce further evidence.
         Thus the matter came before me.

      0. The hearing of the appeal was originally listed for 2 August 2019,
         but on that occasion the entire list had to be adjourned because
         the presenting officer was indisposed on the morning of the
         hearing. Having consulted the Appellants and their representatives
         to ascertain their availability, and secured a court room, the
         entire list was adjourned to 7 August 2019 in an effort to minimise
         the expense and delay that the parties would otherwise face (two of
         the appeals being privately funded). Time for the service of the
         Notice of Hearings was thereby abridged.

      0. On 6 August 2019 the Respondent applied by email of 1255 hours for
         an adjournment of the entire list on the basis it was anticipated
         that it would not be possible to provide a presenting officer as a
         result of seasonal staff shortages. That application was refused by
         email of 1414 hours on the basis there remained ample time for the
         Respondent to secure adequate representation, if necessary by
         resort to the services of the Bar. The application has not been
         renewed. The Respondent did not attend the hearing.

      0. In the circumstances I was satisfied that the Respondent is aware
         of the hearing. I was not satisfied there was any good reason
         demonstrated as to why the appeal should be adjourned once again of
         the Tribunal's own motion. The issues were simple, and it was in
         the interests of justice to proceed with the hearing without delay
         and with minimal further expense, and the appeal therefore
         proceeded in the Respondent's absence, having considered paragraphs
         2, 36, and 38 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules
         2008.

      The challenge

      0. Although this is not immediately obvious from the grounds to the
         application for permission to appeal, Ms Brakaj confirmed that the
         core of the Appellant's challenge to the decision of Judge
         Henderson is contained in paragraph 6(f) of the grounds dated 15
         April 2019. Thus the core complaint is that the Judge failed to
         recognise the extent of the concessions of primary fact that had
         been made by the Respondent in writing in advance of the hearing,
         and failed to take them as her starting point when assessing the
         weight to be given to the evidence concerning the issues of primary
         fact that remained in dispute. Instead, without warning the
         Appellant, or giving her the opportunity to deal with the
         possibility, it is argued that the Judge went behind material
         concessions of primary fact and made adverse credibility findings
         on matters that were not in dispute, thereby rendering the hearing
         of the appeal procedurally unfair. Moreover, and in consequence,
         the assessment of the risk of harm that would be faced by the
         Appellant and her family upon return to Albania was fatally flawed,
         because it was an assessment founded on adverse findings of fact
         that were themselves unsafe.

      The history of the appeal

      0. The appeal was first listed for hearing on 1 November 2018, but it
         was adjourned by decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Moran, with
         directions, once he had concluded that a fair hearing of the appeal
         could not proceed on that occasion. It was considered that the
         stance the presenting officer proposed to take, concerning the
         evidence of the Appellant, her husband, and, her sister, appeared
         to be inconsistent with the decision taken in relation to whether
         the Appellant was a victim of trafficking. The presenting officer
         had indicated he proposed to argue the appeal on the basis that
         significant parts of the Appellant's account were in dispute,
         whereas the Appellant and her representatives had attended the
         hearing of the appeal under the impression that the Respondent had
         conceded in advance of the hearing that past assaults, abduction,
         trafficking, and, forced prostitution had occurred by virtue of the
         positive trafficking decision, and consequential grant of
         discretionary leave to remain.

      0. Although neither party appears at any point to have tried to break
         the evidence down in such a way, it may assist if I note at this
         point that the Appellant relied upon events in the following
         distinct time periods; (i) July 2010 - February 2011, (ii) February
         2011 - December 2014, (iii) December 2014 - January 2017, and, (iv)
         January 2017 - to the date of the hearing. The evidence concerning
         period (i) was to all intents and purposes conceded in the refusal
         letter of 19 September 2018 [#14-17]. The refusal letter does not
         itself place in dispute any of the evidence concerning periods (ii)-
         (iv), the author merely takes as their starting point the
         trafficking decision, and proceeds to consider the adequacy of the
         state protection available to victims of trafficking who face re-
         trafficking, and the ability to relocate within Albania to avoid
         the risk that might be posed by any particular non-state agent.

      0. The confusion over the Respondent's position deepened once the
         presenting officer disclosed to the Appellant and to the Tribunal
         at the hearing a fax of 1 November 2018, which was a copy of the
         file note prepared by a caseworker of the Respondent's reasons for
         reaching a positive conclusion in relation to the trafficking
         claim, and the grant of discretionary leave to remain.

      0. By Judge Moran's direction the Respondent was required to set out
         her position in relation to the evidence of the Appellant, her
         husband, and her sister, in writing. The aim was to identify
         precisely what was conceded, and, thus what was in dispute
         requiring determination by the Tribunal. Pursuant to that direction
         the Respondent produced a supplemental letter of reasons for the
         refusal of the protection claim dated 19 November 2018. I am
         satisfied that this letter was intended to be read with, and as
         supplemental to, both the original refusal letter of 19 September
         2018, and, the fax of 1 November 2018 that had already been
         disclosed at the hearing. Since neither of these documents had done
         so specifically it was in my judgement intended by Judge Moran that
         the Respondent should thereby deal with the evidence of the
         Appellant's husband concerning periods (ii) - (iv), and thus focus
         minds on what was in dispute concerning the Appellant's claim that
         she faced a continuing threat from the non-state agent. Whilst it
         was far from ideal that the Respondent's position should be set out
         in three different documents, I am satisfied that they were
         intended to be read together.

      0. It may be that the far better course would have been for the
         Respondent to withdraw the decision under appeal, and to make a
         fresh decision after taking into account all of the material then
         available, so that if the protection claim was still to be refused
         the Appellant would be able to see in one document what case it was
         that she had to meet; which elements of the evidence she had relied
         upon were accepted, and which were placed in dispute. With the
         benefit of hindsight there would certainly have been far less scope
         for confusion had this course been adopted.

      0. When the three documents are read together, it can however be seen
         that the Respondent had by the date of the hearing before Judge
         Henderson conceded in writing;

         (a)  that the Appellant had been trafficked and forced into
         prostitution, (the evidence concerning period (i) was accepted in
         the letter of 19 September 2018 p6),

         (b)  that her sister had been threatened after the Appellant's
         escape from her traffickers, (which was evidence concerning periods
         (ii) and (iii) accepted in the fax of 1 November 2018), and,

         (c)  that her husband had been beaten threatened and kidnapped
         after the Appellant's escape (which was evidence concerning periods
         (ii), (iii) and (iv) partly accepted in the fax of 1 November 2018
         and partly accepted in the letter of 19 November 2018).

         There was, however, no concession to the effect that there was any
         continuing adverse interest in the Appellant and her family from
         her trafficker in the letters of 19 September 2018, or 19 November
         2018.

      0. It is plain from her decision that Judge Henderson understood the
         Respondent's position to be that she did not accept as truthful the
         evidence of the Appellant's husband concerning any continuing
         adverse interest in the Appellant or her family after February 2011
         [46].

      0. It is also plain from her decision that Judge Henderson makes no
         reference to any concessions over the evidence of the Appellant's
         sister, as set out in the fax of 1 November 2018. Indeed I am
         unable to identify any reference in her decision to the existence
         or content of the fax of 1 November 2018, whether explicit or
         implicit. As Ms Brakaj submits, when the decision is read as a
         whole, the reader is left with the distinct impression that the
         Judge has simply overlooked the existence and content of the fax of
         1 November 2018.

      0. In my judgement, even when read fairly as a whole, it is not
         possible to identify from Judge Henderson's decision that she took
         as her starting point all of the concessions of fact that had been
         made by the Respondent. Thus, no doubt inadvertently, she went on
         to make adverse findings of fact that went behind some of the
         Respondent's concessions in relation to the evidence relied upon by
         the Appellant. In consequence her starting point for consideration
         of the evidence of the continuing existence and level of threat to
         the Appellant was one that was not open to her. It follows that the
         whole of her assessment of the risk faced by this family upon
         return to Albania is unsafe and must be set aside.

      0. One further point raised in the grounds is that the Judge confused
         the dates of a particular incident between hearing the evidence
         (December 2014) and when drafting her decision (December 2015) [65
         & 70]. Since this occurred twice it is less likely to be a mere
         typographical error, although I note that the incident was
         initially correctly dated [30]. Initially it appeared that this
         error was unlikely to be material, but upon reflection I am
         persuaded that it would could reasonably appear to the reader that
         the placement of the incident in December 2015 was material to the
         Judge's reasoning upon the credibility of the claim that the
         Appellant faced a continuing threat [64 - 70]. If it were not a
         typographical error then this would indicate that the Judge had
         fallen into further error.

      0. In the circumstances I am satisfied that setting aside the decision
         and remitting the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh
         hearing is the only pragmatic course open to me, because it cannot
         be said that the Appellant has yet had a fair hearing of her
         appeal. In circumstances such as this, where it would appear that
         the relevant evidence has not properly been considered by the First
         Tier Tribunal in the course of a procedurally fair hearing, the
         effect of that error of law has been to deprive the parties of the
         opportunity for their case to be properly considered by the First
         Tier Tribunal; paragraph 7.2(a) of the Practice Statement of 13
         November 2014. Moreover the extent of the judicial fact finding
         exercise required is such that having regard to the over-riding
         objective, it is appropriate that the appeal should be remitted to
         the First Tier Tribunal; paragraph 7.2(b) of the Practice Statement
         of 13 November 2014.

    To that end I remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh
    hearing with the following directions;

    The appeal is to be heard by a judge other than First-tier Tribunal
    Judge Henderson, at the North Shields Hearing Centre.

    An Albanian interpreter is required.

    The Appellant does not currently propose to file any further evidence
    in support of the appeal, so the remitted appeal is suitable for the
    short warned list. The parties should expect the appeal to called on
    for hearing at short notice after 2 September 62019.

    The Appellant shall serve and file by 5pm on 28 August 2019 a skeleton
    argument that sets out clearly, but in brief;

          i) the concessions of fact in relation to periods (i)-(iv) (see
             above) cross-referenced to the relevant source documents, that
             she asserts the Respondent has made in relation to her own
             evidence, the evidence of her husband, and, the evidence of
             her sister,

         ii) the disputed issues of primary fact that she says the First-
             tier Tribunal needs to resolve in order to assess whether or
             not the Appellant and her family currently face a real risk of
             harm in the event of their return to Albania,

        iii) her case in relation to the sufficiency of the state
             protection available to her, and,

         iv) her case in relation to her claim to be unable to avoid the
             risk of harm she says she faces from non-state agents through
             relocation within Albania.

Notice of decision

      1. The decision did involve the making of an error of  law  sufficient
         to require the decision  to  be  set  aside  on  all  grounds,  and
         reheard. Accordingly, the appeal is  remitted  to  the  First  Tier
         Tribunal for rehearing, with the directions set out above.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any member of his family. This direction  applies
both to the Appellant and to the Respondent.  Failure to  comply  with  this
direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 9 August 2019
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J M Holmes
