
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11152/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford via Skype          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5 August 2020                     |On 17 August 2020                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                     AR
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Kumar
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis


                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS


     1. On 12 March 2020  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Ford  ('the  Judge')
        dismissed the appellant's appeal on  protection  and  human  rights
        grounds.
     2. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Keane
        on 20 April 2020 in the following terms:


        For the reasons mentioned  in  the  grounds  the  Judge's  decision
        contained arguable errors of law but for which the outcome  of  the
        appeal  might  have  been  different.  First,  in  condemning   the
        appellant's accounts as to what became of his passport and identity
        card as "incredible" (paragraph 22  of  the  decision).  The  Judge
        arguably was rejecting the appellant's account "out of hand".  2nd,
        the Judge arguably perpetrated a mistake of fact  in  finding  that
        there was no letter on the file from a Mr Hamadi who was supportive
        of the appeal in circumstances where in fact the letter was  to  be
        found at page 65 of the  appellant's  appeal  documents.  3rd,  the
        Judge arguably had regard to an irrelevant consideration in finding
        at paragraph 29 of the decision as it would be reasonable to expect
        the appellant, during a period of residence in the  United  Kingdom
        as long as 11 years, to produce additional information or  evidence
        concerning his claimed nationality. It was arguably not a  part  of
        the judge's function required the appellant  to  present  evidence.
        Fourth, the judge rejected "out of hand" the appellant's  claim  to
        have been  illiterate  upon  his  arrival  in  the  United  Kingdom
        (paragraph 30  of  the  decision).  Such  a  finding  was  arguably
        Draconian was  not  supported  by  any  or  adequate  reasons.  The
        application for permission is granted.



Background


     3. The appellant claimed to be a citizen of Iran born on 10 May  1990.
        He arrived in the  United  Kingdom  in  October  2009  and  claimed
        asylum.  The  claim  was  refused  and  an   appeal   against   the
        respondent's decision unsuccessful.  The  appellant  became  appeal
        rights exhausted on 27 January 2010 but was not  removed  from  the
        United Kingdom and made an  application  for  indefinite  leave  to
        remain on 5 July 2018 which was refused on 31 October 2018.  On  30
        August 2019, the appellant made further submissions in  respect  of
        his protection claim which was refused  on  28  October  2019,  the
        appeal against which came before Judge Ford.
     4. The Judge sets out the correct legal self-direction in relation  to
        the burden and standard of proof between [2 - 6] and the nature  of
        the appellant's claim from [7 - 14]. The Judge  was  aware  of  the
        appellant's claim to be an Iranian Kurd from  Khanmawa  village  in
        Kermanshah province in Iran.
     5. The Judge notes an earlier decision by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
        McGavin, which was promulgated on 11 January 2010,  between  [15  -
        18]. It is noted Judge McGavin did not find  the  appellant  to  be
        credible. At [18] Judge Ford writes:


        18.  Judge McGavin was not satisfied  that  the  appellant  was  an
             Iranian national because he was  unable  to  name  an  Iranian
             newspaper or radio  station,  and  airport  in  Iran,  or  and
             Iranian mobile phone company. Even if  he  was  an  illiterate
             shepherd,  the  fact  he  had  not  picked  up  any  of   this
             information from his girlfriend who he said was  the  daughter
             of an  influential  man  in  Etelatt  further  undermined  the
             appellant's  credibility.  Judge  McGavin   noted   that   the
             appellant had failed to claim asylum in France  where  he  was
             fingerprinted on 4 occasions shortly before he had arrived  in
             the UK.


     6. The Judge in addition to the documentary evidence had  the  benefit
        of seeing and hearing the appellant give oral evidence.
     7. The Judge records at [28] that the respondent accepted that if  the
        appellant can show that he is an Iranian national  he  will  be  at
        real risk of persecution in Iran by reason  of  his  ethnicity  and
        political opinion due to his Facebook activity.
     8. The Judge, in relation to the protection claim,  writes  at  [29  -
        38]:


        29.   I do not find it credible even to the lower standard of proof
             that the appellant is an Iranian national. The  appellant  has
             known that his nationality was in dispute since the  time  his
             initial asylum claim was refused in 2009. He has had 11  years
             to produce additional information or evidence  concerning  his
             nationality. He indicated he could produce documents including
             a summons and arrest warrant but he has not produced them.  He
             has been in touch with his family since December 2009. He only
             started his  Facebook  posts  in  April  2019.  His  political
             involvement with the Kurdish cause in the UK has been  limited
             and recent. I could see no credible reason why he  had  failed
             to produce any  further  evidence  regarding  his  nationality
             prior to 2009.


        30.  I find  the  Appellant's  credibility  is  further  undermined
             because I find he is not illiterate. The Appellant  claims  to
             have become literate in the English language that  was  wholly
             new to him when he arrived, with only 3 months tuition in  the
             UK and no previous education. This is not credible.  While  he
             may have become familiar with spoken English I do  not  accept
             even to the lower standard of proof that he is told the  truth
             about his own literacy and I do not  accept  that  if  he  was
             unable to read or write in any language when he arrived he  is
             now able to read and write in English.


        31.  It has consistently stated that he is  personally  responsible
             for the Facebook posts on his Facebook account. These are in 2
             different languages, English being  one  of  them.  I  do  not
             accept even to the lower standard of proof that the  appellant
             has been able from a background of  illiteracy,  to  not  only
             learn to read and write in English, but to read and write in a
             2nd language. I find that this  appellant  has  not  told  the
             truth about his level of literacy when he arrived  in  the  UK
             and has sought to present a false picture  of  himself  as  an
             illiterate Shepherd when he must in reality, have had a  basic
             level of schooling.


        32.  It follows  from  this  finding  that  the  appellant  can  be
             expected  to  have  a  basic  knowledge  of  Iranian   affairs
             including geography, history, culture and literature.  He  has
             given no indication  that  he  has  familiarity  with  Iranian
             affairs. The appellant's Kurdish ethnicity is a factor I  have
             considered in my credibility assessment, but I do not accepted
             that as a  literate  Iranian  Kurd  the  appellant  cannot  be
             expected to have even the most  basic  knowledge  of  life  in
             Iran.


        33.  At the appeal hearing he was inconsistent about where he  left
             his ID card and his passport saying that  he  had  lost  them,
             that he had left them with his family in  Iran  and  that  his
             family had lost them. In his witness statement at paragraph  5
             be said "I do not know what has happened to my  ID  documents,
             it would be too dangerous for anyone to send me even  if  they
             did have it because of my relationship with the girlfriend.  I
             did not know the national anthem of Iran as it was in Farsi, I
             cannot read or write or speak Farsi".


        34.  Even as a shepherd, I find it more probable than not that  the
             appellant would be able to demonstrate a reasonable  knowledge
             of life in Iran that  he  singularly  failed  to  demonstrate.
             Reviewing all of the evidence before me, I  am  not  satisfied
             even to the lower standard of proof at  this  appellant  is  a
             national of Iran.


        35.  I agree with Judge McGavin's findings as to the credibility of
             the appellant's claim to have  been  involved  in  an  illicit
             relationship with the  daughter  of  a  senior  individual  in
             Etelatt. The appellant has not adduced any further evidence on
             this issue. I do not accept that the appellant is the  subject
             of an arrest warrant in Iran due to  an  illicit  relationship
             that he had with the daughter of an Etellat  official  or  for
             any other reason. I do not accept that the Iranian authorities
             are interested in this appellant because I do not accept  that
             he is Iranian.


        36.  I am confined in this appeal  to  looking  at  the  article  8
             issues on the basis of the appellant private  life  only.  The
             appellant has been living in the UK now for over 10 years.  He
             was appeal rights exhausted on 27 January 2010 in relation  to
             his protection claim and he failed to leave the  UK.  It  took
             another 8  years  before  he  made  any  further  applications
             regularise his stay.


        37.  It is only in the last 2 years that the appellant has  engaged
             in visible sur plus activities on  Facebook  and  in  protests
             outside the Iranian Embassy. I find that he has done so in  an
             attempt to fabricate another asylum claim because I find  that
             he is not an Iranian Kurd and he has no  genuine  interest  in
             protesting against the Iranian regime.  It  is  more  probable
             than not that the appellant is  an  Iraqi  Kurd.  He  has  not
             disclosed  any  reason  why  he  might  be  at  real  risk  of
             persecution in Iraq.


        38.       The appellant's  appeal  on  Article  2  and  3  and  his
             humanitarian protection grounds fail for the same  credibility
             reasons.


     9. The Judge finds the  respondent's  decision  proportionate  to  any
        interference with a protected article 8 right at [39].




The Appellants Grounds



    10. The appellant relies on 9 grounds of appeal, alleging (1) that  the
        Judge applied a higher standard of proof at  [22]  in  relation  to
        finding the appellant had slightly changed his account in  relation
        to his ID card, (2) that the Judge erred in fact in relation to the
        letter from Mr Hamadi, (3) the Judge erred in fact in  finding  the
        appellant  was  not  illiterate,  (4)  that  the  Judge  mixes  two
        different facts of the appellant's case, (5) the  Judge  applied  a
        higher standard of proof at [34] by reference to the  phrase  'more
        probable than not' which it is claimed is  an  application  of  the
        civil standard which is also said to be present at [37], (6)  fails
        to consider credibility of the appellant's account correctly due to
        the failure to consider evidence of  Mr  Mohammadi,  (7)  fails  to
        consider the appellant's Facebook profile, (8)  fails  to  consider
        internal relocation, and, (9) fails to  consider  relevant  country
        guidance case law.



Error of law


    11. Paragraph [22] of the impugned decision contains  no  findings   by
        the Judge. This paragraph  is  within  that  part  of  the  Judge's
        decision headed 'The Appeal Hearing' in which she is recording  the
        evidence given by the appellant.  It  is  accepted  the  Judge  has
        recorded "In cross-examination he altered his account slightly  and
        said that his family had kept his passport and ID card and when  he
        contacted them they said they had lost them". This is no more  than
        the Judge recording what had occurred during the course of the oral
        evidence. No arguable legal error arises.
    12. Ground 2, in relation to a letter from  Mr  Halliday  confirms  the
        Judge's observations at [24] in this respect are factually correct.
        This is  not  a  finding  but,   again,  the  Judge  recording  the
        appellant had stated he was to provide a letter from  a  friend  Mr
        Hamadi to evidence his nationality but that he had  failed  to  do.
        The Judges Record of Proceedings records the appellant being  asked
        in cross-examination why he had  not  produced  a  letter  from  Mr
        Hamadi  that  he  had  stated  he  would  provide  to  confirm  his
        nationality to which he replied "I handed it to my solicitor".  The
        Judge also records that Mr Chahal, the representatives on the  day,
        checked the file but there was  no  trace  of  such  a  letter  and
        advised the Judge he was certain the appellant did hand it in.  The
        appellant was then asked how he knew Mr Hamadi, to which he gave  a
        reply, indicating there was no confusion in relation to  whom  this
        passage of the evidence related.
    13. In the grounds of appeal the appellant  submits  there  was  no  Mr
        Hamadi, which was not the claim before the  Judge,  and  that  this
        should have been a reference to Mr Ashraf Mohammadi.  It is claimed
        there was a letter from this individual in the  appellant's  bundle
        with a translation at [67].  That  letter,  which  is  handwritten,
        states:


        To whom it may concern


        Date: 21/02/2020


        I would like to support [AR] D.O.B 10/5/1990 as my friend known him
        from 2010
        he is from Iran country and we meet each other many times as  I  am
        Iranian nationality and we are each other's with many thanks.


        My details.......


    14. The grounds also assert that in any event the  Judge  had  evidence
        from Mr Majid and that the Judge well knows that  it  is  difficult
        for anyone to send documents to someone who is outspoken on  social
        media.
    15. The reality of this ground is that it is no more than  disagreement
        with the weight the Judge  gave  the  evidence  that  was  properly
        considered. The Judge clearly considered all the evidence with  the
        required degree of anxious scrutiny and it is not been made out the
        Judge gave inappropriate weight to any aspect of the  evidence.  Mr
        Kumar submitted there were a number of letters from individuals  in
        contact with the appellant on various dates. Whilst that may be  so
        that was not the issue before the Judge. It  is  not  disputed  the
        appellant has been in the United Kingdom for a considerable  period
        of time and it is feasible that during this time he  may  have  met
        the named individuals on regular occasions. What is disputed as the
        appellant's claim to be an Iranian  national.  When  assessing  the
        weight to be given to the letters provided the Judge  was  entitled
        to note that none of the authors of those letters attended to  give
        oral evidence and the subject themselves to cross-examination.  The
        documents are handwritten letters the translation  of  which  shows
        very similar wording used. They are not in the  form  of  a  proper
        witness statement contains no declaration of truth. The weight that
        could be given to such documents is therefore limited when compared
        against the evidence to which the Judge could  wait  including  the
        core  finding  of  Judge  McGavin  at  [14]  of  her  determination
        promulgated on  11  January  2010  shortly  after  the  appellant's
        arrival in the United Kingdom and the appellant's knowledge of  his
        home state would be, one assumes, relatively fresh in his mind.  In
        that paragraph Judge McGavin found:
        14. The Respondent disputes the  Appellant's  nationality  for  the
        reasons stated in paragraph 13 to 20 of the "reasons  for  refusal"
        letter (R1.F4-5). The Appellant's whole explanation for his failure
        to know the basic things about Iran, detailed by the Respondent, is
        that he did not attend school and is unable to read so is unable to
        read newspapers or books, and had not travelled  outwith  his  home
        province (A1. Para 14). However, I do  not  find  that  a  credible
        explanation for his stating that his home  province  of  Kermanshah
        was in the south of Iran when it is in the west of  Iran.  It  also
        does not  credibly  explain  the  Appellant's  statement  that  his
        province was not near a border with any other country  when,  being
        in the extreme west of Iran, the province borders Iraq. Nor does it
        explain the fact he was only able to name  one  of  four  provinces
        neighbouring Kermanshah. These are all facts  about  the  immediate
        living environment in which the Appellant claims to have lived  all
        of his life which I would expect an adult person, even  if  he  was
        illiterate, to know because he had lived and worked in  that  area,
        for all of that time. Similarly, it is  not  a  credible  that  the
        Appellant did not know the name of the nearest school to his  home,
        when his sister, who did attend school, must have attended  it.  He
        claimed that his parents had a farm and that they sold the  produce
        at the local market. Where people are gathered together,  there  is
        the exchange of news, and even if the Appellant was unable to  read
        a newspaper, it is not credible that he had not heard the  name  of
        any newspapers in Iran. Energy is  also  something  which  everyone
        requires and the Appellant has failed to credibly explain how it is
        that he did not know the names of any energy providing  company  in
        Iran. Similarly, if he had attended  a  local  market,  it  is  not
        credible that he would not be aware that other languages other than
        that spoken in his home, were being spoken and as to what languages
        they were. I also find it not credible that a young man,  who  knew
        that military service was compulsory, would not know  what  age  it
        became compulsory. It was not credible that the Appellant  gave  as
        an explanation for his failure to attend school, the fact  that  he
        would be unable to speak Kurdish and  would  have  to  speak  Farsi
        which he did not know, when his sister, on  his  account,  was  not
        prevented from attending school because  she  would  be  unable  to
        speak Kurdish (A1. Paras 11-12).  In  his  witness  statement,  the
        Appellant states "I have little documentation because as a  Kurd  I
        did not go to school as we have to speak Farsi and could not  speak
        Kurdish". However, this does not credibly explain his complete lack
        of any Iranian documentation whatsoever. I was not directed to  any
        country evidence to indicate that it was likely or credible  for  a
        person in the Appellant's claim circumstances to have  no  evidence
        of his identity. The Appellant did not know the name of the Iranian
        national anthem. I do not find this credible, because even  if  the
        Appellant had not attended school, his sister with whom  he  lived,
        had attended school and it is likely that  he  would  have  learned
        things from her that she had learned.  The  name  of  the  national
        anthem is just a basic piece of knowledge as a school  child  would
        be taught. For the foregoing reasons, I find that the Appellant has
        failed to show that he is Iranian.


    16. Ground 3 suggests the Judge erred in law in finding  the  appellant
        not illiterate on  the  basis  the  appellant  entered  the  United
        Kingdom in 2009 and that it was perfectly plausible that during the
        11 years that he has been in  the  United  Kingdom  he  would  have
        learned the English language.  It  is  argued  the  Judge  gave  no
        consideration to the applicable timeframe. It is plausible  that  a
        person who has been in the  United  Kingdom  for  as  long  as  the
        appellant will have acquired language  skills  demonstrated  before
        the Judge. It is  plausible  that  the  appellant  will  also  have
        mastered the skills required to use various social media platforms,
        including Facebook, which appears to be the medium  of  choice  for
        many asylum seekers making a  claim  for  international  protection
        based upon their sur plus activities. The Judge's findings in  this
        respect are however supported by the findings of Judge McGavin  who
        did not find the appellant's explanation given in  support  of  his
        claim not to have attended school to be credible. Even if the Judge
        had erred on this point it is not been made out that any such error
        will be material.
    17. Ground 4 refers against the appellant only becoming  literate  when
        he entered the United Kingdom prior to which, when he was  in  Iran
        was illiterate, and would have required knowledge  from  school  to
        understand the history,  geography,  politics,  etc  in  Iran.  The
        assertion the Judge makes  these  matters  up  does  not  establish
        arguable legal error as it was clear the appellant demonstrated  no
        knowledge of matters which it would have been reasonable to  expect
        him to have some knowledge of  had  his  claim  to  be  an  Iranian
        national been credible. The  grounds  of  appeal  referred  to  the
        Respondent accepting the appellant answered a number  of  questions
        correctly at [13] RFRL, 1. Mr Kumar was asked what this  particular
        reference was to confirmed it was to the reasons for refusal letter
        dated 28 October 2019 which is that the challenge before the Judge.
        That submission is not correct. [13] of  the  reasons  for  refusal
        letter challenge before the Judge states "below is a  consideration
        of the protection-based submissions that have not  previously  been
        considered". There is  nothing  in  that  paragraph  recording  any
        acceptance by the Respondent the appellant having answered a number
        of questions correctly. The grounds set out at [11 (b) -  (i)  what
        appear to be the details which it is said the  appellant  correctly
        identified. It is more likely than not that the  reference  in  the
        grounds of appeal is to the original refusal letter this  dated  10
        November 2009 which is that considered by a Judge  McGavin  and  in
        relation to which the appellant was found not  to  have  sufficient
        knowledge  of  key  issues  sufficient  to  establish  his  claimed
        nationality. It is wholly inappropriate to attempt  to  effectively
        go behind the decision of Judge McGavin on the  basis  of  evidence
        that was properly considered and taken into account by her  in  her
        decision against which there was no successful ongoing challenge.
    18. The assertion the Judge applied a higher standard of proof fails to
        demonstrate arguable legal error. It  is  necessary  to  read  this
        decision as a whole to establish the Judge's thinking and reasoning
        rather than to cherry pick occasional phrases and try to build them
        into a valid argument. Such an approach has been criticised by  the
        Senior Courts. Whilst the Judge uses the phrase "more probable than
        not" on a couple of occasions it is clear that  the  Judge,  having
        set out the correct  legal  self-direction  that  in  a  protection
        appeal it is the lower standard of proof that is applicable applied
        the standard, applied the standard as evidenced by the  first  line
        of [29] of the decision under challenge. It is  not  made  out  the
        Judge  applied  the  civil  standard  when  assessing  whether  the
        appellant had discharged the burden upon him to show an entitlement
        to a grant of international protection or otherwise.
    19. Ground 6 suggests the Judge did not properly consider  credibility,
        but this claim has no arguable merit. The Judge  does  not  give  a
        wrong name in relation to the evidence from  Mr  Mohammadi.  It  is
        clear from a reading of the determination  that  all  the  material
        that was provided was  considered  by  the  Judge.  The  claim  the
        evidence was not considered sufficiently enough  is  no  more  than
        disagreement with  the  finding.  Adequate  reasons  are  given  to
        support the Judges strong believe  that  the  appellant's  lack  of
        knowledge relating to his home  country,  and  lack  of  supporting
        evidence for  his  claim  upon  which  due  weight  may  be  given,
        indicated he was  not  an  Iranian  national.  The  Judge  was  not
        required to set out findings in relation to each and  every  aspect
        of the evidence provided that material was properly  considered  as
        it was in this appeal.
    20. Ground 7  has  no  arguable  merit.  The  Judge  did  consider  the
        appellant's Facebook account but as the core finding  is  that  the
        appellant is not Iranian no arguable error arises in the Judge  not
        considering whether he would face a real risk on return to Iran  as
        a result of his Facebook profile.
    21. Ground 8 has no arguable merit  as  the  Judge  did  not  find  the
        appellant is an Iranian national.  Accordingly, there was  no  need
        to consider whether he was at risk in his  home  area  of  Iran  or
        whether he could internally relocate within Iran if he were.
    22. Ground 9 asserts the Judge failed to consider the relevant  country
        guidance case law but does not specify which case law is  relevant.
        On the facts as found that relating to Iran is, arguably, not.
    23. The grounds amount to no more than a quarrel with findings made  by
        the Judge, disagreement with the weight the Judge gave  to  certain
        aspects of evidence, and a repeat of the appellant's claim that  he
        is an Iranian national. The finding of the Judge, in line with that
        of Judge Gavin, is that the appellant is not  an  Iranian  national
        and had not proved that he was to the lower standard applicable  to
        protection appeals. It has not been shown this is a finding outside
        the range of  those  reasonably  available  to  the  Judge  on  the
        evidence.


Decision

    24. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  Immigration  Judge's
        decision. The determination shall stand.

   Anonymity.


    25. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)  of
        the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


I make such order pursuant to rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008.



Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 6 August 2020







