
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/11521/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 25 January 2019                   |On 13 February 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY


                                   Between

                                      R

                            (Anonymity DIRECTED)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms C Wilson-Brown     (Solicitor from Bradford Law
Centre)
For the Respondent:    Mr A Tan              (Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    This is the claimant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal, brought with the
permission of a Judge of the First-tier Tribunal, from a  decision  of  the
First-tier Tribunal ("the tribunal")  which  it  sent  to  the  parties  on
23 March 2018; whereupon it dismissed her appeal  from  the  Secretary  of
State's decision of 25 October 2017 refusing to  grant  her  international
protection.

2.    The tribunal granted the claimant anonymity.  Nothing was  said  about
that before me but I do detect some sensitive material in the  substance  of
the case.  Accordingly, I have decided to maintain the  status quo  and  to
continue that grant.

3.    The claimant is a national of  Bangladesh  and  is  female.   She  has
given her date of birth as 1 September 1982.  She claims to  have  entered
the UK on 24 March 2011 and it is recorded  that  she  claimed  asylum  on
23 July 2015.  Shorn of all but essential detail,  her  claim  is  to  the
effect that she has been trafficked into the United Kingdom ("UK") for  the
purposes of prostitution; that she was been forced to be  a  sex  worker  in
the UK; that she subsequently took an opportunity to flee from her  captors;
that if she were to have to return to Bangladesh she would be persecuted  in
connection with the sex trafficking  and  linked  matters  by  two  specific
individuals one of whom is a money lender and one of whom she  entered  into
a marriage  ceremony  with;  and  that  if  she  had  to  return  she  would
(irrespective of the truthfulness or otherwise of the account)  be  at  risk
as a lone female with a child.  As to that latter aspect, she says that  she
has been disowned by her family and she has a son who is  a  minor.   It  is
not, in fact, disputed that she has a young son.

4.    The Secretary of State did not believe that the claimant had  given  a
truthful account of events and did not, therefore, believe that  harm  would
come to her if she were to be returned  to  Bangladesh.   That  is  why  the
Secretary of State refused to grant international protection.  The  claimant
appealed to the tribunal.

5.    The claimant's  appeal  was  heard  on  22 February 2018.   She  was
represented before the tribunal as was the Secretary  of  State.   She  gave
oral evidence to the tribunal as did a male  witness  whom  I  shall  simply
refer to as A.  The tribunal, it is clear  from  its  detailed  and  lengthy
written reasons of 23 March 2018, gave very careful consideration  to  the
important question of the claimant's credibility.  Prior to  doing  that  it
summarised, at paragraph 20 of its written reasons, her case as put to  it.
From paragraphs 26-146 it  carried  out  what  I  would  consider  to  be  a
meticulous  assessment  as  to  credibility,  identifying  and   considering
matters which it thought weighed in  favour  of  the  claimant  and  matters
which it thought weighed against her, before reaching a clear view that  she
had not been a witness of truth.   I  have  not  set  out  that  credibility
assessment in this decision but the parties do, of course, have it  and  are
aware of its content.  I would observe,  at  this  stage,  that  whilst  the
tribunal found that the claimant would not be at risk at the  hands  of  any
individual at all upon return to Bangladesh, it also found  that  she  would
not be without family support in Bangladesh  such  that  she  would  not  be
returning as a lone female without such support.  That  was  stated  by  the
tribunal at  paragraph 150  of  its  written  reasons.   It  did,  in  that
paragraph, erroneously refer to Pakistan rather than Bangladesh  but  it  is
clear that it had Bangladesh in mind and no-one has suggested otherwise.

6.    Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was sought.   Essentially,
it was argued in the grounds that the tribunal  had  made  a  factual  error
(translating into an error of law) because it  had  mistakenly  thought  the
claimant  had  asserted  that  her  friend  had  been  able  to  obtain  her
Bangladeshi identity card through contact with her (that is the  claimant's)
family.  It was said that there had, in fact, been  no  involvement  of  the
family in the process of the obtaining of the  card.  That  "error"  it  was
said, had led the tribunal into wrongly concluding that  the  claimant  must
still be in touch with her family and  that  that  had  caused  it  to  also
wrongly conclude she would  not  be  returning  as  a  lone  female  without
support. Related to that, it was argued that the tribunal's  view  that  she
would not be able to live safely as a woman with a child in  Bangladesh  had
been made on an erroneous understanding that she had been doing  so  in  the
past in Bangladesh whereas in fact, at that time, she had been  living  with
her parents.

7.    Permission to appeal, as noted above, was granted.  The grant was  not
subject to any limitations.

8.    Permission having been granted the appeal came before me so  that  the
question of whether or not the tribunal had erred in law could  be  decided.
Representation at that hearing was as indicated above and I am  grateful  to
each representative.

9.    Ms Wilson-Brown, although she had not drafted  them,  indicated  that
she would seek to rely upon the written grounds which had  resulted  in  the
grant of permission.  She suggested that  it  was  apparent  from  what  the
tribunal had had to say at paragraph 150 of its written reasons that it had
wrongly thought the claimant  had  been  living  away  from  her  family  in
Bangladesh prior to coming to the  UK.   She  urged  me  to  set  aside  the
tribunal's decision and to either remake  the  decision  in  the  claimant's
favour or remit.  Mr Tan, for the Secretary of  State,  essentially  argued
that the entirety of the tribunal's reasoning was sound.

10.   As I have  said,  the  credibility  assessment  in  this  case  was  a
meticulous one.  I do not  detect  anything  which  has  been  said  in  the
written grounds or in the oral submissions before me which was,  in  general
terms, intended to suggest otherwise.  Such  would  have  been  unrealistic.
It follows that the tribunal's conclusions regarding the lack  of  any  risk
upon return on the basis of the  contention  she  had  been  trafficked  for
sexual exploitation were sustainable and free from legal error.

11.   The grounds are  really  concerned  with  the  discrete  and  separate
matter as to whether or not the claimant would, nevertheless, be at risk  as
a lone  woman  (or  put  another  way  a  single  woman  with  a  child)  in
Bangladesh.  It was, in principle, open  to  the  tribunal  to  decide  that
there  was  such  risk  notwithstanding  its  general  adverse   credibility
finding.

12.   The tribunal, though, did make such an adverse credibility finding  of
what was, to all intents and purposes, a blanket nature.  At  paragraph 142
of its written reasons it said that as a result of that blanket  finding  it
was not satisfied that the claimant had shown it  to  be  reasonably  likely
that she had been telling the  truth  in  connection  with  her  claim.   At
paragraph 143 it made it clear that it simply  did  not  believe  that  the
events she had claimed had happened to her had  actually  taken  place.   It
was at paragraph 150 that it made it plain that it was also  deciding  that
she had not shown  that  she  did  not  have  contact  with  her  family  in
Bangladesh and had not shown that they had rejected  her.   That  conclusion
as to that portion of her claim  was  entirely  justifiable  simply  on  the
basis of the general blanket adverse  credibility  finding  itself.   In  my
judgment that blanket finding was the key matter which led the  tribunal  to
reach its particular conclusion that she would not be  at  risk  as  a  lone
female in Bangladesh.  Once that  is  realised  it  seems  to  me  that  the
grounds of appeal simply lose their force.  The claimant had not  shown  she
would be without family support because her word as to that, as with all  of
the other key matters relevant to her claim,  could  simply  not  be  relied
upon.  In my judgment that  is  sufficient  to  dispose  of  the  claimant's
appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

13.   Additionally and in  any  event,  whilst  Ms Wilson-Brown  sought  to
persuade me that the tribunal had erred in wrongly thinking  she  had  lived
by herself or by herself with her child in Bangladesh  prior  to  coming  to
the UK, that was in truth immaterial.  The tribunal had found  that  it  had
not been shown that she did not have contact with family  so,  whatever  her
previous circumstances, the point was that if she  required  family  support
it was there for her.  As to the identity document point, I  am  unpersuaded
as to the relevance of that at all, but it was reasonable for the  tribunal,
if it did indeed do this,  to  conclude  that  if  a  friend  had  genuinely
obtained the  claimant's  identity  documentation  in  Bangladesh  that  was
likely to have been via the claimant's own family in Bangladesh.

14.   Ms Wilson-Brown argued the case in a most spirited manner.  But I  am
afraid I was not able to accept her  persuasively  advanced  submissions  on
this occasion.  I have concluded that the tribunal did not err  in  law  and
the consequence of that is that its decision must stand.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of  an
error of law.  Accordingly, that decision shall stand.


Signed:                      Date: 6 February 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway




Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal granted the claimant anonymity.   I  continue  with
that grant pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper Tribunal)
Rules 2008.  Accordingly, no  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  either
directly or indirectly identify the claimant or any member  of  her  family.
This grant of anonymity applies to all parties to the proceedings.   Failure
to comply may lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed:                      Date: 6 February 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway

