
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11727/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Cardiff Civil Justice Centre         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 11 April 2019                              |On 10 May 2019                |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                                    S R M
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Brooks instructed by Albany Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This appeal is subject to an anonymity order  made  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal pursuant to Rule 13  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-tier
    Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014.   Neither  party
    invited me to rescind the order and I continue it pursuant to  Rule  14
    of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (SI 2008/2698).



Introduction

 2. The appellant is a citizen of  Iraq  who  comes  from  the  Independent
    Kurdish Region ("IKR") who was born on 1 June 2002.  He arrived in  the
    United Kingdom on 17 January 2018.  He was, as a consequence, then  15�
    years old.

 3. On 30 January 2018, the appellant claimed asylum.   The  basis  of  his
    claim was that his father had been killed in March  2017  in  what,  he
    believed to be, an 'honour killing'.  His mother had died whilst giving
    birth to the appellant and in May 2007, his paternal  grandmother  also
    died and he went to live with his maternal uncle.  Shortly  thereafter,
    the house where he was living was attacked  and  in  August  2017,  his
    uncle told him that the people who had killed his father wanted to kill
    the appellant  also.   Shortly  after  that,  on  24  August  2017  the
    appellant left Iraq by plane using his own passport.  He  travelled  to
    Turkey where he  remained  for  one  month  before  travelling  through
    Europe, eventually arriving in the UK on 17 January 2018 clandestinely.



 4. On 19 September 2018, the Secretary of State  refused  the  appellant's
    claims for asylum, humanitarian protection and on human rights grounds.
     However, because the appellant was  an  unaccompanied  minor,  he  was
    granted leave until 1 December 2019.

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 5. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In a  detailed  and
    careful determination, Judge Fowell dismissed the appellant's appeal on
    all grounds.

 6. First, he rejected the appellant's asylum claim.   The  judge  made  an
    adverse credibility finding and did not accept that the appellant would
    be at risk on return due to an 'honour killing' and concluded that  his
    departure from Iraq was as a result of "economic motives"  (see  [27]).
    That adverse finding is not challenged in the grounds of appeal  and  I
    need say no more about it.

 7. Secondly, Judge Fowell went on to consider whether the appellant  could
    return to Iraq and live in the IKR.  Before Judge Fowell, the Secretary
    of State did not pursue an argument that the appellant, given  his  age
    that he was an ethnic Kurd and could speak no Arabic, could be expected
    to live in Baghdad where he had no family.  Before me, Mrs  Aboni,  who
    represented the Secretary of State, accepted that that was (and is) not
    an option for the appellant.

 8. As a consequence, Judge Fowell considered whether the  appellant  would
    be able to travel to the IKR on arrival in  Baghdad.   Although  direct
    international flights had resumed to Erbil in the IKR, it was  accepted
    before Judge Fowell that an involuntary returnee to Iraq would have  to
    be returned to Baghdad Airport and would need to travel on  from  there
    to the IKR.

 9.  At  paras  28-31,  Judge  Fowell  made  a  finding,  contrary  to  the
    appellant's evidence which he had rejected, that  the  appellant  still
    had family in the IKR (in Rania) including a maternal uncle.   At  para
    31, Judge Fowell found that the appellant  would,  in  advance  of  his
    return, be able to contact his maternal uncle for support.   The  judge
    said this:

         "He says that he is not in contact with his uncle and does not have
         his number.  That does not seem to me at all likely, given the cost
         of such a journey, and even applying the lower standard  I  do  not
         accept that there is a real risk of his uncle not being contactable
         in advance of his return.  There will be a  network  of  people  in
         Rania even if he could not contact them  directly,  and  ultimately
         even written communications could be sent, but I do not accept that
         he was sent so far and at such cost without any  means  of  letting
         them know that he arrived safely."

10. That finding has not  been  challenged  and,  therefore,  stands.   The
    appellant's case must be approached on the basis that  he  is  able  to
    contact his family, in particular his uncle in the IKR.

11. At paras 33-42, Judge Fowell gave his  reasons  for  finding  that  the
    appellant would, on return to Baghdad, be able to  travel  to  the  IKR
    where his family lived.  Judge Fowell said this:

         "33. I note the evidence of his attempts to obtain documentation at
             the  Iraq  Embassy.   The  fact  that  he   got   nowhere   is
             unsurprising given the lack of documentation and accords  with
             the October 2018 CPIN which documents  the  difficulties.   He
             would at least need to have someone in the IKR  to  vouch  for
             him, documents in the IKR  to  be  produced  and  a  power  of
             attorney prepared.  Although, taking these steps, it might  be
             possible for [the  appellant]  to  obtain  a  passport  before
             returned, it is not to be expected that he would co-operate to
             that extent in his own removal.  Return will only  be  carried
             out once a laissez passer has been obtained in the UK  and  so
             the risks on return have to be assessed on the basis that that
             at least is in place.  Attached  to  that  CPIN  are  now  two
             letters from the Iraqi Ambassador stating that:

             (a)  Returnees can continue their onward  journey  by  air  or
                  road using their laissez passer or letter, i.e.  they  are
                  no longer confiscated.

             (b)  They can re-document themselves and apply in their  local
                  Civil Status Departments for  a  national  ID  card  using
                  their old documents or family records, with  reference  to
                  the page number of the register.

             (c)  Each governate has a Directorate of Civil Status  Affairs
                  where all records are preserved.

             (d)  A letter is also issued by Baghdad International  Airport
                  Police, where  requested  or  documents  are  unavailable,
                  giving their name, date of  birth  and  confirmation  that
                  they  landed  with  a  laissez-passer.   That  letter   is
                  sufficient to pass through checkpoints.

             (e)  All Civil Status Records have been  preserved  nationally
                  going back to 1957 and are available on microfilm  at  the
                  central register in Baghdad.

         34.  Armed with that  laissez  passer,  [the  appellant]  could  be
             returned to Baghdad.  Given his young age it  is  in  my  view
             unrealistic to expect him to leave the airport and attempt  to
             locate his records in the Central Registry  there.   I  accept
             that he has no relative or friend there to help him and has no
             Arabic.  His only realistic option  would  be  to  go  through
             immigration control at the airport and obtain  a  letter  from
             the airport police giving his basic details  which,  according
             to the ambassador's letters, would enable him to pass  through
             checkpoints on arrival at Erbil.  That is a daunting  exercise
             for a 16-year-old but there is no obvious risk of  harm  here,
             and he has  already  overcome  much  greater  difficulties  in
             getting to the UK.

         35.  To be clear, I accept the content of the ambassador's letters,
             to the effect  that  the  laissez  passer  would  not  now  be
             confiscated on arrival at Baghdad.  The  more  recent  country
             guidance in AAH stated in the  headnote  that  this  would  be
             confiscated at Baghdad.  Further:

                  "4.  P is  unable  to  board  a  domestic  flight  between
                      Baghdad and the IKR without either a CSID or a  valid
                      passport.

                  5.   ... It is not  reasonable  to  require  P  to  travel
                      between Baghdad and IKR by land absent the ability of
                      P to verify  his  identity  at  a  checkpoint.   This
                      normally requires the attendance  of  a  male  family
                      member and production of P's identity  documents  but
                      may also be achieved by  calling  upon  'connections'
                      higher up in the chain of command.

                  6.   Once at the IKR border (land or air) P would normally
                      be  granted  entry  to  the  territory.   Subject  to
                      security screening, and registering presence with the
                      local mukhtar, P would  be  permitted  to  enter  and
                      reside in the IKR with no further  legal  impediments
                      or requirements.  There is no sponsorship requirement
                      for Kurds."

         36.  The view that the laissez  passer  is  removed  was  based  on
             evidence from Dr Fatah (paragraph 35) drawn  in  turn  from  a
             DFAT report  (Australian  Government,  Department  of  Foreign
             Affairs and Trade) from September 2017.   This  report  is  no
             longer available online.  The  latest  version,  from  October
             20181     [footnote     1     =     https://dfat.gov.au/about-
             us/publications/Documents/country-info-report-iraq.pdf]  makes
             no such mention.  It states at paragraph 5.20:

                  '5.20 On arrival at  Baghdad  International  Airport,  all
                  passengers irrespective of nationality have their identity
                  information  recorded.   This  process   occurs   at   all
                  international airports in Iraq,  including  the  Kurdistan
                  Region.  Authorities will arrest an  Iraqi  on  return  if
                  they had committed a criminal offence and  a  warrant  had
                  been issued for their arrest.  Others, even those who  had
                  left  illegally,  would  not  be  subject  to  arrest   on
                  arrival.'

         37.  The practice of confiscation also appears to have taken  place
             at a time of particular hostility towards the IKR  around  the
             time of the referendum, when international flights there  were
             banned.  In any event, the  ambassador  to  the  UK  is  in  a
             position to know the current position and so that in  my  view
             amounts to the cogent evidence necessary to depart  from  what
             was expressed to be a temporary situation.

         38.  Mr Brooks submitted that I should follow AAH  on  this  point,
             and that these letters were not  in  evidence,  but  I  cannot
             approach the question in quite such an  artificial  way.   The
             latest Country Policy and Information Note is well known,  and
             indeed Mr Brooks referred me to paragraph 2.7.7 himself on the
             question of the place of return.

         39.  That is therefore a considerable change in the position  since
             it means that [the appellant] could actually get to  the  IKR.
             There is nothing in the rest of the headnote to  indicate  any
             further difficulty in  admission,  such  as  the  need  for  a
             sponsor.  He would  arrive  in  Erbil  in  possession  of  his
             laissez passer and another letter  from  the  Baghdad  airport
             police, which is sufficient to pass  through  checkpoints  and
             dispel any suggestion that he has come from ISIS territory.

         40.  As  I  have  already  found,  he  would  have  family  support
             available to him once there, to take him  in  and  someone  to
             vouch for him in obtaining a CSID in due course.  But this too
             is not straightforward.  According to AAH at paragraph 1:

                  "1.  Whilst it remains  possible  for  an  Iraqi  national
                      returnee (P) to obtain a new CSID whether P  is  able
                      to do so, or do so within a  reasonable  time  frame,
                      will depend on the individual circumstances.  Factors
                      to be considered include:

                      i)   Whether P has any other form  of  documentation,
                           or information about the location of his entry in
                           the   civil   register.   An    INC,    passport,
                           birth/marriage certificates or  an  expired  CSID
                           would  all  be  of  substantial  assistance.  For
                           someone in possession of one  or  more  of  these
                           documents the process should be  straightforward.
                           A laissez passer should not be counted for  these
                           purposes: these can be issued without  any  other
                           form of  ID  being  available,  are  not  of  any
                           assistance in 'tracing back' to the family record
                           and are confiscated upon arrival at Baghdad;

                      ii)  The location  of  the  relevant  civil  registry
                           office. If it is in an  area  held,  or  formerly
                           held, by ISIL, is it operational?

                      iii) Are there male family members who would be  able
                           and willing to attend the civil registry with  P?
                           Because the registration system is patrilineal it
                           will be relevant to consider whether the relative
                           is from the mother or father's side.  A  maternal
                           uncle in possession of his CSID would be able  to
                           assist  in  locating  the   original   place   of
                           registration of the individual's mother, and from
                           there the trail would need to be followed to  the
                           place that  her  records  were  transferred  upon
                           marriage. It must also be borne in  mind  that  a
                           significant number of IDPs in Iraq are themselves
                           undocumented; if that is the case it is  unlikely
                           that  they  could  be  of  assistance.   A  woman
                           without  a  male  relative  to  assist  with  the
                           process  of  redocumentation  would   face   very
                           significant  obstacles  in  that  officials   may
                           refuse to deal with her case at all.

          41. He does not have his passport or CSID with him but he  does  a
             male member of the family with him, his uncle.  They go to the
             registry in Erbil and trace his mother's details.  (The  civil
             registration system is described in more detail in the CPIN at
             section 5.1).  Armed with those  details  he  would  then,  it
             seems, need to go to his own registry  to  get  the  necessary
             details of his own registration.

         42.  That is likely  to  prove  the  most  difficult  part  of  the
             operation  since  he  would  have  to   cross   back   through
             checkpoints, manned by PMU or Hash'd Al Shaabi  militia,  into
             Ninewah province.  If he did not have family support available
             I would not accept that he could do so.  But  travelling  with
             his uncle, who has ID, and with his laissez passer and airport
             letter - which would show he was recently arrived from the  UK
             and not a former ISIS fighter - there  is  no  reason  why  he
             could do so, and so in due  course  obtain  or  re-obtain  his
             documents."

12. As will be apparent, Judge Fowell accepted that, at present, it was not
    feasible to return the appellant because he did not have a passport  or
    a laissez passer, having  sought  one  unsuccessfully  from  the  Iraqi
    Embassy in the UK.  However, Judge Fowell concluded that  although  the
    appellant's return was not currently feasible,  his  claim  had  to  be
    approached on the basis that he would only return to  Baghdad  once  he
    was in possession of a laissez passer.

13. Then, Judge Fowell, taking into account the relevant  country  guidance
    decision in AAH (Iraqi Kurds - internal relocation) Iraq CG UKUT [2018]
    00212 (IAC), concluded that on the basis of what he described  as  "two
    letters from the Iraqi Ambassador" the present position  was  that  his
    laissez passer would not be confiscated at  Baghdad  and  he  would  be
    issued with a letter at the Baghdad International Airport by the police
    ("the certification letter") which would be sufficient for him to  pass
    through checkpoints in order to travel from Baghdad to the IKR.

14. Finally, the judge found that, applying AAH, the appellant has  a  male
    member of his  family,  namely  his  uncle  who  could  assist  him  in
    obtaining a CSID by going with him to the registry in Erbil  and  trace
    his mother's details and then go with him to his own registry in  order
    to obtain new documentation, in particular a CSID.

15. At para 42, set out above, Judge Fowell found that:

         "travelling with his uncle, who has ID, and with his laissez passer
         and airport letter - which would show he was recently arrived  from
         the UK and not a former ISIS fighter - there is no  reason  why  he
         could [not return to the IKR], and so in due course obtain  or  re-
         obtain his documents".

16. On the basis of that, the judge found that the appellant had failed  to
    establish that he would be at risk of persecution or treatment contrary
    to Art 3 of the ECHR.





The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

17. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  which
    was granted by the First-tier Tribunal (Judge O'Callaghan) on 4 January
    2019.

18. I heard oral submissions from Mr Brooks on behalf of the appellant  and
    from Mrs Aboni on behalf of the Secretary of State.  At the  conclusion
    of the hearing I reserved my decision.

The Submissions

19. Mr Brooks raised a number of points derived from the grounds of appeal.



20. First, he submitted that the judge had been wrong to  assume  that  the
    appellant would, in Iraq, have a laissez passer.  He pointed  out  that
    the appellant had not been able to obtain any documents from the  Iraqi
    Embassy in the UK and the judge had failed to explain how he  would  be
    able to obtain one.   Without  a  passport,  Mr  Brooks  submitted  the
    appellant would need a laissez passer.

21. Secondly, Mr Brooks submitted that the judge had been wrong  to  depart
    from the decision in AAH on the basis of the two letters from the Iraqi
    Embassy in the UK.  He provided me with copies of the two letters dated
    5 September 2018 ("letter A") signed by the  Ambassador  and  a  second
    letter dated 2 October 2018 ("letter B") signed by a Counsellor at  the
    Iraqi Embassy.  He pointed out that these letters had been appended  to
    the CPIN Iraq: Internal relocation,  civil  documentation  and  returns
    (October 2018) and were also appended to the more recent version of the
    CPIN of February 2019.

22. Mr Brooks informed me that he had been unable  to  access  the  October
    2018 CPIN and the copies of the letters he had  provided  me  had  come
    from the Annexes to the February 2019 version.   However,  he  believed
    them to be the  same  letters.   During  the  course  of  the  hearing,
    although I was not provided with a copy of the October 2018  CPIN,  Mrs
    Aboni was able to access on the internet an electronic version  of  the
    October 2018 CPIN and confirmed that the  letters  I  had  were  indeed
    appended to that report which was the relevant one at the time  of  the
    judge's decision.

23. Mr Brooks submitted that  these  letters  did  not  amount  to  "cogent
    evidence" necessary to permit the judge  to  depart  from  the  country
    guidance decision in AAH.  He had departed from AAH  in  two  respects:
    first, in finding that if the appellant were returned  with  a  laissez
    passer that would not be confiscated at Baghdad Airport; and  secondly,
    that a letter would be issued at the Baghdad International  Airport  by
    the police  -  the  certification  letter  -  which  would  permit  the
    appellant safely to pass through checkpoints in order to travel to  the
    IKR.

24. Mr Brooks submitted that the judge's statement of these two letters set
    out at para 33(a)-(e) of his decision, was an  interpretation  of  what
    the letters stated.

25. Finally, in the light of the judge's finding  that  the  appellant  had
    family, in particular a maternal uncle in the IKR, Mr  Brooks  did  not
    pursue the ground that the judge had erred in law in finding  that  the
    appellant could obtain a CSID once in the IKR with  the  assistance  of
    his uncle.

26. Mrs Aboni submitted that the appellant would be in a position to obtain
    a laissez passer in the UK if he could obtain a CSID whilst in the  UK.
    She submitted, that as Judge Fowell had found at para 41, the appellant
    could obtain such a document with the assistance of his uncle.

27. Mrs Aboni submitted that on the basis of the two letters from the Iraqi
    Embassy, the judge was entitled to find that the appellant would have a
    laissez passer and a certification document which would be  sufficient,
    when accompanied by his uncle, to  allow  him  safely  to  travel  from
    Baghdad Airport to the IKR.

28. In reply, Mr Brooks submitted that the judge's finding in para  41  was
    only that the appellant could obtain a CSID with the assistance of  his
    uncle when he had returned to Iraq.  He submitted  that  there  was  no
    evidence, and it was speculation  whether  the  necessary  document  or
    assistance from his uncle existed.  There  was  no  evidence  that  the
    appellant's uncle would be able to  obtain  the  document  without  the
    appellant's presence.

Discussion

29. It is clear from the country guidance decision  in  AA  (Iraq)  v  SSHD
    [2017] EWCA Civ 944, where the amended country guidance set out  in  an
    Annex, that:

         "an international protection claim made  by  P  cannot  succeed  by
         reference to any alleged risk of harm arising from an absence of  a
         current or expired Iraqi passport  or  a  laissez  passer,  if  the
         Tribunal finds that P's return is not currently feasible on account
         of a lack of any of those documents."

30. The basis for that guidance, amended  by  the  Court  of  Appeal  on  a
    consensual basis, is set out at [36]-[41] of the judgment.  It is based
    upon that court's earlier decision in HF (Iraq) v SSHD [2013] EWCA  Civ
    1276 (see [38]-[39] of AA).  The context  means  that  a  claim  cannot
    succeed where an individual asserts that  they  are  at  risk  in  Iraq
    because they lack the very documentation needed to return to Iraq,  the
    absence of which would put them at risk (see [38] of AA).  However,  if
    the absence of a document, once in Iraq, creates a risk in the country,
    then it is a live issue as to whether or not an appellant will be  able
    to obtain such a document.  That,  of  course,  is  the  basis  of  the
    country guidance in both AA and AAH, that possession of a  CSID  is  an
    important document when considering an international  protection  claim
    based upon an individual's circumstances once in Iraq.

31. Here, therefore, Judge Fowell was correct  not  to  conclude  that  the
    appellant's appeal succeeded simply because he currently does not  have
    a travel document (such as a laissez passer) and that,  therefore,  his
    return to Iraq is not currently feasible.  As Judge Fowell pointed  out
    at [33], the appellant will only be returned to Iraq if he has a travel
    document, which in this particular appeal, is taken to mean  a  laissez
    passer.  Since he can only be returned  with  such  a  document,  Judge
    Fowell was correct to approach the risk to the appellant once he is  in
    Iraq on the basis that he would be in possession of  such  a  document.
    The position is different in respect of a CSID since, as the  Court  of
    Appeal pointed out in AA at [39], a CSID is not a necessary document in
    order to obtain a travel document.  As the Court of Appeal stated:

         "it is feasible that an individual could acquire a  passport  or  a
         laissez-passer, without possessing or being able to obtain a CSID".
         (my emphasis)

32. In those circumstances, the possession of a CSID, to the extent  it  is
    relevant to the risk to the individual once in Iraq, cannot be  assumed
    to be in that individual's possession simply  because  they  have  been
    returned to Iraq.

33. I do not, therefore, accept Mr  Brooks'  initial  submission  that  the
    judge was wrong to proceed on the basis that the appellant would be  in
    possession of a laissez passer if returned to Iraq.

34. In those circumstances, I conclude that Judge  Fowell  was  correct  to
    assess the appellant's claim on that basis and then to consider whether
    the appellant would be able to travel safely from  Baghdad  Airport  to
    the IKR.

35. That, in my judgement, turns upon the issue of whether  the  judge  was
    entitled to rely upon letter A and letter B and to reach  his  findings
    in regard to those letters, in particular at paras 33, 35, 37  and  39.
    In my judgement, he was entitled to do so.

36. First, the judge appreciated that he was  departing  from  the  country
    guidance case of AAH on  the  basis  of  evidence  that  had  not  been
    considered by the Upper Tribunal in that  decision.   At  para  37,  he
    correctly addressed the issue of  whether  that  evidence  was  "cogent
    evidence" necessary to  depart  from  AAH.   Even  though  he  said  so
    specifically in the context of whether the appellant's  laissez  passer
    would be confiscated, he clearly had in mind the correct test  (as  set
    out in SG (Iraq) v SSHD [2012] EWCA Civ 940  at  [47]  -  "very  strong
    grounds supported by cogent evidence") which would entitle him to reach
    a different finding to that in AAH.

37. It was common ground before me that the  two  letters  from  the  Iraqi
    Embassy were not in evidence before the Tribunal in AAH.  Indeed, it is
    clear from the report of that decision that both the  parties  and  the
    Tribunal in reaching its findings relied heavily and  extensively  upon
    an expert report rather than background material.

38. Mr Brooks drew to my attention that letter B was not, in  fact,  signed
    by the Iraqi Ambassador.  Letter A was signed by him.  However,  letter
    B is signed by a Counsellor at the Iraqi Embassy.   That  person  makes
    specific reference to the earlier Ambassador's letter, and Judge Fowell
    was, in my judgement, entitled to regard this letter as  being  written
    by an Iraqi  official  well-aware  of  the  relevant  matters  and  was
    specifically writing a follow-up letter to that  of  the  Ambassador  a
    month earlier.

39. In my judgement, Judge Fowell's summary at para 33(a)-(e) is  a  proper
    statement of what is said in these letters.   Although  neither  letter
    specifically states that an individual's laissez  passer  will  not  be
    confiscated at the airport, as AAH found on  the  evidence  before  it,
    that was clearly the Ambassador's view as in letter A he states that:

         "The arriving returnees can continue their onward journey to  their
         final destination in Iraq by domestic flights or road  using  their
         laissez passer or letter (if provided) which helped  them  to  pass
         through other designated checkpoints."

40. The wording - "using their laissez-passer or letter  (if  provided)"  -
    only makes sense if the individual's laissez passer is not  confiscated
    at the airport.

41. In any event, the equally important point made in both letters A and  B
    is that, albeit on a "case-by-case" basis, an individual may be  issued
    at the Baghdad International Airport by the police with a  letter  (the
    certification letter) which will then  enable  them  to  travel  safely
    through checkpoints.

42. In letter A, the Iraqi Ambassador states that:

         "I would like to assure you that  all  the  returnees'  papers  are
         checked on arrival and they are received with courtesy  at  Baghdad
         International Airport and may  be  provided  with  a  certification
         letter."

43. In letter B, the Counsellor states:

         "In addition to our clarifications outlined in our  letter  of  5th
         September, please note that the same procedures are applied to  all
         the returnees onward travel from Baghdad to  KRG  or  any  city  in
         Iraq.  The certification letter is issued  on  a  case-by-case  and
         depending  on  the  availability/and  availability   documentations
         (sometimes requested by the returnee),  the  letter  is  issued  by
         Baghdad International Airport police and contains information about
         the returnee including name, date of birth and  clarification  that
         the returnee landed with a  Laissez  Passer  and  his  repatriation
         procedure is completed at the Airport.  This letter  is  sufficient
         to pass through checkpoints in case of enquiry.  Please  note  that
         in rare occasions they may  be  questioned  at  checkpoints.   This
         letter  usually  not  always  issued  for  all   the   cases,   but
         individually case-by-case."

44. In my judgement, this new evidence, not available to the Upper Tribunal
    in AAH, entitled Judge  Fowell  to  consider  that  there  was  "cogent
    evidence" such  that  he  could  conclude  that,  not  only  would  the
    appellant's laissez passer not be confiscated, but that it  was  likely
    that he would be issued with a "certification letter" which  in  itself
    would allow the  appellant  to  travel  safely  through  any  necessary
    checkpoints between Baghdad Airport and the IKR.

45. Dealing finally with the issue of the CSID, as I have already noted, Mr
    Brooks did not challenge the  judge's  finding  in  para  41  that  the
    appellant would, with the help of his uncle, be able to obtain  a  CSID
    in Iraq.  His argument related to whether his uncle would  be  able  to
    obtain such a document whilst the appellant was in the UK in  order  to
    obtain a laissez passer.  As I  have  found  above,  Judge  Fowell  was
    entitled to proceed on the basis that any risk to the appellant in Iraq
    had to be assessed on the basis that he was in possession of a  laissez
    passer as that was the only basis on which he could, in his  particular
    circumstances, practically be returned.  Mr Brooks' argument does  not,
    therefore, arise.

46. It follows, in my judgement, that Judge Fowell  was  entitled  to  find
    that, having returned on a laissez passer, the appellant  could  safely
    travel to the IKR because he would retain his laissez  passer  and  was
    likely to be issued with a certification certificate.  His need  for  a
    CSID would not arise  until  he  was  in  Iraq  and  upon  the  judge's
    uncontested finding in  para  41,  he  would  be  able  to  obtain  the
    necessary documentation including a CSID with  the  assistance  of  his
    uncle.

Decision

47. For the above reasons, the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to
    dismiss the appellant's appeal did not involve the making of  an  error
    of law.  That decision, therefore, stands.

48. Accordingly, the appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.


                                                                      Signed
                                                                       [pic]
                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                                                  9 May 2019
