
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11868/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 14 May 2019                       |On 04 June 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE APPLEYARD


                                   Between

                                  MR. R O R
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs L Brakaj, Counsel.
For the Respondent:    Mrs R Petterson, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is  a  citizen  of  Iraq  who  made  an  application  for
    international protection. It was refused and following a  hearing,  and
    in a decision promulgated on 20 December 2018, his appeal was dismissed
    on all grounds by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Buchanan. The  Judge
    found that the Appellant had given discrepant evidence. He concluded at
    paragraph 29 of his decision that the  Appellant  was  not  a  credible
    witness and that he had not been truthful about the circumstances which
    led to him leaving Iraq. Everything pointed to the Appellant  being  an
    economic migrant from that country whose  departure  from  Iraq  on  20
    October 2015 was planned in advance and was not related to the  matters
    alleged by the Appellant. The Appellant had not  established,  even  to
    the lower standard of proof, to which he is subject that he would be at
    risk if returned to Iraq by reason of the threat of honour  killing  or
    by reason of threat from ISIS. The Judge acknowledged that that was not
    the end of the matter though and went  on  to  consider  the  issue  of
    internal relocation and sufficiency of protection.  He  concluded  that
    the Appellant came from the area of Iraq from which he departed  namely
    the KRI itself and also, in case he  was  wrong  on  that  finding,  he
    assessed the matter as if the Appellant had established that  he  comes
    from Kirkuk which lies in the Governate of Kirkuk.

 2. The Appellant sought permission to appeal against that decision. It was
    granted by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal E M Simpson in  a  decision
    dated 5 February 2019. Her reasons for so granting permission were: -

         "1.  The appellant born on 01/08/1991, a national of Iraq,  applied
         for permission to appeal, in time, concerning the decision of First-
         tier Judge AM Buchanan promulgated on 20/12/  2018  (the  Decision)
         dismissing  the  appeal  on  all  grounds,   asylum,   humanitarian
         protection and human rights, Arts 2, 3, 8.

         2.   Permission to appeal is granted because:

             (i)  credibility was at large in the appellant's asylum appeal
             in which he claimed to be a Kurdish  Muslim  originating  from
             Kirkuk who had fled Iraq following marrying  A,  a  Christian,
             who was subsequently killed by her family, and if returned  he
             feared A's family & his family, because  he  was  at  risk  of
             honour killing, and also feared  ISIS  who  had  attempted  to
             recruit him;

             (ii) there was asserted in  the  permission  grounds  that  on
             09/03/2017 the Respondent had withdrawn the asylum decision in
             the appellant's original appeal to investigate the appellant's
             time in France, but upon the respondent issuing  a  subsequent
             decision on 26/09/2018 that that decision had been similar  to
             the previous decision, and furthermore made no mention  of  HO
             investigations concerning the appellant's time in France;

             (iii)    upon commencing  judicial  findings  on  credibility,
             there was cited  at  the  outset  that  the  evidence  of  the
             appellant giving a false name  in  France  showed  him  to  be
             capable of lying and that  this  was  "not  the  action  of  a
             genuine  asylum  seeker"  (26.1).  Having  read  the  Decision
             carefully there was not discerned that this  matter  of  which
             the appellant had disclosed to  the  UK  authorities,  at  the
             outset, in his screening interview (Al .3) was  in  contention
             either in the respondent's decision, or in  cross  examination
             at the hearing or by way of clarification by the Judge  during
             the hearing. If a matter  of  an  order  of  material  concern
             arguably fairly there  would  have  been  incumbent  upon  the
             judicial decision maker to have raised  this  at  the  hearing
             with the representatives  for  either  of  them  to  raise  in
             examination of the appellant or  on  the  part  of  the  Judge
             themselves by way of clarification to ensure the appellant was
             afforded fair opportunity to provide his explanation;

             (iv) equally  of  arguable  materiality  there  appeared  that
             judicial assessment of the plausibility / credibility  of  the
             appellant's accounts of the number of proposals  that  he  and
             his  family  made  to  A's  family,  their  subsequent  secret
             marriage having been known to some members of the  family  but
             not the rest, and A's family not suspecting risks of elopement
             of their daughter,  together  appeared  bound  by  assumptions
             arguably  devoid  of  a  working  understanding  of  differing
             cultures, more particularly, those  in  which  honour  of  the
             family looms large (26.2-26.4) as equally  arguable  could  be
             observed   for   materially   differing   reasons   concerning
             assumptions concerning actions of an appellant  who  described
             having fled when faced by a large crowd on returning to  their
             home and learning that his pregnant wife had  been  killed  by
             her family  who  in  his  asylum  interview  described  having
             "chickened out" (AIR, 122) (26.6);

             (v)   remaining  permission  grounds  concerning  matters   of
             credibility findings appeared equally arguable;

             (vi)  there  appeared  that  the  appellant  had  consistently
             claimed that he came from Kirkuk,  a  contested  area  outside
             IKR, and that he had spent time in Mosul and Erbil, however in
             the first instance there was determined in the  Decision  that
             he had come from the area in which he had departed,  the  KRI,
             but arguably without reasoning. Furthermore, though  appearing
             to have regard to country guidance, including more recent, AAH
             (Iraqi Kurds -  internal  relocation)  (CG)  [2018]  UKUT  212
             (IAC),  more  especially,  with  reference  to   issues   with
             documentation, arguably, as asserted, there was not materially
             addressed the question whether he could be reasonably expected
             to return to Kirkuk or relocate.

         3.   Arguable material error(s) of law disclosed."

 3. Thus, the appeal came before me today.


 4. Mrs Brakaj relied upon her grounds seeking permission to  appeal  which
    she duly expanded. Her initial broad point is that the Judge's findings
    fail to take into account or fully appreciate the  evidence  given  and
    take  immaterial  factors  into  account  too.  The  findings   require
    corroboration without  considering  whether  such  documentation  could
    reasonably be obtained. Mrs Brakaj's first substantive ground  is  that
    at paragraph 26 of the decision the Judge has found that the  Appellant
    is capable of lying by reason of having given a false name in France en
    route to the United Kingdom and that he concluded "that it is  not  the
    action of a genuine asylum  seeker".  Mrs  Brakaj  argues  that  it  is
    unclear how determinative this has been over  the  claim  as  a  whole,
    however such a statement is wide ranging and has the  potential  to  be
    determinative of the claim as a whole. This is the  starting  point  of
    the findings and no alternative is  considered  when  reaching  such  a
    conclusion. The Appellant had been open about this aspect of his  case,
    had not concealed it and  presented  a  witness  and  evidence  of  his
    activities  in  France  whilst  the  Respondent  presented  no  further
    submissions on the point.


 5. Counsel's second ground relates to the  Judge's  consideration  of  the
    proposal of  marriage  and  contends  that  the  Judge  has  failed  to
    appreciate the evidence given. Contrary to  the  Judge's  findings  she
    maintains  that  there  is  no  inconsistency  within  the  Appellant's
    evidence and that it was not open to the Judge to  find  implausibility
    about the number of marriage proposals made in 2012 between  the  start
    of the year until March when marriage occurred. She asserts that  there
    is an impossibility in  understanding  why  two  formal  proposals  and
    informal proposals could not  be  made  within  a  three-month  period.
    Further,  again  contrary  to  the  Judge's  findings,  there   is   no
    inconsistency between the marriage  being  kept  secret  but  that  the
    Appellant's cousin and mother were aware of it. The Judge's findings at
    paragraph 26.4 of his decision presume that other family would  suspect
    that their daughter would elope. However, there is no basis for such  a
    finding and that this fails to consider the claim by the  standards  of
    Iraq where the family may not consider that their daughter would act in
    such a way. The fact that there were proposals made does  not  indicate
    in any way that the family  should  have  been  suspicious  toward  the
    Appellant; the evidence suggests that a family would receive  proposals
    for marriage in respect of  their  daughter,  but  the  assumption  and
    expectation would be that there would have been no direct contact.  The
    strict moral code prevents such contact and provides for peace of  mind
    of families, especially those with "eligible"  daughters.  The  Judge's
    decision fails to appreciate this.


 6. Thirdly the Judge has again materially erred in concluding at paragraph
    26.6 of his decision that the Appellant's actions in fleeing  Iraq  are
    those of someone who has planned his journey.  Had  the  Appellant  not
    fled as soon as possible an alternative version could  be  said  to  be
    incredible in that he did not flee at the first  opportunity.  Further,
    the Judge has erred in questioning why the family could not locate  the
    couple in Mosul but located quickly in Erbil. The Judge has also failed
    to consider the situation in Mosul at the time that  the  couple  left.
    There would be clear motivation to leave when  large  portions  of  the
    population were leaving for their own safety.


 7.  Fourthly,  it  is  argued  that  the  Judge  has  erred   in   seeking
    corroboration and that there is an expectation that a death certificate
    and marriage certificate should be provided in evidence.


 8. Finally, it is argued that even if not considered to be  credible,  the
    Appellant is from a contested area outside the IKR. There has  been  no
    consideration  to  the  authority  of  AAH  (Iraqi  Kurds  -   internal
    relocation) (CG) [2018] UKUT 212  (IAC)  as  to  whether  he  could  be
    expected to return to Kirkuk or could internally relocate  taking  into
    account his individual circumstances.


 9.  Mrs Petterson's broad  submission  is  that  the  Judge  had  come  to
    conclusions that were open to be made on the totality of  the  evidence
    and has not materially erred as asserted by her opponent.


10. The procedural history of this appeal is that the  Appellant's  initial
    claim was rejected but the Respondent withdrew the decision on the  day
    of his appeal hearing on 9 March 2017 to  investigate  the  Appellant's
    activity during his time in France. A new decision was not  made  until
    26 September 2018, but this made no mention  of  any  investigation  or
    findings and was to all intents and purposes  similar  to  the  earlier
    decision. At paragraph 26.1 the Judge has found that the Appellant  has
    shown himself to be capable of lying to the authorities when in  France
    and making use of a false name as stated in his screening interview. It
    was open to the Judge to conclude that that was not  the  action  of  a
    genuine asylum seeker.  Mrs  Brakaj  argues  that  it  is  unclear  how
    determinative this finding has been over the claim. On any  reading  of
    the decision it is but  one  factor  that  the  Judge  has  taken  into
    account, having considered the totality of the evidence in  the  round,
    before coming to his overall conclusion that the Appellant has provided
    discrepant evidence and is not a credible witness. The  Judge  has  not
    taken this finding in isolation and has subsumed it  into  his  overall
    credibility findings. Ultimately this finding sits well with those made
    within paragraph 28 of the Judge's decision when he considers Section 8
    of the 2004 Act and the failure of the Appellant to take advantage of a
    reasonable opportunity to  make  an  asylum  claim  whilst  in  a  safe
    country. Before arriving in the United Kingdom on the  Appellant's  own
    evidence, he spent a considerable time in France. He was arrested there
    and held in custody and it was open to the Judge to  factor  this  into
    his  credibility  assessment  when  looking  at  the  totality  of  the
    evidence.


11. I am not persuaded that the Judge has either a disbelieving attitude or
    that he has misunderstood the evidence. Throughout paragraph 26 of  his
    decision and the eight sub-paragraphs  the  Judge  has  identified  the
    "several troubling inconsistencies with the  various  accounts  of  the
    Appellant" in his screening interview,  interview,  witness  statements
    and oral evidence. The Judge has gone  on  to  identify  gaps  in  that
    evidence which appear neither plausible nor credible. In so  doing  the
    Judge has set  out  the  arguments  for  and  against  the  Appellant's
    position and, as I say, was entitled to look at the issue of the  false
    name given in France, even if the Respondent had not taken  the  point.
    There is nothing within the Judge's analysis to  suggest  that  he  has
    misunderstood the issues around the Appellant's marriage proposal. They
    have been carefully analysed as has the issue of locating the couple in
    Mosul and Erbil. The Judge  has  considered  these  issues  within  the
    context of the background evidence before coming  to  conclusions  that
    were open to be made. It was open for him to conclude at paragraph 26.6
    of his decision that the  events  described  by  the  Appellant  lacked
    credibility and were consistent only with his departure from Iraq being
    planned well in advance.
12. Both representatives accepted that at paragraph  26.8  of  the  Judge's
    decision there was a typographical error and that the  word  "not"  had
    been omitted from the second sentence. It should read "There  does  not
    need to be any documentation...". On any reading of this  decision  the
    Judge has not  sought  documentary  corroboration  of  the  Appellant's
    claim. Indeed, quite the opposite.


13. These grounds are no more than a dispute with the Judge's findings. The
    findings were open to be made on the totality of the evidence  and  the
    Judge has not materially erred as asserted.


14. Likewise, again contrary to the grounds, the Judge has  considered  the
    authority of AAH and to whether or not the Appellant could be  expected
    to return to Kirkuk or  could  internally  relocate  in  light  of  his
    individual circumstances.


15. There is here no material error of law whatsoever.




Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside the decision but order that it shall stand.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed
         Date: 31 May 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard




