
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11814/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 19th March 2019                   |On 11 June 2019                      |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

                                     JAH
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARy OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Holmes, instructed by Greater Manchester
                    Immigration Aid Unit
For the Respondent:    Mr. McVeety, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Although the First-tier Tribunal ("FtT") did not make an anonymity
    direction and no application is made before me, the appeal concerns a
    claim for asylum and international protection, and in my judgement, it
    is appropriate for an anonymity order to be made under Rule 14 of the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.  JAH is granted
    anonymity throughout these proceedings. No report of these proceedings
    shall directly or indirectly identify her.  This direction applies both
    to the appellant and to the respondent. Failure to comply with this
    direction could lead to proceedings being brought for contempt of
    court.


 2. The appellant appeals against the decision of First-tier Tribunal
    ("FtT") Judge Warren promulgated on 1st November 2018, dismissing the
    appellant's asylum and human rights appeals.


 3. Permission to appeal was granted by Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor
    on 10th January 2019.   In doing so the Judge noted that "... It is
    arguable that, given that the appellants son is a refugee in Sudan, and
    that the judge made no concrete finding about whether the husband had
    been involved in a coup attempt (paragraph 27), this is a matter which
    should have been given more attention by him...". Permission to appeal
    was granted on all grounds.  The matter comes before me to consider
    whether or not the decision of FtT Judge Warren involved the making of
    a material error of law, and if the decision is set aside, to re-make
    the decision.


The background


 4. The appellant is a national of Eritrea.  She arrived in United Kingdom
    on 29 July 2015, having been granted leave to enter as an overseas
    domestic worker in a private household, for a period of six months, on
    11th June 2015.  She claims that in August 2015, she ran away from her
    employer. On 18th September 2015, she made a claim for asylum. That
    claim was refused by the respondent for the reasons set out in a
    decision dated 5th November 2017. It was that decision, that was the
    subject of the appeal before the FtT.


 5. The appellant first left Eritrea in 1995, when she was about 32 years
    of age to work as a Maid in Bahrain.  She returned to Eritrea in 1997,
    and remained there until she travelled to Dubai in 2000 to work as a
    Maid with a family. The appellant moved with her employer to Abu Dhabi
    in 2003, and between 2003 and 2015, she travelled extensively with her
    employer between Adu Dhabi, Jordan, Lebanon, London and Sudan.  When
    she arrived in the United Kingdom in July 2015, that was the seventh
    occasion upon which she had been granted leave to enter the UK.


 6. There were a number of strands to the claim for international
    protection made by the appellant. The claim made by the appellant and
    the evidence before the Tribunal is set out at paragraphs [9] to [23]
    of the decision.  FtT Judge Warren refers, at [8], to there being
    significant inconsistencies in the account relied upon by the appellant
    in her witness statement, the asylum interview, and in her evidence
    before the Tribunal. The findings and conclusions of the FtT Judge are
    set out at paragraphs [24] to [32] of the decision.


 7. The Judge noted, at [24], that the appellant last left Eritrea legally
    in 2012 with the benefit of an exit visa.  The reasons are set out at
    paragraphs [25] and [26] of the decision. the Judge rejected the
    appellant's account that she had spoken out against the Eritrean
    government amongst close friends, in 2012, whilst she was in Eritrea.
    The Judge also rejected the appellant's account that her husband had
    taken part in the attempted coup in 2013 or that he had been arrested
    and detained.  The Judge states, at [27], that ".. Her evidence is
    unreliable and there is no credible evidence to suggest that she would
    be seen as guilty by association with her husband, even if he were
    involved.".  In so far as the appellant's son is concerned, the FtT
    Judge noted that there is no evidence that the appellant's son left
    Eritrea in 2013 as the appellant claims, although it is clear that he
    has spent at least 12 months in a refugee camp in the Sudan. At
    paragraph [29], the Judge states:


         "... Even then, the appellant was not there and so she cannot
         possibly be sure. There is no evidence beyond that of the appellant
         (whose evidence on other issues in this case has proved inherently
         unreliable) that she helped to pay for him to escape from Eritrea,
         and that even if she did, the authorities in Eritrea would be aware
         of that. She had, after all, been sending money for his keep for
         many years. The appellant is thus almost entirely reliant on her
         own account, which is based on what she says others have told her.
         Even on the lower standard of proof, and bearing in mind the
         extensive inconsistencies in her accounts, I cannot say that it is
         reasonably likely that she would suffer at the hands of the
         authorities in Eritrea, for assisting her son to evade the draft."


 8. At paragraph [30] of the decision, the FtT Judge considered the
    appellant's claim that if she were compulsorily returned to Eritrea
    from the UK now, she would be seen by the authorities as a failed
    asylum seeker. The FtT Judge considered that claim by reference to the
    country guidance set out in MST and Others (national service - risk
    categories) Eritrea CG [2016] UKUT 00443 (IAC) noting that the Tribunal
    found that failed asylum seekers per se, are not at risk. The appellant
    had left Eritrea in 2012 with her Eritrean passport and an exit visa.
    She is not subject to national service. She would not, on the facts
    here, therefore be at risk upon return.


The appeal before me


 9. The appellant contends in the grounds of appeal that the FtT Judge
    erroneously failed to make a finding on a relevant factual matter. That
    is the appellant's political opinion. The grounds of appeal are
    somewhat incoherent, but helpfully in his submissions, Mr Holmes
    distilled the three critical matters relied upon by the appellant.
    First, he submits, the FtT Judge failed to make a finding as to the
    appellant's political beliefs, and the risks the flow from that.
    Second, the appellant's political profile is relevant to the overall
    assessment of the credibility of the appellant's account. Third, the
    FtT Judge did not properly address the risk associated with the
    appellants association with her family, and in particular, her son, who
    is now outside Eritrea.


10. There was no doubt that the appellant had previously been a member of
    the EPLF.  The respondent had considered the appellant's account that
    she was an active member of the EPLF and her claim to have fought in
    numerous armed battles. At paragraph [54] of the respondent's decision
    dated 5th November 2017, the respondent stated "... it is noted that
    the EPLF is now the ruling party of Eritrea, albeit under the different
    name of the People's Front for Democracy and Justice. It is therefore
    accepted that you fought for the EPLF, however as they are now the
    ruling party of the country, it is rejected that you would face a risk
    on return due to your previous activities within the organisation.".
    The respondent went on to reject the appellant's account that she has
    come to the adverse attention of the Eritrean authorities because of
    her subsequent outspoken anti-government views.  The question for the
    FtT Judge was whether the appellant now has anti-government views, such
    that she has come to the adverse attention of the current regime. To
    that end, the appellant claimed that in 2012, whilst on a visit to
    Eritrea, she had expressed concerns about the government to a group of
    people she knew as a fellow fighters from the past.  She believes that
    the views expressed by her, were passed to the authorities.


11. The FtT Judge considered the evidence relied upon by the appellant in
    support of her claim that in 2012 she spoke out against the government,
    amongst friends, bringing her to the adverse attention of the
    authorities. The Judge rejected the appellant's claim and having
    considered the various other strands to the appellant's claim,
    concluded at paragraph [28] as follows:


         "I do not consider therefore that it is reasonably likely that the
         claimants (sic) alleged fear of persecution in Eritrea, for her
         political opinion is well founded."


12. In my judgement, the FtT Judge did properly considered the appellant's
    political profile.  The background to the claim was not in issue, and
    it was in my judgement open to the FtT Judge to reject the appellant's
    account that she has been an outspoken critic of the current regime for
    the reasons given.


13. The assessment of credibility is always a highly fact sensitive task.
    The FtT Judge was required to consider the evidence as a whole.  In
    assessing the credibility of the appellant and the claim advanced by
    her, the Judge was required to consider a number of factors.  They
    include, whether the account given by the appellant was of sufficient
    detail, whether the account is internally consistent and consistent
    with any relevant specific and general country information, and whether
    the account is plausible.  Some of those factors may be more relevant
    in an individual case than others.  At paragraphs [25] to [27] of the
    decision, the Judge gives reasons for rejecting the account given by
    the appellant, having noted at [8], there to be significant
    inconsistencies in the appellant's account between her interviews,
    witness statement, and in her evidence before the Tribunal.


14. At paragraph [7], the Judge confirms that he has not made findings
    without first looking at all the evidence in the round, but
    disregarding the conclusions as to whether the appellant has been a
    victim of trafficking.  Having made that clear, there is no reason for
    me to believe that he did not adopt that approach.  What follows at
    paragraphs [24] to [28] are findings that, in my judgement, arise from
    a combination of inconsistencies in the account, a lack of detail or
    sufficient explanation, and matters that appeared to the Judge, to be
    implausible.  The obligation on a Tribunal is to give reasons in
    sufficient detail to show the principles on which the Tribunal has
    acted, and the reasons that have led to the decision.  Such reasons
    need not be elaborate, and do not need to address every argument or
    every factor which weighed in the decision.


15. I am however satisfied that the FtT Judge erred in his consideration of
    the risk upon return by reference to the appellant's association with
    her son. The appellant claims that her son escaped to Sudan.  At
    paragraph [29], the Judge states "There is no evidence that the
    appellant's son left Eritrea in 2013, although it is clear that he has
    spent at least the last 12 months in a refugee camp in the Sudan".  The
    Judge considered the appellant's account that she had aided his move to
    Sudan.  Mr Holmes accepts that there was no evidence of any financial
    payments made by the appellant to her son, to help his escape from
    Eritrea.


16. Mr Holmes however draws my attention to the respondent's 'Country
    Policy and Information Note - Eritrea: National Service and illegal
    exit (October 2016).  Paragraph 14.3 of that note refers to family
    members being subjected to detention, interrogation and financial
    penalties to induce the conscript to return and to pressure the family
    member, to ensure the return to duty.  He submits that Dr John Campbell
    also referred, at paragraph 11 of his report, to family members being
    punished, where drafted leaders and deserters remain untraceable.  Mr
    Holmes submits that the background material that was before the FtT
    Judge, establishes a risk of return by reference to the fact that the
    appellant's son illegally left Eritrea, that is entirely independent of
    the claim made by the appellant to be at risk upon return because of
    her own profile.


17. The Judge plainly had concerns as to the credibility of the appellant
    but it is not entirely clear from what is said at paragraph [29] of the
    decision, whether the Judge considered the risk upon return by
    reference to the circumstances surrounding the presence of the
    appellant's son in Sudan, and the risk identified in the background
    material arising from this, regardless of whether the appellant helped
    to pay for him to escape.


18. In those circumstances, the appeal must be re-determined. I have
    carefully reflected as to the appropriate course for that
    redetermination. There will plainly need to be a consideration of the
    evidence and findings made as to circumstances surrounding the presence
    of the appellant's son in the Sudan.  I note that the evidence before
    the FtT was limited in that respect. Although, I have found there to be
    no merit in the other grounds of appeal advanced by the appellant, in
    my judgement, given the nature of the issues in the appeal, the
    appropriate course is for the appeal to be remitted for hearing afresh
    with no findings preserved.


19. The appeal is accordingly remitted for re-hearing afresh, with no
    findings preserved.


Decision:


20. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained a material error of
    law and is set aside.


21. The appeal is remitted for hearing afresh.


22. No aanonymity direction was made by the FtT. As this is a protection
    claim, it is appropriate that a direction is made.


Signed                                  Date          2nd May 2019


 Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia


TO THE RESPONDENT


FEE AWARD


I have allowed the appeal and remitted the matter for re-hearing before the
FtT.  In any event, no fee was paid and there can be no fee award.



Signed                                  Date          2nd May 2019


 Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia
