
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                   Appeal Number:
pa/11760/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Fox Court                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 12th February 2019                   |On 19th March 2019                  |
|                                        |                                    |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS

                                   Between

                                   C M N B
                         (ANONYMITY direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Chakmakjian of Counsel, Leonard & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Senior HOPO

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Manyarara, promulgated on 29th November 2018, following a hearing
    at Hatton Cross on 5th November 2018.  In the determination, the  judge
    dismissed  the  appeal  of  the  Appellant,  whereupon  the   Appellant
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a female, a citizen of Cameroon, and was born on  20th
    November 1978.  She appealed against the  decision  of  the  Respondent
    dated 20th September  2018  refusing  his  claim  for  asylum  and  for
    humanitarian protection pursuant to paragraph 339C of HC 395.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The essence of the  Appellant's  claim  is  that  she  had  an  abusive
    stepfather which resulted in the Appellant disliking men.  From the age
    of 5 she was raised by her grandmother.  She had been kicked out of her
    mother's home.  At the age of 13 she went to live with her aunt and her
    cousins.  She stayed there until she was 26.  She began to be attracted
    to other girls as she was growing up.  None of her school friends knew,
    when she was age 13, that she was a lesbian.  At the  age  of  26,  she
    told her cousin that she was a lesbian.  This was  because  her  cousin
    had noticed her behaviour and had  asked  her.   She  had  trusted  her
    cousin with a secret.  However, in 2004, her cousin told everyone about
    her sexuality.  This meant that the Appellant could no longer  continue
    to live with her aunt.  She was forced to return to  her  grandmother's
    home.  Her family decided she needed to have sex with men in  order  to
    help her family's reputation, and to protect her from the public.   Her
    grandmother kept her locked up in a room and tied her to  a  bed.   She
    was forced to have sex with men and she fell pregnant in 2010.  She has
    three children.  They are in Cameroon.

 4. In 2005, she met a lady by the name of Helen at a church and they began
    a friendship.  Helen made the first move.  The  Appellant  found  Helen
    attractive.  Helen is the only person that the Appellant has been in  a
    relationship  with  in  Cameroon.   When  her  grandmother   was   less
    controlling, the Appellant fled her grandmother's home and she was able
    to leave Cameroon in July 2016 after a male neighbour had reported  her
    to the police following an altercation  involving  her  children.   Her
    neighbour found out she was gay because she lived in a terraced  house.
    He may have heard her grandmother talking  to  her  friends  about  her
    sexuality.  Everyone kept their doors open.  She was arrested and shown
    a warrant with a stamp.  She does not have  evidence  of  the  warrant.
    Her half-brother then paid a bribe for her release.   She  spent  three
    days in a cell.  She was forced to return  home.   However,  her  half-
    brother arranged for an agent to take her out  of  the  country.   (See
    paragraph 10 of the judge's determination of this account).

The Judge's Finding

 5. The judge did not find the Appellant to be credible.  The judge came to
    this conclusion for the following reasons.

 6. First, it was not credible  that  the  Appellant's  sexual  orientation
    arose at the age of 5 because of her abusive stepfather,  which  caused
    her to be drawn away from men and towards other girls (paragraph 47).

 7. Second, it was not credible that the  Appellant  would  have  told  her
    cousin in secret given that the cousin  then  went  on  to  betray  the
    information that been given to her (paragraph 48).   It  was  also  not
    credible that the Appellant had been subsequently held captive  by  her
    grandmother in order to protect her  from  the  community.   Whilst  it
    could be argued that the entire neighbourhood knew of  the  reason  why
    the Appellant had moved from her  aunt's  house  to  the  grandmother's
    house in another area, it was not credible that the  grandmother  spoke
    openly about the Appellant's sexuality to others (paragraph 50).

 8. Thirdly, the claim that the Appellant's grandmother found out about her
    relationship with Helen was not credible  given  that  the  grandmother
    then gave the Appellant freedom to go wherever she  wanted.   This  was
    despite the fact that such freedom only occurred when the Appellant was
    pregnant (paragraph  51).   In  fact  it  was  not  credible  that  the
    Appellant then continued to return to her  grandmother's  home  despite
    being granted freedom during pregnancies (paragraph 51).

 9. Fourth, the Appellant had continuously added to her  claim,  up  to  an
    including the appeal hearing, and the Appellant had departed from  much
    of her original claim, "inasmuch as  she  has  now  described  numerous
    arrests and detentions by the authorities in Cameroon, as opposed to  a
    single incident that triggered her departure from Cameroon"  (paragraph
    53).

Grounds of Application

10. The grounds of  application  state  that  the  judge  erred  for  three
    reasons.  First, there was a failure to consider the material evidence.
     Second, there  was  a  failure  to  consider  the  objective  evidence
    relating to risk.  Third, the judge's approach  to  credibility  issued
    contrary to credence was on plausibility, which led  to  an  irrational
    decision.

11. On 31st December 2018, permission to appeal was granted  on  the  basis
    that, if it was argued that the judge reached  a  conclusion  that  was
    unsustainable in stating that there was a "sustained campaign of arrest
    and detention that she only  raised  towards  the  end  of  her  cross-
    examination" (see paragraphs 53  to  56),  this  failed  to  take  into
    account the fact that the Appellant during  her  asylum  interview  (at
    question 65) had said that, "I was in  a  cell  for  three  days.   And
    before this I was arrested several times and my  name  is  at  all  the
    police stations".

12. The judge had not made any  reference  to  this  answer.   It  was  not
    mentioned in the refusal letter either.  Given this was the  case,  the
    Appellant need not have referred  to  this  expressly  in  the  witness
    statement, since it had already been stated in  the  asylum  interview.
    Therefore, the conclusion (at paragraph  55)  that  the  Appellant  has
    sought to embellish her account was unsustainable.

13. Permission to appeal was granted on 31st December 2018.

Submissions

14. At the hearing before me on 12th  February  2019,  Mr  Chakmakjian,  of
    Counsel, relied upon the Grounds of  Appeal.   He  submitted  that  the
    credibility findings amounted to an error of law because they  took  no
    account of the evidence of the Appellant during her  asylum  interview.
    Moreover, the findings failed to refer to the authoritative guidance in
    KB and AH (credibility - structured approach) Pakistan [2017] UKUT 491.
     In that case, the Tribunal had referred to the well-known authority in
    HK v SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ  1037  where  Neuberger  LJ  had  stated  (at
    paragraphs 28 to 30) that,

         "In many asylum cases, some, even most, of  the  appellant's  story
         may seem inherently unlikely but that does  not  mean  that  it  is
         untrue.  The ingredients of the story, and the story  as  a  whole,
         have to be considered against the available  country  evidence  and
         reliable  expert  evidence,  and  other  family  factors,  such  as
         consistency with what the appellant has said before, and with other
         factual evidence (where there is any)" (see paragraph 28).

15. Moreover, it was also said:

         "Inherent probability, which may be helpful in many domestic cases,
         can be a dangerous, even a wholly inappropriate, factor to rely  on
         in some asylum cases.  Much of the evidence will be  preferable  to
         societies with customs and circumstances which are  very  different
         from those of which the members of the fact-finding  Tribunal  have
         any (even second-hand) experience.  Indeed, it is likely  that  the
         country which an asylum-seeker has left will be suffering from  the
         sort of problems  and  dislocations  with  which  the  overwhelming
         majority of residents of this country would  be  wholly  unfamiliar
         ..." (paragraph 29).

16. Indeed, Neuberger LJ had stated (at paragraph 28) that:

         "the need to consider factors relate  to  plausibility  along  with
         'other  familiar  factors  ...  such  as   consistency'   is   also
         illustrative of the need to avoid a basic credibility assessment on
         just one indicator.  We would add that even when focusing  just  on
         plausibility, it is not a concept with clear edges.  Not  only  may
         there be degrees of (IM) plausibility, but sometimes an  aspect  of
         an account that may be implausible in one respect may be  plausible
         in another" (see paragraph 30).

17. Mr Chakmakjian went on to say that the judge had rejected (at paragraph
    49) may be implausible in one respect may be plausible in another" (see
    paragraph 30).

18. Mr Chakmakjian went on to say that the judge had rejected (at paragraph
    49) the Appellant's claim that she was held captive by her grandmother,
    and forced to have sex with men.  However, the judge failed to consider
    the plausibility of the account by reference to  the  guidance  in  HK,
    together with the objective evidence relating to the societal  practise
    of "corrective rape" in Cameroon.   The  Appellant  relied  on  a  news
    article, dated 2nd October 2018, reporting on a study that up to one in
    five lesbians in Cameroon had been subjected to sexual  violence.   The
    report confirmed that, "... queer women  and  girls  in  Cameroon  face
    violence and 'corrective rape' often orchestrated by their  own  family
    members".

19. For her part, Ms Isherwood submitted that there was no  material  error
    of law.  A striking feature of this appeal was that the  Appellant  had
    added new bits of evidence as she went along.  Nowhere is this  clearer
    than the fact that after the hearing had come to an end, the  Appellant
    sent in a statement which she claimed to have already been  before  the
    Secretary of State.  The hearing had taken place on 5th November  2018.
    The determination was then promulgated on 29th November 2018.  However,
    the judge had signed off the decision  on  22nd  November  2018.   Yet,
    without  seeking  permission  to  adduce  any  further  evidence,   the
    Appellant had sent in an additional statement of evidence (see page  12
    of the bundle) which referred to the Appellant's "arrest"  even  though
    no evidence of this had been given previously.

20. In reply, Mr Chakmajian submitted that what the Appellant had done  was
    to send in a statement referring to evidence that  was  already  before
    the Tribunal.  It was not new evidence at all.  The translation appears
    at page 2.  The purpose of the additional material was to make it clear
    that this evidence was already before the authorities.

Error of Law

21. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law, such that if falls to be  set
    aside (see Section 12(1)) of TCEA 2007.  My  reasons  are  as  follows.
    First, and most importantly, the judge has come to a  very  clear  view
    here that the Appellant has not referred to  previous  arrests  in  the
    original claim.  (See paragraphs 53 to 56).  However, this ignores  the
    fact that during her asylum interview, the Appellant  had  referred  to
    several arrests (see question 65), alongside the fact that she had been
    detained in a cell for three days.  She made it quite  clear  that  her
    name was at all  the  police  stations.   She  had  been  at  pains  to
    emphasise that her name was known to the  police  (see  question  264).
    She had made it quite clear that the police were  arresting  people  at
    the  bar  where  she  used  to  frequent  (question  265).   In   these
    circumstances, it  is  not  correct  to  say  that  the  Appellant  has
    dishonestly embellished her evidence.

22. Second, insofar as  the  issue  of  the  Appellant  having  sent  in  a
    statement after the hearing, is concerned, what the Appellant had  done
    was to disclose a statement in French, which she had written in advance
    of the hearing.  In this statement, she had made it clear that she  had
    been arrested on a number of occasions.  This document  was  translated
    by her solicitors.  It was accompanied with supporting statements  from
    the Appellant and a support worker.  It was submitted  by  fax  to  the
    Tribunal on 23rd November 2018 (which was the day after the  judge  had
    signed off the determination on 22nd November 2018).  The cover  letter
    also off this fax reiterated that there had been  previous  arrests  as
    mentioned by her at question  65  and  questions  264  to  265  of  the
    interview.

23. Third, it is also a factual error to say that the Appellant had  become
    aware of her sexuality at the age of 5.  The judge states,  "I  do  not
    accept that this [i.e. the rejection by her stepfather] was  a  trigger
    to her discovery of her sexuality at the age of 5".  What the Appellant
    had actually stated (see question 87) was that at the age of 5 she  had
    become aware that "I had no fatherly love because I suffered  from  the
    lack of having a father in my childhood".  She had then gone on to  say
    (see question 95) that "I said that at  the  age  of  10  I  liked  the
    company of girls compared to the company of boys and at the age  of  13
    that I started desiring girls.  But at the age of 5 I did not  like  to
    see boys because of  my  mother's  husband's  behaviour".   Indeed,  in
    assessing this particular aspect of the Appellant's claim, the  refusal
    letter makes it clear (at paragraph 30)  that  "this  is  a  reasonable
    explanation as to why you preferred the company of  girls  at  a  young
    age".

24. Finally, the objective evidence does make it  clear  that  there  is  a
    practise of "corrective rape" in Cameroon whereby family members  often
    subject an errant woman to rape by other men on account  of  her  being
    queer.  If the Appellant  retuned  back  to  her  grandmother's  house,
    (which is criticised by  the  judge  at  paragraph  51)  there  was  an
    explanation for this (at paragraph 20) that the Appellant  had  nowhere
    else to go to because her grandmother's  house  was  where  she  lived.
    Accordingly, for a variety of reasons, there  have  been  a  series  of
    irrational conclusions as to fact in this determination.

  Notice of Decision

25. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside  the
    decision of the original judge.  I  remake  the  decision  as  follows.
    This appeal  is  remitted  back  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  to  be
    determined by a judge other than Judge Manyarara, subject  to  practice
    statement 7.2(b).

26. An anonymity direction is made.

27. This appeal is allowed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 15th March 2019







