
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11646/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 8 March 2019                               |On 02 April 2019              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PEART


                                   Between

                                   mrs p r
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Mustafa
For the Respondent:    Mr Lindsay, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant was born on 25 August 1994.  She is a citizen of Iran.

 2. She appealed against the respondent's  refusal  to  grant  her  asylum,
    humanitarian protection and on human rights grounds dated 22  September
    2018.

 3. In a decision promulgated on 11  December  2018,  Judge  C  Burns  (the
    judge) dismissed the appellant's appeal.  She did not find  her  to  be
    credible with regard to events in her own country, or that she would be
    at risk on return.

 4. The grounds claim the judge erred with regard to  the  plausibility  of
    the appellant's account.  There were various issues:

      a) That the judge erred in finding the appellant's account implausible
         when  considered  against  the  background  information  on   Iran.
         Further, the appellant's case could not rationally be  said  to  be
         contrary to the country evidence.  See decision at [26] - [28].

      b) It is claimed the judge erred because she found it implausible that
         the appellant would assist Komala by buying medicine for members of
         the party.  That overlooked the appellant's  plausible  explanation
         for her behaviour at [3] and [9] of her  statement  when  she  said
         inter alia "although not politically active, I did want to help the
         Kurdish parties because they are fighting for  our  freedom."   The
         grounds submit there was nothing inherently implausible about  that
         aspect of the appellant's account and the judge gave no reason  for
         discounting that explanation.  See decision at [26].

      c) The judge found the appellant's evidence of meetings being held  at
         her house between August and  September  2017  and  March  2018  as
         inconsistent with the objective evidence of a crackdown on  Kurdish
         political groups at that time.  The  grounds  submit  that  it  was
         unclear how that was inconsistent with the appellant's evidence  of
         having hosted Komala members during that period.  On  any  rational
         view, that evidence supported the plausibility of  the  appellant's
         case.  If the Iranian authorities were cracking down on  the  known
         supporters of the party and locations  where  they  were  known  to
         congregate, that would explain why the group began holding meetings
         in the home of someone with no  previous  political  profile.   The
         appellant's explanation that her house was considered a safe  place
         in comparison  with  the  homes  of  known  Komala  supporters  was
         consistent with the country  evidence.   Further,  the  appellant's
         evidence that those meetings were eventually detected accorded with
         the evidence.  See decision at [27].

      d) The judge pointed to evidence that Komala conducted its business in
         secret as suggesting that the appellant's evidence  that  she  knew
         that the men who met at her house were  involved  with  Komala  was
         implausible.   Firstly,  the   evidence   indicated   that   Komala
         sympathisers usually do not know who members  are,  not  that  they
         never know who members are.  Secondly, while the evidence suggested
         that Komala kept its meetings a secret from the outside  world  and
         from the authorities, it did not suggest that the participants were
         invisible and silent.  It would be absurd as the  judge  suggested,
         that meetings were kept separate from the participants and those in
         whose houses they were held.  See decision at [28].

      e) The judge concluded at [28] that as the evidence  suggested  Komala
         leaflets were distributed by being left in a pile in public places,
         they would not be  stored  inside  a  house  before  they  were  so
         distributed.  The grounds claim there was nothing in the  objective
         evidence to suggest that did not occur.   As  a  matter  of  logic,
         leaflets must first be produced and if they  were  not  distributed
         immediately, they must be stored somewhere in the meantime.

 5. Judge Grant-Hutchison granted permission to appeal on 8 February  2019.
    She said inter alia:

         "2.  It is arguable that the judge erred in  law  in  her  approach
             when concluding that the appellant's case is implausible  when
             considered against the background information  in  respect  of
             Iran in relation to

             (a)  assisting Komala by buying medicine for  members  of  the
                  party even though she was not politically active;

             (b)  the meetings being held at her house when her  house  was
                  considered a safe place in comparison with homes known  to
                  support Komala and the fact that the meetings in her  home
                  were eventually detected accords with the evidence;

             (c)  knowing the men who met at her house  when  the  evidence
                  dictates that Komala sympathisers usually do not know  who
                  members are, not that they never know who members are; and



             (d)  that Komala leaflets would not be stored inside  a  house
                  before they are distributed to the public  when  there  is
                  nothing to suggest in the  objective  evidence  that  this
                  does not occur.  As a matter of logic  the  leaflets  must
                  first  be  produced  and  if  they  are  not   distributed
                  immediately,  they  must  be  stored  somewhere   in   the
                  meantime.

 6. There was no Rule 24 response.

Submissions on Error of Law

 7. Mr Mustafa relied upon the grounds.  He drew my attention  to  [3]  and
    [9] of the appellant's statement dated 22 November 2018 with which  the
    judge did not engage.  The  appellant  said  she  was  not  politically
    active but wanted to help  the  Komala  Party.   She  was  helping  her
    husband.  She was not an active member or supporter of the party.   She
    bought medication for the party because she wanted to help.

 8. The authorities were cracking down on  known  dissidents  so  used  the
    houses of people not known, for meetings.  Mr Mustafa  referred  me  to
    3.1.1. at L60 of the respondent's bundle.  Komala Party cells  in  Iran
    act as an  umbrella  which  covers  a  large  number  of  sympathisers.
    Sympathisers and members come into contact and are acquainted with  one
    another through  different  collective  activities.   The  sympathisers
    usually do not know who  members  are  as  the  members  never  present
    themselves as such.  However, through these collective activities,  the
    members get to  know  the  best  and  the  most  active  persons  among
    sympathisers.  As regards leaflets, I am referred to 3.1.2.2. at L62 of
    the respondent's bundle.  Materials are distributed either by the party
    members or left in a pile during the night in places such as  secondary
    schools, universities, factories, workshops,  market,  etc.   Sometimes
    young and inexperienced activists were arrested for  storing  political
    material.

 9. Mr Lindsay submitted that the grounds were merely a  challenge  to  the
    reasons the judge gave and an attempt to reargue the case.   The  judge
    gave three key reasons at [26], [27] and [28] of the decision.

10. As regards [26] the judge found  the  explanation  that  the  appellant
    would buy medication  for  members  of  the  party  and  hold  meetings
    unbelievable, particularly when this was  a  period  during  which  the
    authorities had a crackdown against any perceived political dissidents.
     The judge took account of the appellant's oral evidence from [13].

11. As regards [27] the judge's findings were based on the  evidence.   The
    appellant's own evidence was that her house was considered to be a safe
    place for meetings but  clearly,  it  was  not  safe.   The  judge  was
    entitled to find that the appellant's evidence was not consistent  with
    the background evidence.  See [20] of the judge's decision.

12.  As  regards  [28]  the  judge's  findings  were  consistent  with  the
    background information.  Put simply, there was  nothing  to  support  a
    case such as the appellant was putting forward.  There was  nothing  to
    suggest that leaflets were stored in private dwellings.

Conclusion on Error of Law

13. I find the grounds are nothing more than a  challenge  to  the  reasons
    given by the judge and an attempt to reargue the case.  The judge  gave
    clear and cogent reasons at [23]-[32]  for  rejecting  the  appellant's
    account that she assisted  members  of  the  Komala  Party  by  holding
    meetings, storing leaflets and purchasing medication.   The  judge  did
    not accept for the reasons she  gave  that  members  of  the  Ettela'at
    raided the appellant's home because she found there would be no  reason
    for them to do so given the appellant's lack of involvement in  Kurdish
    politics.  The judge did not accept the appellant was storing  leaflets
    and that her claim was a fabrication.  Those were reasons the judge was
    entitled to come to on the evidence before her.

Decision

14. The judge did not materially err. Her decision shall stand.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date: 27 March 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Peart

