
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11137/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 14th January 2019                          |On 7th February 2019          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                    H A R
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the appellant's appeal against the decision of  Judge  Monaghan
    made following a hearing at Bradford on 27th March 2018.

Background

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Iraq born, as found  by  the  Immigration
    Judge, on 1st October 1999.  He arrived in the UK on 23rd December 2015
    and claimed asylum.  On 17th October 2017 a decision was made to refuse
    his application, and it was this decision which was the subject of  the
    appeal before the Immigration Judge.

 3. The appellant left Iraq on 1st September 2015.  He  comes  from  Mullah
    Abdullah which is in the Kirkuk Governorate.  His claim for asylum  was
    on the basis of a conversion from Islam to Christianity  but  this  was
    rejected by the Immigration Judge and there is no appeal  against  that
    aspect of her decision.

 4. The appellant says that he cannot return to Iraq because he would be at
    risk of treatment  contrary  to  Article  15(c)  of  the  Qualification
    Directive since he cannot return to his home area, which is  under  the
    control of Daesh, and cannot relocate to Baghdad.  He does not  have  a
    CSID and would not be able to obtain a replacement.

 5. The Immigration Judge cited AA (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG [2015] UKUT  544
    which held that there was at present a state of internal armed conflict
    in  certain  parts  of  Iraq,  involving  government  security  forces,
    militias of various kinds and the Islamic Islamist group known as ISIL.



         "The intensity of this armed conflict in  the  so-called  contested
         areas comprising the governorates of Anbar, Diyala, Kirkuk, Ninewah
         and Salah al-Din is  such  that  as  a  general  matter  there  are
         substantial grounds for believing that any civilian returned there,
         solely on account of his or her presence there, faces a  real  risk
         of being subjected to indiscriminate violence amounting to  serious
         harm within  the  scope  of  Article  15(c)  of  the  Qualification
         Directive."

 6. She then relied on the Country Policy  and  Information  Note  entitled
    "Iraq: Return/Internal Relocation June 2017", which concluded that  the
    security situation had changed, and on that basis she departed from the
    findings in AA.  She said  that he could return to his home area.

 7.  She  accepted  that  the  appellant  does  not   have   the   relevant
    documentation for a return and does not have a CSID card.

 8. At paragraph 40 she wrote:

         "40. The appellant was asked all the relevant questions  about  his
             CSID card in a letter from the respondent  dated  22nd  August
             2017 to which his legal representatives sent a response on 5th
             September 2017.  He  said  that  he  did  not  know  what  had
             happened to his parents or his home village or if his  parents
             were alive or not.  He maintained in his oral evidence that he
             had been unable to make any contact with them or hear any news
             of them despite asking other Iraqis he came into contact with.
              He does not know the number of his CSID card nor  the  volume
             number or details of his family members CSID cards.  Therefore
             whilst he may be able  to  get  to  the  necessary  office  in
             Kirkuk, given I find that this is no longer a contested  area,
             he asked me to find that there is no evidence that there is  a
             family member who can vouch for him or that he will be able to
             persuade officials that he is who he says he is as he will not
             be able to provide the relevant details to obtain a copy CSID.
              As a CSID is generally required in  order  for  an  Iraqi  to
             access financial assistance from the authorities;  employment;
             education; housing; and medical treatment  and  there  are  no
             family or other members likely to be able to provide means  of
             support it is submitted  that  the  appellant  is  in  general
             likely to face  a  real  risk  of  destitution,  amounting  to
             serious harm on return to Iraq.

         41.  However given that it  will  be  clear  from  my  findings  in
             relation to his  claim  to  be  a  Christian  convert  and  my
             findings that he was fingerprinted and  claimed  asylum  in  a
             European country on his journey to the UK  it  will  be  clear
             that I find the appellant not credible as a witness.   Further
             I note that he has made very little effort to trace members of
             his family or find out whether his village was attacked and/or
             destroyed by Daesh as he claims.  The only effort he has  made
             is to ask other Kurdish people whom he has come across if they
             have heard anything of his  family.   The  appellant  gave  no
             further details of this; neither as to whom he had asked,  how
             many times he had asked and where he was  when  he  made  such
             enquiries.  There is also no suggestion that he has  attempted
             to  trace  his  family  through  any  voluntary  organisation,
             charity, or through any official means.  In summary  therefore
             he has made very little effort indeed which  must  be  weighed
             adversely against him in terms of his overall credibility.

         42.  I therefore find that the appellant has  failed  to  establish
             that he does not have immediate family members still  residing
             in  the  Kirkuk  Governorate  due  to  his  lack  of   general
             credibility and his very limited efforts to find them.

         43.  I therefore find that it is reasonably  likely  that  he  does
             still have family members in Kirkuk Governorate who  may  have
             his original CSID card which he said he left at home  when  he
             fled or if not that they can vouch for him and assist  him  to
             obtain a replacement CSID card soon after arrival in Iraq."

 9. On that basis she dismissed the appeal.

The Grounds of Application

10. The appellant sought permission to appeal on the grounds that the judge
    had failed to properly apply the current country guidance case law.

11. In AA the Tribunal found that there  was  a  state  of  internal  armed
    conflict in the Kirkuk Governorate, a conclusion which was confirmed in
    the decision in BA (Returns to Baghdad) Iraq CG [2017]  UKUT  18  which
    was decided in January 2017. It was not challenged by the Secretary  of
    State in the Court of Appeal decision in AA (Iraq) v SSHD  [2017]  EWCA
    Civ 944.  The annex to AA  [2017]  makes  it  clear  that  the  country
    guidance on the contested regions stands.

12. Even though the Secretary of State was now, before this judge,  relying
    on CPINs dated March 2017 and June 2017, arguing that the situation had
    changed since the country guidance in AA, this was not an argument made
    to the Court of Appeal when AA was decided there  in  July  2017.   The
    judge did not address the argument that the only evidence relied on  by
    the respondent concerned a single document which predated the  decision
    in the Court of Appeal and not challenged by the Secretary of State  in
    that case.

13. Second, the judge had failed to provide  any  reasons  as  to  why  the
    respondent's CPIN amounted to cogent evidence  sufficient  to  allow  a
    departure from the existing country guidance case law,  and  failed  to
    properly consider whether he had an CSID or would be able to obtain one
    reasonably soon after his arrival in Iraq.

14. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Haria on 25th  May  2018  for
    the reasons stated in the grounds.

15. Mr Diwnycz, for the respondent, accepted that the judge  had  erred  in
    law and that the decision had to be remade.   He  made  no  substantive
    submissions in relation to the appellant.

Findings and Conclusions

16. The Immigration Judge erred in  law  for  the  reasons  stated  in  the
    grounds, in particular she did not provide cogent reasons sufficient to
    allow a departure from existing country guidance case law. The decision
    will have to be remade.

17. The appellant is a Kurd  from  Kirkuk  Province.   He  does  not  speak
    Arabic.  His interview was conducted in Kurdish.  He does  not  have  a
    CSID.

18. There is no  proper  basis  for  departing  from  the  current  country
    guidance case which concluded that appellants such as Mr R would face a
    real risk of Article 15(c) indiscriminate violence in Kirkuk simply  as
    a civilian returning there.

19. I am informed that a new country guidance case on this issue is  to  be
    heard in May but on the present state of the law  the  findings  in  AA
    should be applied.  The appellant cannot return to Kirkuk, and will  be
    returned to Baghdad.

20. He cannot return to Kirkuk to attempt  to  obtain  a  replacement  CSID
    because it remains a contested area.  In any  event  travel  to  Kirkuk
    from Baghdad is hazardous.  His parents live in his home area  as  does
    his sister but there is no evidence that he has any male family  member
    who would be able to travel from Kirkuk to Baghdad and could attend the
    civil registry with him.

21. I conclude that the appellant is not therefore in a position to  obtain
    the relevant documents needed to apply  for  a  CSID  card.   He  would
    therefore be an undocumented internally displaced person in Baghdad.

22. In AA it was the respondent's position that  it  would  in  general  be
    reasonable and not unduly harsh to  expect  a  person  to  relocate  to
    Baghdad city if there was an Article 15(c)  risk  in  their  home  area
    except where:

         "A person returned to Iraq who was unable to  replace  their  Civil
         Status ID Card or Nationality Certificate who would  be  likely  to
         face  significant  difficulties  in  accessing   services   and   a
         livelihood and would face destitution which is likely to reach  the
         Article 3 threshold."

    The appellant has additional factors, cited in AA, which would point to
    his having particular difficulties in Baghdad, namely that he does  not
    speak Arabic, is from a minority group, has never been to  Baghdad  and
    has neither family nor friends nor access to a sponsor there.

23. Accordingly, at the present state of the law, the appellant is entitled
    to succeed in his appeal in relation  to  the  Qualification  Directive
    since return to his home area would expose him to a real risk of  being
    subjected to indiscriminate violence and, without a CSID or the ability
    to obtain one, he could not internally relocate to Baghdad as he  would
    be exposed to treatment contrary to Article 3 of the ECHR.

Notice of Decision

24. The original judge erred in law.  Her decision is  set  aside.   It  is
    remade as follows.  The appeal is dismissed  on  asylum  grounds.   The
    appeal is allowed on humanitarian protection grounds and on  Article  3
    grounds.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


[pic]
Signed                              Date 4 February 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor



