
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11774/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 31st August 2017                   |On 4th September 2017                 |
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON


                                   Between

                                    [u t]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Sharma of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant appeals against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Callow promulgated on 26 May 2017,  in  which  the  Appellant's  appeal
    against the decision to refuse his protection and  human  rights  claim
    dated 11 October 2016 was dismissed.

 2. The Appellant is a national of Turkey, born on  [  ]  1977,  who  first
    entered the United Kingdom in 2013 as a visitor  and  who  subsequently
    submitted various applications for leave to remain to establish himself
    in business under the European Community Association Agreement, all  of
    which were refused.  The Appellant remained in the United  Kingdom  and
    claimed asylum on 12 April 2016.  The basis of his claim for asylum was
    that  he  feared  persecution  on  return  to  Turkey  because  of  his
    connections with the BDP and his ex-wife's involvement  with  the  TKP.
    The Appellant also relied on family and private life established in the
    United Kingdom, including with a new partner and her child.

 3. The Respondent refused the application on 11 October 2016 on the  basis
    that the Appellant's asylum claim was lacking in detail and was  vague,
    with  risk  on  return  being  purely  speculative.   The   Appellant's
    credibility was also damaged by the delay in making his  asylum  claim.
    In terms of private and family life, the Appellant  did  not  meet  the
    requirements of Appendix FM for a grant of leave to  remain  under  the
    Immigration Rules on this basis that it was not accepted that he was in
    a genuine and subsisting relationship with  his  partner,  nor  did  he
    satisfy the requirements of paragraph 276ADE  in  relation  to  private
    life.

 4. Judge Callow dismissed the appeal in a decision promulgated on  26  May
    2017 on all grounds.  Judge Callow found the  Appellant's  evidence  in
    relation to his protection claim to  be  vague  and  inconsistent,  the
    claim was made many years after the Appellant's arrival in  the  United
    Kingdom  and  only  after  other  applications  had   failed.    Taking
    everything into account, his claim was not credible and  he  was  found
    not to be at risk on return to Turkey.  As to his Article 8 claim,  the
    Appellant's wife had no leave to remain in the United Kingdom such that
    he could not meet the requirements of Appendix FM for a grant of  leave
    to remain under the Immigration Rules and in terms of private life, the
    Appellant  would  not  face   very   significant   obstacles   to   his
    reintegration into Turkey.  Overall Judge Callow found  that  it  would
    not be unduly harsh for the Appellant to return  to  Turkey,  nor  were
    there any exceptional circumstances or good grounds for granting  leave
    to remain outside of the Immigration Rules.

The appeal

 5. The Appellant appeals on  two  grounds.   First,  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal erred in law in relation to the protection claim by failing to
    consider the chronology and all relevant material; reaching  irrational
    conclusions; giving  insufficient  reasons  for  the  findings  and  by
    treating the delay in claiming asylum as determinative  of  the  claim.
    Secondly, in relation to the human rights claim,  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal erred in law in  failing  to  make  any  findings  as  to  the
    Appellant's family life outside of the Immigration Rules,  specifically
    there was no consideration of the impact of removal on  the  Appellant,
    his wife and her child nor on the evidence as to the  reasons  why  the
    Appellant claimed that family life could not continue in Turkey.

 6. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Robertson on 20 June 2017  on
    the second ground only in relation  to  human  rights.   On  the  first
    ground, Judge Robertson  decided  that  the  Judge's  findings  on  the
    protection claim were open to him on the evidence before him  and  were
    not unreasonable or irrational.

 7. At the hearing, on behalf of the Appellant, Mr  Sharma  submitted  that
    although the First-tier Tribunal was correct to find that the Appellant
    was unable to meet the requirements of Appendix FM for a grant of leave
    to remain because his wife has no current status in the United Kingdom;
    the Judge erred in failing to consider that relationship outside of the
    Immigration Rules, particularly when he was invited to do so and  there
    was evidence before him of the adverse effect on  family  life  if  the
    Appellant  were  removed  to  Turkey.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  only
    considered private life and made no findings  at  all  on  family  life
    outside of the Immigration Rules.

 8. On behalf of  the  Respondent,  it  was  submitted  that  although  the
    decision was brief, the potential difficulties on return to Turkey  for
    the Appellant were considered and reading  the  decision  as  a  whole,
    sufficient consideration  was  given  to  family  life  and  sufficient
    reasons given for a lawful decision.

Findings and reasons

 1. Judge Callow deals with the Appellant's  private  and  family  life  in
    three paragraphs incorrectly numbered 20, 34 and 21  in  the  decision.
    The first paragraph accurately records that the Appellant can not  meet
    the requirements of Appendix FM for a grant of leave  to  remain  under
    the Immigration Rules and that if his wife's application for  leave  to
    remain were to be successful, he could make an  application  for  entry
    clearance to join her.  The second paragraph makes reference to whether
    return to  Turkey  would  be  unduly  harsh,  whether  there  were  any
    exceptional circumstances, good grounds for granting leave  outside  of
    the Immigration Rules or whether removal would cause  very  substantial
    difficulties.  However, the substance of the findings in this paragraph
    are  clearly  relevant  only  to  private  life  and  under   paragraph
    276ADE(1)(vi) of the Immigration Rules as to  whether  there  would  be
    very significant obstacles  to  reintegration  considering  linguistic,
    cultural and familial ties there.  The third paragraph  concludes  that
    the Appellant would prefer to live in the United Kingdom by choice  but
    the European Convention on Human Rights is  not  to  confer  individual
    advantages or benefits such as this.

 2. The First-tier Tribunal decision contains no findings at all as to  the
    existence or otherwise of family life between the Appellant,  his  wife
    and/or her daughter; nor does it go on  to  make  any  findings  on  or
    assess interference with any such family life or proportionately of the
    decision.  Although there are references to there being no good grounds
    for granting leave outside of the Immigration  Rules,  no  reasons  for
    this conclusion are given.  In the context of a human rights appeal and
    in all the circumstances of this case (in particular where  the  reason
    why the Appellant could not meet the requirements of Appendix  FM  were
    due to his wife's lack of  status  rather  than  lack  of  any  genuine
    relationship at all  and  where  evidence  was  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal of both family life  and  interference),  these  are  material
    errors of law and I allow the Appellant's appeal on this basis.  It  is
    therefore necessary for the decision of Judge Callow to  be  set  aside
    and the appeal to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a de  novo
    hearing before a different Judge.

 3. Finally, I note that as at the date  of  the  hearing  before  me,  the
    Appellant's wife's application  for  leave  to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom had been outstanding for some six months.  It is  of  course  a
    matter for the Respondent, but  the  outcome  of  that  application  is
    clearly relevant to the Appellant's circumstances and it is  likely  to
    be beneficial to both parties if the outcome is known by the  time  the
    First-tier Tribunal considers the Appellant's appeal afresh.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of a material error of law.  As such it is  necessary  to  set  aside
the decision.

I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal and remit the appeal  to
the First-tier Tribunal to be determined afresh by any  Judge  except  Judge
Callow.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   [pic]         Date         1st September 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson

