
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11145/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Heard at Manchester    Decision and Reasons Promulgated
On 1st May 2019   On 30th May 2019



                                   Before

                    DEPUTY JUDGE UPPER TRIBUNAL FARRELLY


                                   Between

                                    M S Y
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                          Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                 Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr Z Khan, Knightbridge Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr A Tan, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The background

    1. The appellant made a claim  for  protection  on  the  basis  that  if
       returned to Iran, his home country, he would face mistreatment on the
       basis of his political  opinion.  He  is  of  Kurdish  ethnicity.  He
       claimed to support the KDP (rather than the KDPI) and made  a  living
       as a cross-border trader with Iraq.

    2. He claimed that in November 2015  whilst  in  Iraq  he  was  given  a
       package which he was  told  contained  leaflets  promoting  the  KDP.
       Crossing the border back to Iran he encountered police but managed to
       escape. He said he learnt  that  Etelaat  had  been  to  family  home
       looking for him.

    3.  He decided to leave Iran and travelled back to Iraq and then  on  to
       Turkey. From there, he travelled to  Greece  before  passing  through
       various countries until he came to Switzerland. He remained in a camp
       for around a year but said he  did  not  claim  protection.  He  then
       travelled on to France before arriving in the United  Kingdom.  Since
       being in the United Kingdom he had been posting pro-KDP  material  on
       Facebook and attending demonstrations.

    4. The respondent found his account to be  internally  inconsistent  and
       did not accept he was wanted by the Iranian authorities.

The First tier Tribunal

    5.  His  appeal  was  heard  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Ennals  at
       Manchester on 19 October  2018.  In  a  decision  promulgated  on  23
       October  2018  his  appeal  was  dismissed.  The  judge   found   the
       appellant's  account  at  his  asylum  interview  to  be   reasonably
       consistent and he showed a knowledge of the KDP. The judge  found  an
       inconsistency about the level of contact with his family. In his oral
       evidence he said he only spoke his brother once since arriving in the
       United Kingdom but in his asylum interview said they were in  contact
       once a month. The appellant had  indicated  he  would  like  to  have
       joined the Peshmerga  but  had  a  wife  and  young  son.  The  judge
       questioned why, instead of travelling across Europe and  leaving  his
       family behind, he did not join them.

    6. The appellant had produced the letter said to confirm his involvement
       with the KDP. The judge questioned this, given that he  said  he  had
       been a supporter rather than a member and on his account only  for  a
       short time before the ambush.

    7.  He  also  produced  photographs  said  to  show  him  at   pro   KDP
       demonstrations. The judge felt the photographs were taken in order to
       bolster his claim for protection and questioned why he would  publish
       those pictures on the Internet as he claimed. The judge was shown  an
       extract from the appellant's Facebook account but no  photographs  of
       the appellant at demonstrations were seen. The judge did  not  accept
       it  demonstrated  he  was  wanted  by  the  Iranian  authorities  and
       concluded by rejecting the claim. The judge did  accept  he  probably
       left Iran illegally but did not find this will place him at risk.

The Upper Tribunal

    8. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis  it  was  arguable  the
       judge had not provided sufficient reasons for the decision.

    9. At hearing, Mr Khan relied upon the grounds for which application was
       made.

   10. In response, Mr Tan said the decision had to be viewed in the  round.
       At paragraph 18 the judge  had  commented  on  inconsistencies  about
       contact with his family and questioned the authorities being  at  his
       home as promptly as claimed. At paragraph 19 the judge questioned why
       the appellant, if exposed, did not then  seek  refuge  with  his  KDP
       colleagues. Regarding the letter of support, it was a matter for  the
       judge to decide what weight should be attached.

   11. Regarding his sur place activities and BA (demonstrators in  Britain-
       risk on return) Iran CG [2011] UKUT Mr Tan said that  this  appellant
       had no profile in Iran  or  in  the  United  Kingdom.  Regarding  his
       Facebook activity there was no evidence about how  widely  spread  it
       was. The judge assessed this at paragraph 22. Mr Tan  submitted  that
       the judge correctly applied this case law. The decision of HB (Kurds)
       Iran CG [2018] UKUT 00430 (IAC) was promulgated subsequently.

Consideration

   12. The First-tier judge was the factfinder in relation to  the  evidence
       produced. The judge had the details obtained from  the  appellant  by
       the respondent and his substantive interview. The  interview  was  in
       January 2018, at which time on the appellant's account  he  had  been
       out of Iran over 2 years. At question 4 he said that he  had  contact
       with one of his brothers maybe once a month for  a  few  minutes.  He
       said he had spoken to him a month have earlier. The judge found  this
       was inconsistent with his oral evidence which was to  the  effect  he
       had only spoken to his brother once  since  arriving  in  the  United
       Kingdom in December 2017.

   13. At question 16 of his  interview  he  gave  a  detailed  account.  He
       described how after 10 PM he started  across  the  border  when  they
       encountered the police.  The  following  morning  he  telephoned  his
       mother and she said  the  authorities  had  visited.  They  had  also
       searched his brothers' homes. The 1st Tier judge questioned  how  the
       authorities would have made the connection so quickly but accepted it
       was possible.

   14. The appellant did not claim any political activity in  Iran.  He  was
       sympathetic towards the KDP was not a member. At question 20 he  said
       he had been supporting the party for one month before  the  incident.
       That was when he said he 1st met the Peshmergas. He recounted that by
       chance he knew the brother of one of the men he met  and  they  began
       talking. He said it was  through  this  man  as  a  referee  that  he
       obtained the letter of support. Before that he said he did not have a
       lot  of  information  because  the   authorities   restricted   media
       information. He was able to give a detailed account about the KDP and
       the KDPI.

   15. The judge was provided with a bundle on behalf of the appellant. This
       included Facebook prints.

   16. The judge sets out the assessment of the  evidence  at  paragraph  18
       onwards. The judge deals with a letter of support. The judge referred
       to the appellant stating in oral evidence  that  he  joined  the  KDP
       which was not consistent with his  earlier  account  that  he  was  a
       supporter, not a member. The judge referred to the  evidence  of  his
       attendance at demonstrations.

Conclusions

   17. I agree with Mr Tan that the decision must be looked at in the round.
       The judge was presented with a claim which is not uncommon. I  accept
       that the extent of the reasoning is  limited  but  this  is  dictated
       contextually by the  nature  of  the  claim  made  and  the  evidence
       produced. The respondent did not accept he was wanted by the  Iranian
       authorities. The judge accepted aspects of the claim as possible  but
       also raised various inconsistencies. The judge assessed the  evidence
       at para 17 onwards and the conclusions reached were open. Reasons are
       given which I find adequate in the circumstance. I can find no  error
       of law in the judge's assessment.

   18. BA (demonstrators in Britain- risk on return)  Iran  CG  [2011]  UKUT
       held that the risk depended on  the type of  activity  involved;  the
       risk that a person will  be  identified  ;   the  factors  triggering
       inquiry on return of the person and the factors that  would  lead  to
       identification at the airport on return or after entry.  The  Iranian
       authorities attempt to identify demonstrators outside the Embassy  in
       London by filming demonstrations but there is  insufficient  evidence
       to establish that the regime has  facial  recognition  technology  in
       use. The Iranian security apparatus attempts to match names to  faces
       of demonstrators from.  The  infrequent  demonstrator  who  plays  no
       particular role in demonstrations  and  whose  participation  is  not
       highlighted in the media will not face a real risk of  identification
       and therefore not a real risk of consequent ill-treatment, on return.



   19. The appellant gave evidence of some sur  place  activities.  However,
       those activities were very limited.  Although  the  country  guidance
       decision is not referred to the judge did assess  the  likelihood  of
       the appellant's activities bringing  him  to  adverse  attention.  At
       paragraph 21 the judge refers to the absence  of  evidence  that  the
       Iranian  authorities  systematically  check  on  anyone  who  attends
       demonstrations.  Country  guidance  decision   does   indicate   some
       surveillance but there is nothing to suggest the appellant's  profile
       would place him at risk. Consequently, I do not find a material error
       demonstrated in respect of how the surplus activities where assessed.

   20. HB (Kurds) Iran CG [2018]  UKUT  00430  (IAC)  was  promulgated  post
       decision. It found that those of  Kurdish  ethnicity  are  reasonably
       likely to be subjected to heightened  scrutiny  on  return  to  Iran.
       However, the mere fact of being a returnee of Kurdish ethnicity  with
       or without a valid passport and even if combined with  illegal  exit,
       does  not  create  a  risk  of  persecution.  Kurdish  ethnicity   is
       nevertheless a risk factor which, when combined with  other  factors,
       may create a real risk.  Even  low-level  activity  perceived  to  be
       political, such as, possession of leaflets supporting Kurdish  rights
       involves a risk of persecution but  each  case  depends  on  its  own
       facts. However in the appellant's case the  judge  had  not  accepted
       found the underlying incident. Again, taking into account this latest
       guidance I do not find a material error of law.

Decision

No material error of law has  been  shown  in  the  decision  of  First-tier
Tribunal  judge  Ennals.  Consequently,   that   decision   dismissing   the
appellant's appeal shall stand.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Farrelly

Dated 28th May 2019
