
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/11114/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Birmingham Civil Justice Centre|Decision and Reasons Promulgated  |
|On: 18th February 2019                   |On: 22nd February 2019            |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                                     MOE
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr Barnfield, Counsel instructed by Genesis Law
                       Associates
For the Respondent:    Mrs Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant claims to be a national  of  Syria  born  in  1995.   The
    matter of his identity  is  the  central  issue  in  this  appeal:  the
    Respondent has refused to grant him protection on the grounds that  the
    Respondent believes him in fact to be a national of Egypt.






 2. By its decision of the 4th April 2018 the First-tier Tribunal dismissed
    the Appellant's appeal. In broad summary it accepted  the  Respondent's
    case that the Appellant is an Egyptian masquerading as a Syrian and  so
    falsely claiming an  entitlement  to  international  protection.    Its
    reasons were:

          a) Although the Appellant has produced copy documents  purporting
             to be  Syrian  identity  documents  belonging  to  his  family
             members, these have not been produced in the original;


          b) The Appellant has in any event failed to provide  translations
             of these documents;


          c) The Appellant failed to approach the  Syrian  embassy  in  the
             United Kingdom to obtain verification  of  his  identity  card
             and/or claimed nationality;


          d) A linguistic analysis commissioned by the Respondent indicates
             that the Appellant's language is inconsistent with  his  claim
             to be from a village near Aleppo, but clearly suggests that he
             is in fact Egyptian;


          e) The Appellant's credibility is damaged by his failure to claim
             asylum en route to the United Kingdom in  at  least  two  safe
             European countries.

 3. The Appellant now has permission to appeal against that decision on the
    following grounds:

          i) In respect of reason (a) above the Tribunal has failed to take
             material evidence into account, namely that the family members
             involved are still in Syria and so are unable to provide their
             original documents, which had been photographed  and  sent  to
             the Appellant online;


         ii) In respect of reason (b) above the Tribunal has erred in  fact
             because complete translations were provided  for  all  of  the
             documents concerned;


        iii) In respect of reason (c) above the First-tier Tribunal  failed
             to take material evidence into account. The Tribunal  declined
             to attach any weight to the Appellant's Syrian  identity  card
             because he had not had it verified by the  Syrian  embassy  in
             London. The Tribunal here failed to have regard  to  the  fact
             that there has not been an operational embassy in London since
             2012 and the  Appellant  would  therefore  have  no  means  of
             obtaining Syrian consular assistance;


         iv) In respect of reasons (d) and (e) above the Appellant  accepts
             that these were  matters  that  weighed  against  him  in  the
             balance but submits that the decision overall  is  flawed  for
             the  errors  identified  herein  and  that  the  matter  would
             therefore need to be set aside to be remade.

 4. Before me Mrs Aboni, having listened to the submissions of Mr Barnfield
    accepted that at least grounds  (ii)  and  (iii)  were  made  out.  The
    translations are all in the bundle, reflecting the Appellant's evidence
    that these Arabic documents are the Syrian  identity  cards  of  family
    members including his sister, her  husband  and  their  children.   The
    Judge (and Presenting Officer  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal)  were
    mistaken to think that they were not.   It is also correct to say  that
    there is no operational Syrian embassy in the United Kingdom  and  that
    as such it is not possible for  the  Appellant  to  have  the  original
    document submitted to  the  Home  Office  as  long  ago  as  July  2017
    authenticated. Mrs Aboni accepted that these grounds do go to the heart
    of the decision. Whilst the Respondent maintains  that  the  linguistic
    analysis is a weighty item of evidence, he accepts that  the  documents
    supplied, purportedly issued by the Syrian authorities, must be weighed
    in the balance before a lawful decision can be reached. For that reason
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal must be set aside.


 5. It was not possible for me to proceed to remake  the  decision  in  the
    appeal today as there was no Arabic interpreter available and in  light
    of the credibility issues raised, Mr Barnfield wished to call  his  lay
    client.   The  parties  were  further  in  agreement  that   the   most
    appropriate forum for the remaking would be  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
    given the extent of fact finding required. I agree  and  so  remit  the
    matter to the First-tier Tribunal.



      Decisions

 6. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contains  material  errors
    of law and it is set aside.


 7. The decision in the appeal is to be remade in the First-tier Tribunal


 8. Having regard to the fact that this is a protection claim I am prepared
    to make the following direction for anonymity, pursuant to Rule  14  of
    the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 and the Presidential
    Guidance Note No 1 of 2013: Anonymity Orders.


        "Unless and until  a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
        Appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
        shall directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his
        family.  This direction applies both to the Appellant  and  to  the
        Respondent.  Failure to comply with this direction  could  lead  to
        contempt of court proceedings".










                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce



                                       Dated 18th February 2019
