

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/11911/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 9 May 2017                         |On 10 May 2017                       |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAFFER

                                   Between

                                    [W S]
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Capel of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Miss Holmes a Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

    1. The Respondent refused the Appellant's  application  for  asylum  or
       ancillary protection on 13 October 2016. His appeal against this was
       dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Gibbs ("the Judge") following
       a hearing on 30 November 2016.

The grant of permission


   2. Upper Tribunal Judge Blum granted permission to appeal (30 March 2017)
      on the basis that it is arguable that the Judge  materially  erred  in
      failing to properly contextualise  the  Appellant's  account  or  take
      account of  relevant  considerations  given  the  background  evidence
      relating to blood feuds and the Appellant's assertion that his  father
      remained in hiding. Permission was  granted  in  respect  of  all  the
      grounds.


Discussion

    3. It was submitted in the rule 24 notice  (13  April  2017)  that  the
       Judge directed herself appropriately. The findings must be  seen  in
       the context of the Appellant's admitted deception  in  applying  for
       asylum as a Syrian, a position he maintained  until  shortly  before
       the hearing when he admitted to being Egyptian. It was difficult  to
       criticise the Judge with respect to the finding of his father having
       left the mother behind when the grounds accept  that  female  family
       members have been targeted in  the  past  in  blood  feuds  and  the
       Appellant's case was that his mother had been murdered.


   4. Miss Holmes however accepted that, despite the  Appellant's  mendacity
      in relation to his original assertion he was Syrian, the Judge did not
      identify where in Egypt his village was and whether that falls  within
      the areas referred to in the background evidence  as  to  where  blood
      feuds existed namely the Southern part of Egypt which is also referred
      to as Upper Egypt. This was a gap in the determination and should have
      been considered. In those circumstances, she accepted that  the  Judge
      could not properly consider the risk on return  without  having  found
      where he was returning to and whether in that part of Egypt there were
      indeed blood feuds. That  went  to  credibility  and  accordingly  the
      matter should be remitted for a de novo hearing.

    5. Ms Capel agreed.

    6. Given the concession made by the Respondent, and  having  considered
       it myself, I am satisfied that a material error of law occurred  and
       that it is appropriate to remit the matter de novo as the error goes
       beyond  those  contained  within  the  Presidential   Guidance   for
       retention in the Upper Tribunal.

Decision:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

      I set aside the decision.

    I remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal for a  de  novo  hearing,
    not before Judge Gibbs.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saffer
9 May 2017
