
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11516/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford IAC by a remote hearing |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 18 August 2021                         |On 04 October 2021               |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

                                    D A R
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Holmes, Counsel instructed on behalf of the
appellant.
For the Respondent:    Ms H. Aboni, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


    Introduction:
    Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
    Anonymity was granted at an earlier stage of  the  proceedings  because
    the case involves protection issues. I find that it is  appropriate  to
    continue the order. Unless  and  until  a  tribunal  or  court  directs
    otherwise, the appellant is  granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these
    proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify him.  This  direction
    applies both to the appellant and to the respondent. Failure to  comply
    with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal (DI  Judge  McClure)  (hereinafter  referred  to  as  the
    "FtTJ") who dismissed his appeal in a decision promulgated  on  the  11
    May 2020.

 2. Permission to appeal that decision  was  sought  and  on  8  July  2020
    permission was granted by DIJ Shaerf.

 3. In the light  of  the  COVID-19  pandemic  the  Upper  Tribunal  issued
    directions that the error of law issue could be  determined  without  a
    face-to-face hearing and the hearing was  to  be  listed  as  a  remote
    hearing. Both parties indicated that they were content for the  hearing
    to proceed by this method. Therefore, the Tribunal listed  the  hearing
    to enable oral submissions to be given by each of the parties.

 4. The hearing took place on 18 August 2021, by means of  Microsoft  teams
    which has been consented to and not objected to by the parties. A face-
    to-face hearing was not held because it was not practicable,  and  both
    parties agreed that all issues could be determined in a remote hearing.



 5. I was present at Bradford  IAC  and  conducted  the  hearing  from  the
    tribunal centre. The advocates attended remotely via video. There  were
    no issues regarding sound, and no substantial technical  problems  were
    encountered during the hearing, and I am satisfied both advocates  were
    able to make their respective cases by the chosen means.  I am grateful
    for the clear and careful submissions made by the advocates.

The background:

 6. The background to the appeal is set out in the decision letter and  the
    decision of the FtTJ at paragraphs 16-32. The appellant is  a  national
    of Iraq of Kurdish ethnicity.

 7. The appellant is from a village in what  is  now  considered  a  former
    contested area. The appellant left Iraq in 2008 and travelled to Norway
    where he claimed asylum. However the appellant returned to Iraq in 2008
    without receiving a decision on his claim.  The  appellant  claimed  to
    have left Iraq again in November or December 2014 having entered the UK
    on 4 January 2018 and claimed asylum on the same day.

 8. The appellant claimed that his problems began in 2014 and that ISIS had
    been to  his  village  and  where  raiding,  killing  and  robbing  its
    inhabitants during which time his father was taken by ISIS  and  during
    the incident he was hit on the head and knocked unconscious.  ISIS  had
    been attacking the village although not  specifically  the  appellant's
    family. The appellant claimed  to  have  spent  15  days  in  hospital.
    Initially the appellant stated that he  left  his  village  and  on  to
    Turkey where he was for 2 months. However when  pointed  out  that  the
    appellant claimed the attack been in July 2014 and had spent 15 days in
    hospital,  he claimed he left Iraq in November  -  December  2014,  the
    appellant then claimed that he did not travel immediately but stayed at
    a friend's home until he was well  in Kurdistan.

 9. In a decision letter dated 8 November 2019 the respondent  refused  his
    claim. There is no dispute that the appellant was an Iraqi  citizen  of
    Kurdish ethnicity however for the reasons set out at paragraphs 21 - 25
    the respondent reached the conclusion that he had not given a  credible
    account concerning any problems in Iraq  with  ISIS  or  the  PMF.  The
    decision letter undertook an assessment of return taking  into  account
    the CG decisions that were current at the date of the  decision  letter
    (AA (Article 15(c) Iraq CG [2017]  UKUT  0544  and  AAH  (Iraqi  Kurds-
    internal relocation) Iraq CG UKUT 00212. The  respondent  further  took
    into account that the appellant claimed to have a CSID document in  his
    home in Iraq and that having the document would enable him  to  replace
    his passport in the UK before travelling. The respondent concluded that
    in light of all the information provided and the points raised  in  the
    decision letter it was considered that he could feasibly return back to
    Iraq.

Decision of the FtTJ:

10. The appeal came before the FtT on 16 January 2020.  The  FtTJ  set  out
    the  basis  of  the  appellant's  claim  that  he  faced  the  risk  of
    persecution or serious harm in Iraq based on imputed political  opinion
    as a result of being against ISIS, his  ethnicity  as  a  Kurd  or  his
    religious identity as a Sunni Muslim. However  the  FtTJ  rejected  his
    claim to have faced any threat  from  ISIS  or  the  militias  for  the
    reasons that he gave at paragraphs [38]-[43]. The FtTJ found  that  the
    appellant was not targeted for any reason and  also  that  neither  the
    appellant nor any member's family had been targeted but that they  were
    caught up in the civil war at that time (at [42]). The judge found that
    the appellant was not being pursued personally for any reasons and that
    in any event the conditions which gave rise to any  general  fear  from
    ISI S no longer  existed  (applying  the  country  guidance  case).  He
    further found that the circumstances were not such that  the  appellant
    for any reason would be personally at risk. The  judge  also  found  at
    [43] that the appellant had  also  internally  relocated  by  going  to
    Kurdistan and there was no reason to find that  that  resulted  in  any
    unreasonably harsh consequences for the appellant.

11. The judge concluded that the appellant could return safely to his  home
    area where he would not be at risk of any form of harm or mistreatment.
    As to the form of documentation that he  would  require  to  return  to
    Iraq, the judge referred to  the  CG  decision  of  SMO  and  that  the
    appellant required a CSID card. He further noted at [45] that a further
    issue to be decided in accordance with the  CG  case  was  whether  the
    appellant would be able to provide that information from  the  registry
    or would be able to obtain his CSID card or other documentation.

12. The FtTJ noted that when in Europe previously he managed to  return  to
    Iraq without any problem and in order to do so he would  have  required
    some form of travel document to enable him to  enter  Iraq.  The  judge
    also noted that the appellant appeared to have entered Iraq without any
    difficulty. At [47] the  FtTJ referred to  the  appellant's  CSID  card
    being left with his mother at home in Iraq and that there was no reason
    why the appellant could not contact his family members, which  included
    a male  family  member  in  the  form  of  his  uncle,  to  obtain  his
    documentation or the necessary information to enable him to  return  to
    Iraq.

13. In conclusion the judge found that  the  appellant  would  be  able  to
    contact family members and  would  be  able  to  obtain  the  necessary
    documentation to enable him to return to Iraq. The judge found that the
    appellant would not be at risk in his home area and  also  that  having
    relocated in the past he was not at any risk of any mistreatment at the
    time that he left Iraq. He therefore dismissed the appeal.

14. The appellant sought permission to appeal that decision and  permission
    was granted by DIJ Shaerf on 8 June 2021 for the following reasons:

         "It is arguable that the judge erred in  law  in  not  specifically
         applying the guidance in SMO,  KSP  and  IM  (Article  15  (  c  );
         identity  documents)  Iraq  CG  [2019]  UKUT  00400  (IAC)  to  the
         particular circumstances of the appellant, notwithstanding  he  had
         given sustainable reasons for his far-reaching adverse  credibility
         findings. Permission to appeal is granted and both grounds  may  be
         argued."

The Hearing before the Upper Tribunal:

15. By way of background to the appeal, the decision of Judge  McClure  was
    promulgated on 11 May 2020 (having heard the appeal in  January  2020).
    The grounds issued challenging the  decision  were  made  in  time  and
    submitted on 18 May 2020. Following the grant  of  permission  in  June
    2020, the appeal came before the Upper Tribunal  on  7  September  2020
    before a UTJ. Having heard the parties at a  remote  hearing,  the  UTJ
    dismissed  the  appeal  for  the  reasons  given.  There  followed   an
    application to set aside that decision under Rule 43  of  the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 made on 29 September 2020 on  the
    basis that the judge had failed to have regard to the position  of  the
    respondent expressed in the latest CPIN published in June 2020. The UTJ
    made reference to the direction that she earlier sent  to  the  parties
    and observed that as no response had been received from the respondent.
    It was taken that the application to set aside was unopposed  and  thus
    the judge set aside the decision to be relisted before another  UTJ  to
    determine whether the decision of Judge McClure should be set aside for
    error of law. That decision was dated 8 December 2020.

16. However on  9  December  2020  the  UTJ  received  an  email  from  the
    respondent indicating that there had been previous submissions made and
    that due to an administrative error they had not been recorded  by  the
    Upper Tribunal's administration. As  a  result  the  UTJ  withdrew  the
    decision of 8 December 2020 and reconsidered the matter in the light of
    those submissions. Thus in a decision dated 7 February 2021  the  judge
    reached the decision that it was in the interests  of  justice  to  set
    aside her earlier decision of 10 September 2020.

17. I set out that procedural history to  demonstrate  that  it  is  common
    ground between the parties that the decision that I have to make is  to
    determine whether the original grounds of  challenge  demonstrate  that
    the decision of Judge McClure involved the making  of  an  error  on  a
    point of law such that it should be set aside.

18. There is no dispute  that  the  CG  decision  that  Judge  McClure  was
    required to take into account was that of SMO and I have not been asked
    to take into account information that was not  available  to  the  FtTJ
    such as the June 2020 CPIN, which was not before the  FtTJ  in  January
    2020 when he heard the appeal nor in May 2020 when he  promulgated  his
    decision. Neither was that CPIN available on the date  the  grounds  of
    challenge were filed.

19. I therefore turn to the grounds  of  challenge  that  are  advanced  on
    behalf of the appellant.

20. Mr Holmes, Counsel instructed on behalf  of  the  appellant,  made  the
    following oral submissions. They can be summarised as follows.

21. He began his submissions by reference to ground 2  which  he  submitted
    challenged the significance of the appellant having previously returned
    to Iraq in 2008 and by reference to the decision of the FtTJ  at  [46].
    The FtTJ stated that because the appellant had  previously  facilitated
    his return to Iraq in 2008 it followed that he had documents from  that
    time or as stated at  [48]  because  he  had  previously  returned  the
    appellant would know the relevant evidence  to  facilitate  his  return
    now. Mr Holmes submitted that he understood the judge to mean that  the
    appellant would know the family book from his own records.

22. Thus he submitted that the appellant's case was that any reference made
    to his return to Iraq in  2008  was  an  irrelevant  consideration  and
    secondly that the judge  conflated  the  issue  with  return  with  the
    question of obtaining a CSID.

23. He submitted that on the face of it the lapse of time since his  return
    in  2008  and  the  appeal  in  2020  was  that  events  had  moved  on
    significantly from the  late  2000's  as  evidenced  by  the  different
    country guidance decisions. There had been a civil war  between  the  2
    periods of time and there were issues concerning  documentary  evidence
    which had become more prominent.

24. He submitted that an example of how the judge had taken  considerations
    beyond their limits were set out at paragraph [48] and it was difficult
    to see without more detailed consideration of the  point  what  it  was
    about his return in 2008 to assist him now in replacing his CSID. If he
    returned on a Laissez Passer in 2008 that would not answer the question
    of re- documentation now. If  he  had  an  original  passport,  it  was
    difficult to see how that helped the judge to reach his conclusion  and
    illustrates his conflation of the issues. It was a separate question of
    whether the appellant could be documented.

25. Dealing with ground 1 he submitted that  it  was  a  challenge  to  the
    FtTJ's conclusion that the appellant could redocument whilst in the  UK
    prior to return. This relied upon matters of recall of relevant details
    of the family book and also the "medical angle" that the appellant  had
    a medical condition which might impact on the recall of such details as
    set out in the doctor's letter which the judge did acknowledge. However
    what was missing was how that affected his ability to  recall  relevant
    details. SMO at paragraph 392 dealt with this.

26. As to the 2nd point, present  in  the  headnote  at  paragraph  13  was
    whether an  individual  could  be  documented  in  the  UK.  Mr  Holmes
    submitted that there was a two-stage approach, and that SMO did not say
    that merely knowing the details of the family book would be sufficient.
    Merely  knowing  that  reference  would  not  be  enough  to  establish
    identity. Mr Holmes referred to the conclusions of paragraph 383 of SMO
    which endorsed paragraph 26 of AAH  where  the  tribunal  set  out  the
    documents required. The appellant does not possess a passport.

27. As to redocumentation by proxy Mr Holmes submitted that  the  judge  at
    paragraph [47] suggested that the appellant's  uncle  or  other  family
    members could obtain documents on his behalf from Iraq. The judge  does
    not tackle the question as to whether the individual's  home  area  has
    adopted the INID and if so a proxy would not be available.

28. This was set out in SMO at paragraph 389 and that the  evidence  of  Dr
    Fatah (about the practice in  the  IKR),  that  an  individual  who  is
    registered in a city in which the INID process has been rolled out will
    be unlikely to secure a replacement CSID there. When  tribunal  stated,
    "the logic which underpins Dr Fatah's evidence is irrefutable  and  was
    implicitly  accepted  by  the  respondent  at  [151]  of  her   closing
    submissions, which spoke only of the CSID still being issued  in  rural
    areas". He submitted that at  paragraph  431  the  UT  considered  that
    Kirkuk was one of the areas which had an INID,  but  this  was  not  as
    result of direct evidence but an inference. He submitted that the judge
    concluded that the appellant could use a proxy however looking  at  SMO
    that the tribunal made an inference as  to  where  the  INID  had  been
    rolled out and Mr  Holmes  invited  the  tribunal  to  adopt  the  same
    approach.

29. Ms Aboni  on behalf of the respondent submitted that if there were  any
    errors of law as to re-documenting himself in the UK or by proxy,  they
    were not material because the FtTJ found as a fact that  the  appellant
    previously had a CSID in Iraq which he had left there. Furthermore, the
    judge found that he was in contact with his family and therefore it was
    open to the FtTJ to reach the conclusion that by contacting his  family
    he could obtain the CSID himself.  There  was  no  challenge  to  those
    factual findings in the grounds and no  evidence  that  the  family  no
    longer had the document and if the CSID was with the family members  he
    would be able to obtain them, and this would be adequate  documentation
    to return to Iraq.

30. By way of reply to Mr Holmes submitted that it was not  an  issue  that
    the appellant was without documentation in the UK, and it was incumbent
    on the judge to consider the situation as it was and that he was not in
    possession of a CSID.

31. Both parties submitted that if the decision of the  FtTJ  disclose  the
    making of an error of law, any remaking should await the formulation of
    further country guidance.

32. At the conclusion of the hearing I reserved my  decision  which  I  now
    give.





Decision on error of law:

33. I shall start by considering ground  2.  This  challenges  the  factual
    finding made by the FtTJ at paragraph [46] where  he  stated  that  the
    appellant had previously returned to Iraq without any problem  in  2008
    and that "in order to do so would have required  some  form  of  travel
    documents to enable him to enter Iraq. The appellant  appears  to  have
    entered Iraq without any difficulty."

34. When considering the challenge in the grounds and on the basis  of  the
    submissions made, it is important  to  consider  the  context  of  that
    finding. Firstly, there is no dispute on the facts (nor have they  been
    challenged) that the appellant's immigration history was  that  he  had
    previously left Iraq and claimed asylum in Norway, he  had  not  waited
    for a decision on that claim but had  returned  to  Iraq  "without  any
    problem" (at [23]). Therefore the factual assessment made by  the  FtTJ
    as the appellant's immigration history was  entirely  correct  and  the
    judge was entitled to find that the appellant had been able to re-enter
    on whatever travel documents he had in 2008 without any difficulty.

35. That finding at paragraph [46] is then followed by further findings  at
    [47]-[49]. At [47] the FtTJ found that the documentation the  appellant
    had was his CSID which was with his mother in Iraq where  he  left  it.
    This is not challenged in the grounds. The judge further found that the
    appellant had a male relative (his uncle) in the  same  area  and  that
    there was no reason why the appellant  could  not  contact  his  family
    members to obtain the document or the  necessary  information  (in  the
    alternative) to enable him to return to Iraq (at  [47]).  At  [48]  the
    judge found that the appellant would be able to contact family  members
    and thus would be able to obtain the necessary documentation to  enable
    him to return to Iraq. Whilst the judge also made a reference  at  [49]
    that he would know the necessary details having returned in  the  past,
    the  judge  had  also  made  sustainable  findings  relating   to   the
    documentation the appellant had access to and information that  he  had
    access to from family members.

36. As can be seen from the above references paragraph [46] should be  read
    alongside the other paragraphs which, whilst brief, set out the  FtTJ's
    reasoning as to how the appellant could return to Iraq either with  his
    own CSID document or to be re-documented to enable  him  to  return  to
    Iraq.

37. Whilst I would accept the submission made by Mr Holmes that there was a
    lapse of time between 2008 and the date of the hearing before the  FtTJ
    in 2020, and that what might have been the position  in  2008  may  not
    necessarily be the position some years later  given  the  changes  that
    have happened in Iraq, it does not mean that the FtTJ was in  error  in
    the latter part of his assessment where he clearly found as a fact that
    the appellant had the relevant document,  a  CSID  or  that  they  were
    family members with whom he could reasonably be in touch with who could
    obtain the document for him to enable his return.

38. Contrary  to  the  submission  made,  paragraph  [46]  when  read  with
    paragraphs [47 - 49] do not show  any  conflation  of  the  issues  and
    plainly deal with how  the  appellant  could  obtain  documentation  to
    enable his return to Iraq. On the factual findings  made  by  the  FtTJ
    which are not challenged on the grounds, it was open to  the  judge  to
    find that family members could assist him in  providing  the  CSID  for
    him. He would therefore not need to obtain a replacement  CSID  as  his
    own CSID, which the judge found was available,  could  be  provided  to
    him.

39. This leads onto ground 1. Mr Holmes  submitted  that  ground  1  was  a
    challenge to the FtTJ's conclusion that  the  appellant  could  be  re-
    documented whilst in the UK prior to return and relied upon matters  of
    recall of the family book. The submission made was that whilst the FtTJ
    referred to the appellant having  epilepsy  what  was  missing  in  his
    consideration was how that affected his recall and thus any information
    that could be provided by way of the family book.

40. Dealing with this issue, the FtTJ was plainly aware that the  appellant
    suffered from epilepsy (at paragraph [31]) and referred to the  medical
    note confirming this. Whilst the FtTJ recorded the appellant's evidence
    at [20]-[21] that he had been hit on the back of the head and  that  he
    could not remember much because of his health and  that  he  was  still
    being tested, the medical note  exhibited  in  the  appellant's  bundle
    (page 3 ) did not provide any evidence in support as to how his medical
    condition had been  caused  nor  did  it  set  out  how  his  condition
    affected him. There was nothing said that his  condition  affected  his
    recall or memory. Consequently it has not been demonstrated that  there
    was any evidence to support such a submission.

41. The second point made by Mr Holmes is that by reference to SMO there is
    a two-stage approach and that merely  knowing  any  references  to  the
    family book would be insufficient. In his submissions  he  referred  to
    the Tribunal in SMO adopting the  previous  findings  made  in  AAH  at
    paragraph 26 as to re-documentation in the UK. SMO , read together with
    AAH (Iraqi Kurds - internal relocation) Iraq CG UKUT 212 (IAC)  and  AA
    (Article  15(c))  Iraq  CG  [2015]  UKUT   544   (IAC)   explains   the
    circumstances in which an Iraqi national present in  the  UK  would  be
    able to obtain a replacement CSID in the UK.

42. Paragraph 11 of the headnote to SMO states:

         Notwithstanding the phased transition  to  the  INID  within  Iraq,
         replacement  CSIDs  remain   available   through   Iraqi   Consular
         facilities.  Whether  an  individual  will  be  able  to  obtain  a
         replacement  CSID  whilst  in  the  UK  depends  on  the  documents
         available and, critically, the availability of the volume and  page
         reference of the entry in the Family Book  in  Iraq,  which  system
         continues to underpin the Civil Status Identity process. Given  the
         importance of that information, most Iraqi citizens will recall it.
         That information may also be obtained from family members, although
         it is necessary to consider  whether  such  relatives  are  on  the
         father's or the mother's side because the  registration  system  is
         patrilineal.

43. Paragraph 383 of SMO states:

         We have not been asked to revisit the extant  country  guidance  on
         the way in which an individual might obtain a replacement CSID from
         within the UK, for which see [173]-[177] of AA (Iraq) and  [26]  of
         AAH (Iraq). We add only this: whilst the INID is clearly  replacing
         the CSID in Iraq, consulates do not have the  electronic  terminals
         necessary to issue the INID and continue to issue the CSID instead,
         as confirmed in a Canadian Immigration  and  Refugee  Board  report
         which is quoted at 5.6.9 of the respondent's CPIN entitled Internal
         Relocation, civil documentation and returns, dated  February  2019.
         An Iraqi national in the UK would be able to apply for  a  CSID  in
         the way explained  in  AA  (Iraq)  and,  if  one  was  successfully
         obtained, we find that it  would  be  acceptable  evidence  of  the
         individual's identity throughout Iraq.

44. Paragraphs 173 - 177 of AA refers to obtaining a CSID whilst in the UK.

         173. As regards those who have an expired or current Iraqi passport
         but no CSID - Dr Fatah identifies in his first report that  a  CSID
         may be obtained through the "Consular section of the Iraqi  Embassy
         in London", which will send a request for a replacement or  renewed
         CSID to the  General  Directorate  for  Travel  and  Nationality  -
         Directorate of Civil Status. A request for a replacement CSID  must
         be accompanied, inter alia, by "any form of  official  document  in
         support of the applicant's identity" and the application form  must
         be signed by "the head of the family,  or  the  legal  guardian  or
         representative to verify the truth of its contents." He also  added
         that an applicant must also authorise a person in Iraq  to  act  as
         his representative in order for that person to "follow  up  on  the
         progress of the application.

         174.  However,  Dr  Fatah  continued  by  explaining  that  if   an
         individual has lost his CSID and does not know  the  relevant  page
         and book number for it, then the Iraq Embassy in London will not be
         able to obtain one on his behalf. Instead, he or she will  have  to
         attend the appropriate local office of family registration in  Iraq
         or give a relative, friend or lawyer power of  attorney  to  obtain
         his or her CSID. The process of a giving power  of  attorney  to  a
         lawyer in Iraq to act "as a proxy" is commonplace and Dr Fatah  had
         done this himself. He also explained that  the  power  of  attorney
         could be obtained through the Iraq Embassy.

         175. Dr Fatah gave further evidence to the  effect  that  having  a
         marriage certificate may be useful as it would contain  data  found
         in the family records. It  is,  however,  not  possible  to  use  a
         "health card" in order to obtain a CSID because there is no primary
         health care or GP system in Iraq,  but  instead  patients  attended
         hospital when they needed to do so,  and  no  central  records  are
         held.

         176. There is a consensus  between  Dr  Fatah's  evidence  and  the
         following more general evidence provided  by  UNHCR-Iraq  in  April
         2015 on the issue of obtaining CSID's from abroad.

             "In principle, a failed asylum seeker,  or  indeed  any  Iraqi
             citizen abroad, can  acquire  Iraqi  documents  through  Iraqi
             embassies and consulates. There  is  a  special  authorization
             granted to these bodies to provide documents for Iraqi  abroad
             on the  condition  that  the  beneficiaries  should  have  any
             available documents in order to prove their nationality."

         177. In summary, we conclude that  it  is  possible  for  an  Iraqi
         national living in the UK to obtain a  CSID  through  the  consular
         section of the Iraqi Embassy in London, if such a person is able to
         produce a current or expired passport  and/or  the  book  and  page
         number for their family registration details. For  persons  without
         such a passport, or who are unable to produce the  relevant  family
         registration details, a  power  of  attorney  can  be  provided  to
         someone in  Iraq  who  can  thereafter  undertake  the  process  of
         obtaining the CSID for such person from the  Civil  Status  Affairs
         Office in their home governorate. For  reasons  identified  in  the
         section that follows below, at the  present  time  the  process  of
         obtaining a CSID from Iraq is likely to be severely hampered if the
         person wishing to obtain the CSID is from  an  area  where  Article
         15(c) serious harm is occurring.

45. Paragraph 26 of AAH states:

         If  applying  through  a  consulate  abroad  the  requirements  are
         different. Having contacted the consulate in London, and checked on
         the website of the Iraqi embassy in Sweden, Dr  Fatah  states  that
         the  authorities  will  require  the  applicant  to  first  make  a
         statement explaining why he needs a CSID and  attach  this  to  his
         application form, which must  countersigned  by  the  head  of  the
         applicant's family and stamped by the consulate or embassy; he must
         then produce his Iraqi passport and proof of status in the  country
         where he is applying, the name of a representative (proxy) in Iraq,
         an additional form completed by the head of the applicant's  family
         verifying that the contents of his application form were true, four
         colour copies of his INC, and 10 colour photographs. Crucially  the
         applicant must be able to produce something which can establish the
         location of his family's details in the civil register. This should
         be a CSID, an INC or  birth  certificate.  If  none  of  these  are
         available to the applicant he must supply the identity documents of
         his parents. This evidence again  accords  with  that  of  Landinfo
         (December 2017) who conclude that it can  be  difficult  to  obtain
         replacement ID documents from an embassy abroad for the  individual
         who is unable to verify his or her identity.

46. In his decision the judge referred to SMO and at  paragraphs  [47]  and
    [48]  the judge stated that the  appellant  would  be  able  to  either
    "obtain the necessary documentation for his family" or at [47] that  he
    could  contact  his  family  members   to  obtain   the   "   necessary
    information" from his family in Iraq. Although the judge's reasoning is
     brief, it is plain from the reference to "relevant information" and  "
    documentation" that the judge had in mind the volume and page reference
    of the entry in the Family Book in Iraq or from the documents that were
    available at home but also in the alternative that the appellant  could
    obtain his own CSID from his  family  relatives.  The  2nd  alternative
    would not require any knowledge of the family book.

47. The last point advanced  on  behalf  of  the  appellant  is  that  when
    considering the issue of redocumentation the FtTJ's  finding  that  the
    appellant's uncle and or other family members could obtain documents on
    his behalf failed to tackle the question of whether his home  area  had
    adopted the INID.

48. In this context Mr Holmes submits that where the INID's had been rolled
    out the appellant would be unlikely to secure a replacement CSID there.
    During his submissions he referred  me  to  SMO  at  paragraph  431  in
    support of his submission that the UT  considered  Kirkuk  as  an  area
    which had an INID, and it was not the result  of  any  direct  evidence
    that by  way  of  an  inference  and  that  I  should  adopt  the  same
    inferential approach.

49. I am satisfied that there is no error in the FtTJ's approach in the way
    submitted on behalf of the appellant. There is no dispute that  for  an
    INID  there  is  a  requirement  for  enrolment  of  biodata  including
    fingerprints and iris scans and must  be  applied  for  in  person  (at
    paragraph 388 of SMO). However at paragraph 389 the UT  found  that  in
    respect of the CSID they were satisfied that it was still being  issued
    in parts of Iraq. The tribunal stated that they did not have a list  of
    the CSA offices which did or did not have an INID terminal.  Whilst  Mr
    Holmes relies upon paragraph 431 of SMO and as recited in  the  written
    grounds, that paragraph related to the assessment made  by  the  UT  by
    reference to the particular circumstances of the  appellant  (SMO)  and
    fails to take account of the earlier  paragraph  at  430  that  in  his
    particular circumstances and that in the event that his CSID is at home
    in Kirkuk, it could be sent to him in the UK or taken to him on arrival
    in Iraq. That was in essence the factual finding clearly  made  by  the
    FtTJ in the present appeal.

50. Paragraph 431 then refers to the prospects of obtaining  a  replacement
    CSID and that in the tribunal's mind it was likely that the CSA  office
    in Kirkuk had an INID and would not issue a CSID by proxy, but they did
    not resolve the case  as  they  reached  the  conclusion  that  further
    factual findings were necessary.

51. There was no evidence advanced before the FtTJ that in the  appellant's
    home area there was an INID terminal. Notwithstanding  the  submissions
    made by Mr Holmes that it should be inferred that there might  be,  the
    UT expressly stated in its analysis of  the  issues  at  paragraph  389
    (rather than paragraph 431 which refer to the particular  circumstances
    in that appellant's case) that that whilst they did not have a list  of
    CSA offices which had an IND terminal, " it will consequently be for an
    individual appellant who does not have a CSID or INID to  establish  on
    the lower standard that they cannot obtain a CSID by the use of a proxy
    whether from the UK or on arrival in Baghdad."

52. On the factual findings made by the FtTJ  the  judge  was  entitled  to
    reach the conclusion that the appellant  had  not  established  to  the
    lower standard that he could not obtain a CSID. In his  case  the  FtTJ
    identified 2 particular ways that he could do so; firstly by  obtaining
    the assistance of family members in providing the relevant  information
    but secondly that the appellant still  had  his  CSID  which  could  be
    accessed by sending it  to  him  in  the  UK.  Therefore  even  if  the
    appellant could not recall the family book details, he would  not  need
    to because he had the relevant information in his CSID card.

53. Consequently as the  factual  findings  which  underpinned  the  FtTJ's
    assessment are not challenged, I am satisfied on  the  evidence  before
    the judge at the hearing in January 2020 and at the time he promulgated
    his decision in May 2020 that the  country  guidance  set  out  in  AAH
    (paragraph 26) which was adopted by the UT in SMO  that  it  was  still
    possible to obtain a CSID by contacting male family members in Iraq  to
    send the documents required as well as providing  the  family  book  or
    page number details. In  the  alternative  as  stated  in  SMO  if  the
    appellant had access to a CSID which could be sent to him,  that  would
    mean that he would not be subject to Article 3 ill-treatment or serious
    harm (Article 15 (b) ) on return to Iraq.

54. The obligation on a tribunal judge is to  give  reasons  in  sufficient
    detail to show the principles upon which the tribunal has acted and the
    reasons that have led to the decision.   Appellate  courts  should  not
    rush to find a misdirection simply because they might  have  reached  a
    different conclusion on the facts or  express  themselves  differently,
    and in my judgement and  on  a  careful  reading,  the  FtTJ  did  give
    adequate reasons for his decision and did so in a way  consistent  with
    the CG decision of SMO.

55. Consequently it has not been demonstrated that  the  decision  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law and the appeal  is  dismissed.
    The decision of the FtTJ shall stand.



Decision:

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of  an
error on a point of law and the decision of the FtT shall stand.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him. This direction applies both to  the  Appellant  and
to the Respondent.  Failure to comply with  this  direction  could  lead  to
contempt of court proceedings.



Signed
                                Date:     19 / 8/ 2021
Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds

