
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11904/2019 (v)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard by way of a remote hearing     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On the 14 May 2021                   |On the 28 May 2021                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

                                     G F
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     AND

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr F. Magennis, Counsel instructed on behalf of the
appellant.
For the Respondent:    Ms R. Pettersen, Senior Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction:

      1.  The  appellant  who  is  a  national  of  Ethiopia,  appeals  with
         permission  against  the  decision  of  the   First-tier   Tribunal
         (hereinafter  referred  to  as  the  "FtTJ")  who   dismissed   his
         protection and human rights appeal in a decision promulgated on the
         2 October 2020.

      2. I make a  direction  regarding  anonymity  under  Rule  14  of  the
         Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal  Rules)  Rules  2008  as  the
         proceedings relate to the  circumstances  of  a  protection  claim.
         Unless  and  until  a  Tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise  the
         appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
         shall directly or indirectly identify him. This  direction  applies
         both to the appellant and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
         with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

      3. The hearing took place on 14 May 2021, by way of a  remote  hearing
         which has been consented to and not objected to by the  parties.  A
         face-to-face hearing was not held because it was  not  practicable,
         and both parties agreed that all issues could be  determined  in  a
         remote hearing.  The advocates attended remotely via video. It  was
         not possible to use the skype for  business  mode  of  hearing  and
         after a delay we were able to reconvene the hearing using Microsoft
         Teams. There were no  issues  regarding  sound,  and  no  technical
         problems were encountered during the hearing  and  I  am  satisfied
         both advocates were able to make  their  respective  cases  by  the
         chosen means.

Background:

      4. The history of the appellant is set out  in  the  decision  of  the
         FtTJ, the decision letter and the evidence contained in the bundle,
         including the witness statements.

      5. The appellant is a national of Ethiopia and of Oromo ethnicity  and
         originates from the Wollega region. He entered the  United  Kingdom
         clandestinely on 21 August 2017 and claimed asylum on the same day,
         on the basis  that  he  feared  persecution  as  a  result  of  his
         political opinion.

      6. The factual basis of his claim is that he supported  the  political
         party called OLF and first started actively supporting the party in
         2013 by donating money because of the detention of his parents  and
         he was concerned about the problem of the Oromo people.

      7. His family had suffered as a result of their  ethnicity  and  their
         support and membership of the OLF. His grandfather  was  killed  by
         the  government  in  1992  when  the  OLF  was  expelled  from  the
         government and prominent supporters were  hunted  by  the  security
         forces. He was arrested and killed in  detention.  The  appellant's
         father supported the OLF financially  and  both  his  parents  were
         arrested in 2010 and were detained.

      8. The appellant undertook activities  on  behalf  of  the  OLF  which
         included handing out leaflets and  attending  demonstrations.   The
         appellant joined and OLF cell along with his cousin and at  monthly
         meetings would discuss Oromo history, current events  and  provided
         financial amounts.

      9. The appellant claimed that he was detained on  30  August  until  3
         November 2014. He had been arrested by  the  security  forces  when
         they came to his home and taken to the police station. He was  held
         there with many other detainees in very  poor  conditions.  He  was
         interrogated by the officers and he was punched and slapped and ill-
         treated whilst in detention.

     10. On 3 November 2014 he was released after receiving a  warning  that
         if he were to be involved in OLF again the measures  will  be  more
         severe. He was made to sign a document that they did not allow  him
         to read.

     11. In December 2014 the security forces came and ransacked  his  house
         not long after his release. At  the  time  there  was  a  state  of
         emergency,  so  movement  was  very  restricted.  He  continued  to
         contribute money to the OLF.

     12. In 2015 the government resumed the "master plan" and the  appellant
         continued in his  activities  for  the  OLF  and  participating  in
         demonstrations.

     13. In June 2015 he was shopping and was stopped by security forces who
         removed and burnt his T-shirt because it was red and green. It  was
         said to be an OLF T-shirt that they could use this as a pretext  to
         frighten him. He was taken to the police station for  a  few  hours
         and asked questions. He was mistreated there.

     14. On 28 November 2015 while dropping off leaflets he learned from his
         cousin that one of the cell members had been arrested.

     15. As a result of the detentions and the circumstances in Ethiopia the
         appellant considered that it  was  too  dangerous  to  remain.  The
         appellant left Ethiopia on 16th of December 2015 and  travelled  to
         Sudan. He spent eight months in Sudan, was  detained  on  3  August
         2016. He travelled via Libya to Italy before travelling to  Germany
         on 24 October 2016. The appellant claimed  asylum  in  Germany  and
         left in July 2017. He travelled to France on 4 August  2017,  spent
         two weeks there before travelling to Belgium. He entered the UK  on
         21 August 2017 clandestinely and claimed asylum.

     16. Since his arrival in the UK, he claimed to have supported  the  OLF
         and being politically active by attending three meetings and having
         attended celebrations.

     17. Since leaving Ethiopia, his cousin went missing and his whereabouts
         are still unknown, and he was active in the same OLF  cell  as  the
         appellant.

     18. The respondent refused his claim in  a  decision  letter  dated  14
         November 2019.

     19. In the decision, the respondent accepted that the appellant  was  a
         national of Ethiopia and that he was of Oromo ethnicity.

     20. The respondent considered his  account  of  support  for  the  OLF,
         noting that he had not been politically active before 2013 and  had
         given an inconsistent account as to why  he  began  supporting  the
         party. Initially stating that he began supporting the party in 2013
         because of the detention of his parents and he was concerned  about
         the problem of the Oromo people but alternately stated  the  reason
         he began supporting the party with because he believed he would  be
         detained by the authorities if he did not  oppose  the  government.
         The respondent also considered his account of why he supported  the
         party lacked a depth of personal emotional  feeling  and  was  also
         inconsistent with his initial motivation to support the party.

     21. As to his account of work undertaken for the OLF and that he handed
         out slogans that raised awareness demonstrations and would hand out
         leaflets  inviting  people  to  attend  the  demonstrations,  those
         documents did not contain information about the OLF. The respondent
         considered that the appellant had  failed  to  show  how  political
         activity was related to his claim support of the OLF.

     22. As to the claim of distributing leaflets, it was not accepted  that
         he would have come to the adverse attention of the  authorities  on
         the basis of handing out leaflets as this was a low-level  activity
         which was infrequent and not observed by anyone.

     23. As to the demonstrations, he stated attended approximately five and
         the reason for them was associated with the master  plan  and  were
         peaceful (AIR 44). The respondent noted that he was given  multiple
         opportunities to explain how attendance of  the  demonstrations  is
         were related to his  claim  support  of  the  OLF.  The  respondent
         considered that his  account  failed  to  detail  how  his  claimed
         political activity was related to the OLF other than a  generalised
         demand for the release of remote prisoners stop it  was  considered
         that this raised doubts as to his claim support of the party.

     24. The respondent considered his claimed detention on 30  August  2014
         until 3 November 2014  when  he  was  released  after  receiving  a
         warning. The appellant did not have any further  adverse  attention
         from the authorities until leaving Ethiopia in 2015.

     25. The respondent considered the country information  (country  policy
         and guidance note, Ethiopia: Oromos including the  Oromo  protests,
         version  2.0,  November  2017).  Having  done  so,  the  respondent
         considered that  the  appellant's  account  of  being  detained  in
         Ethiopia was consistent with that country information of  low-level
         political activists. It was further considered that his account  of
         being detained following low-level activity was indicative  of  the
         arbitrary  arrests  that  occurred  in  2014  rather   than   being
         specifically identified as an opposition member by the authorities.

     26. As to his account that he was threatened  by  the  police  in  2013
         after being suspected of supporting the OLF, he stated that his  T-
         shirt was taken off and burned by  the  authorities  in  2015.  The
         respondent did not accept that he would have come  to  the  adverse
         attention of the authorities following this incident as he was able
         to leave the situation immediately and had no further contact  from
         the authorities.

     27. As to his claim that he left Ethiopia because he had been  given  a
         final warning does not support the OLF and if he did, he  would  be
         killed, the appellant had given inconsistent  reasons  for  leaving
         Ethiopia.

     28. His ability to remain in Ethiopia  for  over  a  year  after  being
         released without incident indicated  low-level  political  activity
         which undermined his claim that he was of specific interest to  the
         authorities due to his support of the OLF.

     29. As to his activities in the UK and having attended  three  meetings
         for the OLF, the respondent took into account that he had not taken
         part in any demonstration since arriving in the UK, he  was  not  a
         member of the party and therefore the low-level  activity  for  the
         party would not be indicative of a significant  political  profile.
         Furthermore, his low-level activity in the UK would not are brought
         into the adverse attention of the authorities in Ethiopia.

     30. As to his claim that he posted political content  on  social  media
         related to the OLF, the appellant had failed to submit evidence  of
         that despite his representatives requesting a further extension  of
         time

     31. It was not accepted that he was a supporter of  the  OLF,  and  his
         claim was rejected.

     32. As to his ethnicity as an Oromo, consideration  was  given  to  his
         claim that he will be at  risk  upon  return  on  that  basis.  The
         respondent took into account that he  had  not  faced  persecution,
         discrimination, or mistreatment in Ethiopia on  the  basis  of  his
         ethnicity  nor  had  he  come  to  the  adverse  attention  of  the
         authorities prior to becoming politically active  and  after  being
         released from detention in 2014 he was able to reside  in  Ethiopia
         one year without incident. Consideration was given to the CPIN.

     33. As to section 8 of the 2004 Act, the respondent took  into  account
         the journey undertaken by  the  appellant  and  that  he  travelled
         through Belgium,  France  and  Italy  which  were  considered  safe
         countries. Furthermore, he claimed to  have  spent  five  weeks  in
         Italy in two weeks both in France and Belgium and that he failed to
         take advantage of a reasonable opportunity to make an asylum  human
         rights claim whilst in a safe country. Failure to do so damaged his
         credibility.

     34. As to an assessment of his claim, consideration was  given  to  the
         country guidance decision in MB (OLF and MTA -  risk)  Ethiopia  CG
         [2007] UKAIT 00 30 which held that OLF members and sympathisers and
         those specifically perceived by the authorities to be such  members
         or sympathisers will in general be it a real risk of persecution if
         they have been previously arrested or detained on suspicion of  OLF
         involvement. So, to all those who have a  significant  history,  of
         OLF membership or  sympathy  which  is  known  to  the  authorities
         (paragraph 66).

     35. However, as his account and credibility of the  OLF  had  not  been
         accepted, he did not meet the criteria set out in the CG case.

     36. Furthermore, consideration was given to country materials  set  out
         in the CPIN, Ethiopia: opposition to the government,  version  3.0,
         August 2019, and that since the CG determination of MB the  country
         situation had improved. During 2018 the Prime Minister removed  the
         designation of the OLF, ONLF and Ginbot as terrorist  organisations
         and welcomed back high-profile leaders back to Ethiopian where they
         can register as political parties (although there is no  indication
         that this  is  yet  happened).  Hundreds  of  thousands  of  people
         gathered in Addis Ababa  to  welcome  back  OLF  leaders  which  is
         reported to have passed without incident. A number of  high-profile
         prisoners had also been released and/or pardoned, including  deputy
         leader of Ginbot 7 who been detained since 2014.

     37. Thus,  the  respondent  considered  that  the  country  information
         indicated there had been cogent and durable changes  in  regard  to
         the opposition generally and former and  current  armed  groups  in
         particular and thus there  were  very  strong  grant  supported  by
         cogent evidence to depart from the findings in MB.

     38. The respondent considered that based on that material,  and  whilst
         it was not accepted that he was a supporter of the OLF, even if  he
         were, it was not accepted that he would be at risk  of  persecution
         or serious harm on return to Ethiopia.

     39. The remainder of the decision letter considered Article 8.

     40. The appellant appealed that decision to the FtT  (Judge  Lever)  on
         the 22 September 2020. In a decision promulgated on 2 October  2020
         the judge dismissed his appeal.

     41. The FtTJ set out his factual findings and analysis of the  evidence
         at paragraphs [14 -39].

     42. I summarise them as follows:

          1) the appellant is from Ethiopia and is of Oromo ethnicity.

          2) There was nothing inherently implausible in him supporting the
             OLF and being sympathetic to the general views  and  ideas  of
             the OLF.

          3) It is further not implausible that he would like many tens  of
             thousands have been involved in demonstrations in the  2013  -
             2014.

          4) Earlier at [15] the FtTJ set out the  country  information  in
             the fact-finding mission to Ethiopia dated February  2020  and
             the general commentary made concerning the current position of
             Oromo people and the OLF. The judge considered that whilst  it
             post-dated  the  appellant's  time  in  Ethiopia,   paragraphs
             7.1.127.3.9 provided information that during  the  appellant's
             time in Ethiopia at the OLF had a large support  base  amongst
             or among people and that the flag, name, and  organisation  of
             the OLF resonated amongst the Oromo population.

          5) Furthermore at [15] the  judge  referred  to  the  CPIN  dated
             November 2017 which referred to the demonstrations in Ethiopia
             which   noted   that   there   were    "largely    spontaneous
             demonstrations  involving  thousands  of   people.   Tens   of
             thousands  were   arrested   and   those   arrested   included
             "grassroots supporters", not just leaders and organisers. Many
             of those grassroots supporters were released  and  those  left
             detention at that stage (2017)  were  in  the  main  suspected
             leaders.  It  is  said  violence  against  people  is  largely
             arbitrary and it is unlikely that the authorities were able to
             have an interest in or identify individuals. Therefore, taking
             part in protest was unlikely  to  result  in  ongoing  adverse
             attention.

          6) Based on that material, the judge accepted that in the  period
             2013 - 2015 there were large protests in Ethiopia amongst  the
             Oromo people.

          7) In light of the material, the judge  found  that  it  was  not
             implausible  that  the  appellant  would  like  many  tens  of
             thousands have been involved in demonstrations in 2013 -  2014
             I may well have been arrested and detained as a result.

          8) At paragraphs [16 - 20] the FtTJ considered the medical report
             and psychiatric report provider on behalf of the appellant and
             set out his reasoning as to the deficiencies in that evidence.

          9) However, based on the medical  report  that  referred  to  the
             scars on the appellant, the judge found that he "may well have
             been  arrested  and  detained  as  a  result.  I  accept   the
             possibility that he suffered ill-treatment and injuries whilst
             in detention" (at [21]).

         10)  However,  the  judge  found  that  like  many  thousands   of
             grassroots supporters as the  country  materials  demonstrate,
             the appellant was released without any conditions attached  or
             any requirements to report.

         11) The judge found that he was therefore of no  further  interest
             the authorities and was not considered any form of threat  and
             would have been regarded like  many  thousands  of  others  is
             merely a low-level supporter.

         12) The judge rejected his account that he was motivated to  leave
             Ethiopia  because  of  the  present  fear  of  his  safety  or
             realistically any future fear for his safety. The judge  found
             that there was no good reason why a genuine refugee would  not
             have claimed asylum in the first European country came to  nor
             did he find any  good  reason  why,  if  the  Home  Office  is
             correct, having claimed asylum in Germany would then leave.

     43. The FtTJ then turned to the issue of risk on return in the light of
         the country guidance decision of MB [2007], the substantial body of
         current country material including the report of Dr  Verhoeven  and
         the evidence of the appellant's witness.  Dealing  first  with  the
         country guidance case of MB, the FtTJ referred to the summary  that
         OLF members and sympathisers and those  specifically  perceived  by
         the authorities to be members or sympathisers will generally be  at
         risk of persecution  if  they  have  previously  been  arrested  or
         detained on suspicion of OLF involvement. The judge concluded  that
         at first glance the appellant would  appear  to  fall  within  that
         category as someone who had been for a short time in OLF  supporter
         and also had been arrested and detained. However, at [23] the  FtTJ
         stated:

             "23. That country guidance case is now some 13 years  old  and
             whilst it  has  not  been  superseded  by  any  other  country
             guidance case, a care needs  to  be  taken.  It  is  good  and
             understood law that they need to be good reason to depart  the
             country guidance case. It is also good sense that following  a
             country guidance case which has been  substantially  overtaken
             by events is not in the interests of justice."

     44. At paragraphs [25-38] the FtTJ set out his analysis  and  reasoning
         as to why the appellant would not be at risk on return to  Ethiopia
         and why he departed from the CG decision of MB on the material that
         was before him,  including  the  expert  evidence  adduced  by  the
         appellant.

     45. At [27] the  judge  made  reference  to  the  fact-finding  mission
         report, dated February 2020 which he stated he  found  of  "greater
         use". Among speeches noted about the OLF, one source said that they
         had 6 million supporters on their return from exile to Addis  Ababa
         (7.3.1). They had a large social base of support.  It  was  further
         noted however that OLF was  now  fragmented  and  was  composed  of
         different factions numbering about 4 to 7.

     46. At [28] the judge took into account that in terms  of  security  at
         paragraph 8 there had been a rapid dismantling and purging  of  the
         security sector but without new systems being put in place:  "there
         is a new system a machine but there are a lot of errors within this
         as forces act how they want. The old systems are been removed  with
         a new one has not been put in place. It  means  security/please  do
         not have a mandate on how they can act." The  judge  recorded  that
         the TPL effort been removed from the security apparatus  especially
         the military and intelligence service. DFID noted "in terms of  the
         institution we have seen that a commitment  from  government  e.g.,
         the appointment of human rights institutions. We  are  disappointed
         in the security protection  decrease."  There  are  indications  of
         those responsible for torture or corruption being  charged  but  it
         was spasmodic. E -Zema noted "of  course  it  shows  commitment  to
         security and justice for, but we cannot go forward as a country  by
         arresting and charging  everyone  from  the  previous  government."
         There is a feeling that Tigrayans are being targeted.

     47. At [29] the judge stated that "regions are of importance and  there
         are regional  security  forces  varying  hugely  in  size.  Central
         government did not have effective control  over  regional  security
         forces or regional states."

     48. At [30] the judge took into account the country materials  relating
         to arrests in Ethiopia. He noted "the  government  did  not  arrest
         people arbitrarily as it used to. Arbitrary arrest in mass  numbers
         is witnessed although rare. The main concern was arbitrary  arrests
         within regions. Different groups fight for their own  status  e.g.,
         Amhara and Oromo (9.1.2). Arrests vary according to region. It  was
         noted that there had been some arrests of the ONLF, but the numbers
         were small. Situation was better and although not a hundred percent
         safer ONS not comparable to the actions of the previous government.

     49. At paragraph [31] the judge set out the country materials  relevant
         to arrest and detention and training camps and the  purpose  behind
         such attentions and treatment. This stated "one reason provided  in
         September 2019 was for  the  government  to  weaken  opposition  by
         detaining political opposition, Harris and then release  them.  The
         people being arrested tended to be younger and not involved in  the
         previous regimes, arrests, and detention. DFID Ethiopian  cautioned
         against the assessment of state targeting of OLF and Oromo. It  was
         unlikely a person will be picked up by security forces in an  Oromo
         area or Addis Ababa based on being linked to OLF. Reference is made
         to the legalising of OLF, but it is hard to distinguish who is  and
         what the OLF is.  The  ODF  ruling  Oromo  party  is  seen  as  the
         oppressor by some OLF supporters. There is  also  an  opinion  from
         Addis Ababa University, September 2019 reported at 9.6.629.6.7.  At
         9.8.1 OFC Horn of Africa researcher and DFI D  Ethiopian  stuff  on
         the issue of arrests of Oromo/OLF said:

             "the senior representative of the OFC opined that  Oromo  were
             arrested on the basis of ethnicity and  that  if  someone  was
             against the government, they would be linked to OLF.  However,
             the throne of Horn of Africa researcher noted  that  prior  to
             Abiy this could be the case and that it was rare for an  Oromo
             who was arrested not to be accused of being OLF that  did  not
             make  representations  about  the  present   situation.   DFID
             Ethiopian staff observed 10 years ago then yes, objectively  I
             would say that this is not the case now  but  there  are  some
             cases. Depends on your geography, history, background. I would
             caution against the assessment that if you are OLF  and  Oromo
             you are being targeted."

     50. At [34] the  judge  considered  the  evidence  of  the  appellant's
         witness who he stated he found to be of  assistance  and  credible.
         That evidence referred to family  members  held  in  detention  and
         knowledge of a friend who  had  voluntarily  returned  from  Norway
         being arrested. The witness described himself as a full  member  of
         the OLF since 2014 and  OLF  UK  and  Ireland  executive  committee
         member. The judge considered that  the  witness  "had  a  different
         profile to the appellant. Nevertheless,  the  prospect  the  family
         members were detained is not inconsistent with the  complex  issues
         described within the function material."

     51. At [36], the judge considered that the  position  in  Ethiopia  had
         "changed to the extent that I find the case  to  be  outdated.  The
         features that seem reasonably clear from the material now is that:

          a) the previous government has gone on much of those  responsible
             for persecution or discrimination and arbitrary  ill-treatment
             have also gone from power.

          b) There were genuine efforts of reform, respect for human rights
             and the rule of law established  by  the  new  government  but
             progress has been arbitrary and slow.

          c) A power vacuum has been created by the removal of many of  the
             previous regime

          d) there are  now  far  more  regional  and  ethnic  factions  of
             potential for their own security groups and infighting.

          e) There has been a large number of IDP is caused by both drought
             and internal violence.

          f) It would perhaps be unwise for a person say of Oromo ethnicity
             to move to an area of largely different ethnic group given the
             regional conflicts.

          g) There is a profile within the OLF or regarded as  a  competent
             or clearly in opposition to the government, potentially do run
             something of a risk of being targeted."

     52. Having made that summary of the material the FtTJ returned  to  the
         position of the appellant. The judge stated as follows:

             "37. The appellant I find at his highest was a mere support of
             the OLF for a brief period in Ethiopia, 2013 to 2015. I accept
             he may have been arrested and detained along with thousands of
             others by the former regime that was released and was  I  find
             of no further interest  of  that  regime.  I  find  it  highly
             unlikely any record of his activities  or  arrest  would  have
             been kept and that small  risk  was  clearly  diminished  even
             further by the end of that regime.

             38.  The appellant's profile remains in my view very  low  and
             impart his activities in the UK are simply self-serving. "

    53.  The FtTJ therefore concluded that  given  his  assessment  of  the
         evidence and credibility he did not find that  the  return  of  the
         appellant to Ethiopia would present a real risk that he would be at
         risk of persecution or serious harm  on  return.  Consequently,  he
         dismissed his appeal.

    54.  Permission to appeal was sought and permission was refused by  FtT
         Judge Grant but on renewal was granted by UTJ Grubb on  2  December
         2020 for the following reasons:

             "grounds one, three and  four  are  arguable  that  the  judge
             failed properly to consider the expert report in reaching  his
             finding that the appellant was not at real risk on return  and
             in departing from MB. I also grant  permission  on  ground  to
             although  the  materiality  of  any  error  will  need  to  be
             established.

             Ground six (there is no ground  five)  is  not  arguable.  The
             judge accepted the appellant's account (see para  21)  so  the
             application of section 8 of the 2004 act was not  material  to
             the finding that the appellant was not a real risk.

             For these reasons, I grant permission on grounds  one  -  four
             but refuse permission on ground 6."



The hearing before the Upper Tribunal:

     55. In the light of the COVID-19 pandemic  the  Upper  Tribunal  issued
         directions indicating that it was provisionally of  the  view  that
         the error of law issue could be determined without  a  face-to-face
         hearing and that this could take place via a remote  hearing.  Both
         parties have indicated that they were content for  the  hearing  to
         proceed by this method. Therefore, the Tribunal listed the  hearing
         to enable oral submissions to be given by each of the parties.

     56.   I  am  grateful  for  their  assistance  and  their  clear   oral
         submissions.

     57. Mr Magennis of Counsel appeared on  behalf  of  the  appellant  and
         relied upon the written grounds of appeal.  He  took  the  Tribunal
         through the  grounds  and  did  so  by  reference  to  the  country
         materials.

     58. In summary, it was submitted that based on the evidence provided on
         behalf of the appellant and also in the respondent's evidence  that
         the appellant was in an enhanced risk category taking into  account
         his area  of  origin,  his  family  history  and  thus  the  FtTJ's
         assessment of him as a "low-level supporter" of  the  OLF  did  not
         adequately take account of those factors.

     59. It was further submitted that the FtTJ gave inadequate reasons  for
         rejecting the expert evidence advanced on behalf of the  appellant.
         A careful consideration of the evidence set out in the  respondents
         CPIN and the Fact-Finding Mission report (hereinafter  referred  to
         as the "FFM") demonstrated that the  evidence  contained  in  those
         reports did not contradict the expert evidence of the appellant.

     60. Those submissions were contained in grounds 1 and 3.  When  looking
         at the  appellant's  profile,  it  was  submitted  that  the  judge
         mischaracterised the appellant's profile as a "low-level" member of
         the OLF despite the expert evidence which  made  reference  to  his
         home area of Wollega in the Oromia region of Ethiopia.  The  expert
         report made reference to the relevance of the appellant's home area
         (page 10 of the expert report; A38) and the  evidence  was  not  in
         conflict with the evidence contained in the CPIN and the FFM  where
         reference was made to the ongoing  conflict  between  the  militant
         wing of the OLF (known as the OLA) and the  government  forces  and
         civilians had been targeted by the government in retaliation.

     61. A further relevant factor related to the  appellant's  history  and
         background. Mr Magennis submitted that  this  formed  part  of  the
         appellant's evidence which had not been challenged at the  hearing.
         The respondent had not been represented at the hearing and the FtTJ
         did not ask any questions of the  appellant  who  relied  upon  and
         adopted his witness statement  as  his  evidence.  In  his  witness
         statement the appellant set out his account  that  his  family  had
         suffered in Ethiopia as a result of their ethnicity as  Oromo.  The
         appellant's grandfather was killed by the Ethiopian  government  in
         1992, the OLF was expelled from the government  in  that  year  and
         prominent supporters were hunted by the security forces. It is said
         that he was arrested  and  then  killed  whilst  in  detention.  In
         relation to his father, he supported the OLF financially and was an
         Oromo nationalist. It was further stated by him at paragraph 11  of
         the witness statement that his parents were  arrested  at  home  in
         2010, were detained and taken to the police station and  were  held
         for three months before being released without charge.

     62. As to his own history, it was not disputed that the appellant was a
         supporter of the OLF and had undertaken activities on their behalf.
         It was further not disputed that he was  detained  from  30  August
         2014 until 30 November 2014. It was submitted that whilst the  FtTJ
         placed reliance on the fact that the appellant was released without
         charge, the appellant's account to set out in his witness statement
         was that he left Ethiopia in December  2015  as  a  result  of  the
         increasing oppression of the Oromo  people  and  the  targeting  of
         young men by the  security  forces.  Furthermore,  he  stated  that
         towards the end of the period when one  of  his  cell  members  was
         arrested and his family were arrested it was clear that he would be
         at risk (see paragraphs 45 - 46 at A9). Therefore, the  appellant's
         profile was not properly taken account of when making an assessment
         of risk within the country materials.

     63. When addressing the expert evidence (ground three) it was submitted
         that the judge did not dispute the expertise of the expert nor  did
         he appear to challenge the quality of the report however  the  FtTJ
         did not go on to take account of the expert  evidence  relating  to
         the risk to this particular appellant in Ethiopia. At best,  it  is
         submitted the judge appeared to  address  this  at  paragraph  [27]
         where the judge made reference to the FFM dated February 2020. From
         that paragraph it appears that the FtTJ preferred the  evidence  in
         the  FFM  given  the  comments  that  it  was  not  "focus  on  the
         credibility or plausibility  of  the  appellant's  account  but  is
         solely concerned with the current situation".

     64. However, it was submitted that the expert evidence covered both the
         plausibility of the appellant's account and the  country  situation
         in Ethiopia with both aspects considered.

     65. Thus, it was submitted that the judge could only reject the  expert
         evidence based on the respondent's evidence if one contradicted the
         other. However, it was submitted that the evidence did not and that
         both the FFM and the expert evidence  portrayed  the  same  complex
         developing confrontations between the government and  opponents  of
         the government. In this context as set out in  ground  one,  issues
         relating to the appellant's place of origin, family background  and
         his arrest history was consistent with the evidence set out in  the
         respondent's CPIN and the FFM.

     66. In his oral submissions Mr Magennis referred the  Tribunal  to  the
         country materials before  the  FtTJ  and  highlighted  two  issues;
         firstly, there was no clear definition of OLF  membership  (relying
         on evidence in the FFM report at paragraph 4.3  .2,  4.3.3,  7.4.3,
         9.1.4 and 9.5.6 (CPIN). Secondly the FFM and the CPIN did not offer
         a clear and unified idea of the extent of arrests  of  OLF  members
         and supporters. Whilst the judge referred to the FFM interview with
         the Department for International development evidence there  was  a
         low risk of arrest or persecution but that this interview  at  page
         76 of the FFM was probably most optimistic picture of the evidence.
         Paragraph 21 of the grounds set out the country material in the FFM
         and CPIN which gave a contrary picture.

     67. In summary, the sources consulted by the respondent gave  different
         perspectives on the government's  treatment  of  the  OLF  but  the
         themes from the evidence relied  upon  by  the  appellant  and  the
         respondent all referred to a conflict in Oromia between  the  armed
         wing of the OLF and the government and some targeting of  civilians
         in that  area,  slowing   government  reform  and  the  failure  of
         attempts  to  integrate  the  OLF  into  the  Ethiopian  army,   an
         escalation  of  community  violence  and  the  resumption  of  some
         political arrests.

     68. Mr Magennis referred to ground 3 and the issue  of  departing  from
         country guidance. He submitted that when taking  into  account  the
         current CG set out in the headnote, if the judge had  not  departed
         from the CG, the appellant fell within the criteria.

     69. However, the FtTJ did not apply the correct  test  set  out  in  SG
         (Iraq). In this context he submitted that  grounds  one  and  three
         overlapped and that it was necessary to consider what the  evidence
         was to disagree with the expert  (ground  one)  and  what  evidence
         there was to depart from the current CG decision. In  this  context
         he submitted, the judge failed to identify  the  correct  test  and
         secondly even if he did, the test to depart from  country  guidance
         was a high test and was not met. There was not the cogent  evidence
         before the tribunal to justify a different conclusion from that  in
         MB and that Ethiopia  showed  a  complex  picture  of  arrests  and
         violence had continued. He submitted that whilst the judge did  not
         dispute the expert evidence, he ignored the assessment within  that
         report concerning the issues of risk and had  he  properly  applied
         the expert report to the evidence in the FFM,  he  would  not  have
         reached the conclusion that the  country  guidance  decision  could
         have been departed from. In any event, the evidence in the FFM  and
         the CPIN did not offer a clear idea of the extent of arrests.

     70. Dealing with ground 4, he  submitted  that  the  judge  applied  to
         higher threshold for a "real risk" of persecution and made contrary
         findings to the appellant's background evidence without reason.  In
         particular Mr Magennis relied upon the reference  by  the  FtTJ  at
         [38] that his profile remained "very low" and that  his  activities
         in the UK were "simply self-serving". The judge gave no  reason  as
         to why he believed that to be the case and it was  unclear  on  the
         evidence how his activities were "in part" self-serving and what it
         meant. The judge had not sought to clarify this during the hearing.



     71. It was further submitted that the FtTJ's conclusion  at  [37]  that
         the appellant was a mere supporter of the OLF was  contradicted  by
         the evidence and that it was not the case that  the  appellant  did
         not face persecution after his detention as the appellant's account
         was that his house was ransacked, and he went into hiding before he
         fled the country.

     72. As to ground 2, it was submitted that the expert evidence  set  out
         that the risk of persecution to the appellant came  not  just  from
         the state but also from nonstate actors as a result of the  current
         security vacuum in Ethiopia. As with  the  other  grounds,  it  was
         further submitted that the evidence set out in  the  expert  report
         was  supported  by  the  evidence  in  the   respondent's   country
         information. For example, in the most recent CPIN  (which  in  turn
         relied on the evidence set  out  in  the  FFM)  set  out  that  the
         president's intended reforms were threatened by "ethnic conflict in
         breakdowns in law and order" (3.8.8) and that local grievances were
         being played out at regional levels" (see 3.8.2).  Sources  in  the
         CPIN note that violent demonstrations can largely be attributed  to
         "group clashes and communal violence". It  is  also  detailed  that
         despite the efforts of the central government  to  reduce  killings
         and arrests, local government forces  are  failing  to  follow  the
         government leads. Thus, it was submitted the  failure  to  consider
         the risk from nonstate actors was also an error of law  given  that
         the issue was specifically set out in the expert evidence.

     73. There was no rule 24 response on behalf the respondent. However, in
         her oral submissions Ms Pettersen  accepted  that  the  appellant's
         grounds were made out. It was  accepted  that  the  judge  had  not
         properly identified the appellant's profile and that if  the  judge
         had applied the CPIN based on the factual findings that he had made
         in respect of his history, then the appellant would have  succeeded
         as the evidence  demonstrated  a  real  risk  of  serious  harm  or
         persecution on return.

     74. It was accepted on behalf of the respondent that the error  of  law
         was material and that even on the basis of  the  facts  found,  the
         outcome would have been different, and  that  the  appellant  would
         have succeeded in his appeal.

     75. Ms Pettersen therefore invited the court to set aside the  decision
         of the FtTJ and to remake the appeal by  allowing  the  appellant's
         asylum appeal.

    Decision on error of law:

     76. After hearing the submissions made on behalf of the  appellant  and
         the particular reference made to the country materials, as set  out
         above Ms Pettersen on behalf of the respondent  accepted  that  the
         judge had materially erred in law for the reasons set  out  in  the
         grounds. In the light of that acceptance, I conclude that the  FtTJ
         materially erred in law for the reasons set out in the grounds that
         relate to the assessment of the country materials, and  the  expert
         evidence which led to an  error  in  his  assessment  of  both  the
         appellant's profile and the risk to  the  appellant.  Those  errors
         also infected the conclusion concerning the  finding  made  by  the
         FtTJ that the country evidence was sufficiently  strong  and  of  a
         durable nature to satisfy the  test  to  depart  from  the  current
         country guidance of MB.

     77. Therefore, and in the light of the submissions made  on  behalf  of
         the respondent it  is  accepted  that  the  decision  of  the  FtTJ
         involved the making of an error on a  point  of  law.  I  therefore
         intend to set out briefly the reasons why I agree with that view.

     78. The current country guidance is set out in MB (OLF and MTA - risk)
         Ethiopia CG [2007] UKAIT 00030. The relevant part of the  headnote
         reads as follows:

             (1)  As at February 2007, the situation in  Ethiopia  is  such
             that, in general: -

                  (a)  Oromo Liberation Front members and sympathisers.

                  (b)  persons perceived to be OLF members or  sympathisers;
                  and

                  (c)  members of the Maccaa Tulema Association.

             will, on return, be at real risk if they fall within the scope
             of paragraph (2) or (3) below.

             (2)  OLF  members  and  sympathisers  and  those  specifically
             perceived  by  the  authorities  to   be   such   members   or
             sympathisers will in general be at real risk if they have been
             previously  arrested  or  detained   on   suspicion   of   OLF
             involvement. So too will those who have a significant history,
             known to the  authorities,  of  OLF  membership  or  sympathy.
             Whether any such persons are to be excluded  from  recognition
             as refugees or from the grant of  humanitarian  protection  by
             reason of  armed  activities  may  need  to  be  addressed  in
             particular cases.

         Since that decision and after years of widespread protests  against
         government policies, and  brutal  security  force  repression,  the
         human rights landscape transformed in 2018 after Abiy Ahmed  became
         prime minister  in  April.  The  government  lifted  the  state  of
         emergency in June and released  thousands  of  political  prisoners
         from detention, including journalists and  key  opposition  leaders
         such as Eskinder Nega and  Merera  Gudina.  The  government  lifted
         restrictions on access to  the  internet,  admitted  that  security
         forces relied on torture, committed to legal reforms of  repressive
         laws, and introduced numerous other reforms,  paving  the  way  for
         improved respect for human rights. Parliament  lifted  the  ban  on
         three opposition groups, Ginbot 7, Oromo Liberation Front (OLF) and
         Ogaden National Liberation Front (ONLF) in June. The government had
         used the  proscription  as  a  pretext  for  brutal  crackdowns  on
         opposition  members,  activists,  and  journalists   suspected   of
         affiliation with the groups. Many members of these and other groups
         are now returning to Ethiopia from exile.

     79. As set out above  the  respondent  and  the  decision  letter  made
         reference to the changes that had occurred in Ethiopia  to  support
         the position that the CG (see page 12 of the decision letter).

     80. The appellant relied upon an expert report from  Dr  Verhoeven  set
         out in the bundle at A29  -  A53  dated  7  July  2020  which  made
         reference to the continuing risk factors facing the appellant based
         on his particular backgrounds and circumstances and his support and
         membership of the OLF. The expert set out in  his  report  why  the
         relevant evidence that notwithstanding the positive changes,  there
         remained a risk of serious harm to the appellant and  by  reference
         to the  country  materials.  At  paragraph  1  of  that  report  Dr
         Verhoeven set out his qualifications and  experience  referable  to
         Ethiopia including having made 10 research trips there in the  last
         five years. In his decision the FtTJ does  not  appear  to  dispute
         that expertise nor is there any overt challenge to the material  in
         that report and the conclusions reached.

     81. I would agree that the only point that can be viewed as a criticism
         of the report is  that  set  out  at  [27]  where  the  judge  made
         reference to the Fact-Finding Mission report, dated  February  2020
         which he stated he found of "greater use". The  judge  stated  that
         this was a comprehensive report running to many pages and  obtained
         evidence from multiple sources, many in senior positions in from  a
         wide range of individuals. He noted that it was "not focus  on  the
         credibility or plausibility of  the  appellant's  account  that  is
         solely concerned with the country situation. The  inference  raised
         from that observation is that Dr Verhoeven's  report  merited  less
         weight  because  it  was  focused  on  the  plausibility   of   the
         appellant's account. In my judgement, it would not be  unusual  for
         an expert report to deal both with plausibility of  an  appellant's
         account but also with the country  situation  under  consideration.
         That is the purpose of the report- to set the  appellant's  account
         alongside what is known about country  conditions  in  the  country
         under discussion. Thus, it would be wrong to say  that  the  expert
         report should be given less weight solely  on  the  account  of  it
         focusing on the plausibility of the appellant's account.

     82. Furthermore, as accepted on behalf of the  respondent,  the  expert
         evidence set out in the report of Dr Verhoeven did  not  materially
         differ from the material set  out  in  the  respondent's  evidence.
         Whilst  the  FFM  was  a  comprehensive  report  and  was  properly
         described as one emanating from  multiple  sources  from  those  in
         senior positions of  a  wide  range  of  individuals,  that  report
         identified a complex country situation where confrontation  between
         the government and opponents of the government still continued.

     83. The grounds expressly make reference to the country  materials  set
         out in the FFM and the CPIN which  did  not  provide  a  clear  and
         unified picture concerning the extent of arrests of OLF members and
         supporters.  This  was  of  material  relevance  given  the  FtTJ's
         assessment at [30] there have been some arrests of  the  OLF  at  a
         local level, but the numbers  were  small  and  at  [31]  where  he
         recorded that the DFI D Ethiopia cautioned against  the  assessment
         of state targeting of OLF and Oromo and that  "it  was  unlikely  a
         person will be picked up by security forces in  an  Oromo  area  or
         Addis Ababa based on being linked to the OLF." The FtTJ also quoted
         paragraph 9.8.1 from OFC Horn of  Africa  research  at  the  DFI  D
         Ethiopia staff on the issue of arrests of Oromo/OLF,  and  that  in
         summary there would be a low risk of arrest. However, a  journalist
         was interviewed by  the  FFM  explained  "we  are  hearing  reports
         filtering  through  of  thousands  of  journalists,  activists  and
         protesters being arrested in Oromia. now you go to a Oromia  region
         and you get hundreds, or  thousands  arrested,  adding  "in  Oromia
         region, they do this mass arrests" (I refer to  15.0.10)  and  also
         see earlier at 5.1.7 where reference was made to the OLF allowed to
         return to Ethiopian but that the government  still  labelled  their
         "fighting in the bush" as illegal and therefore continue to  arrest
         the so-called insurgents for their acts of banditry. By  legalising
         the OLF, it allowed Oromo activists and oppositions to openly self-
         identify as the OLF".

     84. Reference is made to the Amnesty International report (in  CPIN  at
         15.1.13) where reference was made to the OLA's  decision  in  April
         (2019) to cut ties with the OLF. It records "OLF supporters on  the
         campaign trail have been arrested, beaten and threatened  by  state
         security forces over the past  few  months.  Amnesty  International
         reported at least 75 OLF supporters had been  arrested  last  month
         (January 2020) with  most  of  them  rounded  up  while  peacefully
         attending various OLF campaign functions."

     85. The OLF are a registered party that plans to  compete  in  upcoming
         national and regional elections. However, the Amnesty international
         information set out that notwithstanding that, complaints were made
         about continuing state repression and being unable  to  engage  and
         take part in  activity  in  areas  under  command  post  rule.  The
         executive committee member stated that since July last year,  "more
         than 10,000 members were arrested  and  for  example  42  of  those
         detained in "dark rooms" in the Kumsa Moroda  Palace  Museum,  with
         over 600 imprisoned in Gimbi at military camps. Over hundred and 40
         OLF officials, members and  supporters  were  held  in  Kaliti  and
         Kilinto prisons  and  Addis  Abbaba's  "Sostegna"  police  station.
         Around 350 OLF members were arrested this week,  mostly  in  Oromia
         towns near Addis Ababa."

     86. There is no dispute as to the applicable test when consideration is
         given to departing from a country guidance decision. In SG (Iraq) v
         Secretary of State for the Home Department [2012] EWCA Civ 940 Lord
         Justice Stanley Burnton said this:

             45.  There are simply not the resources  for  a  detailed  and
             reliable determination of conditions in foreign  countries  to
             be made on  an  individual  basis  on  each  decision  on  the
             application or appeal of persons seeking protection. There are
             far too many such cases, as is demonstrated by  the  Secretary
             of State's use of charter flights  to  accommodate  the  large
             numbers of returnees to  countries  such  as  Afghanistan  and
             Iraq. Neither those representing those seeking protections nor
             the Secretary of State herself  have  the  resources  for  the
             detailed, lengthy, and costly investigation of  conditions  on
             return that is appropriate, given the potential  risk  to  the
             returnees,  in  every  case.  Even  if  the   resources   were
             available, it would be wasteful to have such an investigation,
             involving much the same evidence, in every case.  There  would
             also be a risk of inconsistent decisions, a consideration that
             is particularly important in  the  present  context  since  it
             follows from a decision that one person  requires  protection,
             if correct, that a person in the same situation who  has  been
             returned may have risked or suffered ill treatment or worse.

             46.  The system of  Country  Guidance  determinations  enables
             appropriate resources, in terms of the representations of  the
             parties to the Country Guidance  appeal,  expert  and  factual
             evidence and the personnel and time of  the  Tribunal,  to  be
             applied to the determination of conditions in,  and  therefore
             the risks of return for persons such as the appellants in  the
             Country Guidance appeal  to,  the  country  in  question.  The
             procedure is aimed at arriving at a reliable (in the sense  of
             accurate) determination.

             47.  It is for these reasons, as well as the  desirability  of
             consistency, that decision  makers  and  tribunal  judges  are
             required to take Country Guidance determinations into account,
             and to follow them unless very strong  grounds  supported  by
             cogent evidence, are adduced justifying they're not doing so.

     87. The Upper Tribunal elaborated upon  this  test  in  the  subsequent
         decision  in CM  (EM  country  guidance;  disclosure )  Zimbabwe
         CG  [2013] UKUT 59 (IAC) [at 72]:

             "[We] recognise that where a previous assessment has  resulted
             in the conclusion that the  population  generally  or  certain
             sections of it  may  be  at  risk,  any  assessment  that  the
             material circumstances have changed would need to demonstrate
             that  such  changes  are  well  established  evidentially  and
             durable."

     88. As the grounds set out and as  the  advocates  agree,  the  country
         materials relied upon by both the appellant and the respondent  set
         out a number of agreed themes. Notwithstanding the changes that had
         occurred since 2019, the evidence continues to point to a  conflict
         in Oromia between the armed wing of the OLF and the government  and
         some targeting of civilians in that area, a slowing  of  government
         reform and that the security  and  intelligence  personnel  of  the
         previous government remained largely  in  their  posts.  There  are
         failures of attempts to integrate the OLF into the  Ethiopian  army
         and an escalation of community violence with the resumption of some
         political arrests. Consequently, the situation  in  Ethiopia  could
         not properly be said to have been settled and the position remained
         fluid. Therefore, on the evidence of both parties and  particularly
         in the evidence set out in the expert report (which the  judge  did
         not reject with any cogent reasons), the circumstances and  changes
         in Ethiopia could  not  be  described  as  being  well  established
         evidentially and durable.

     89. Furthermore, it is agreed by the parties  that  the  FtTJ  did  not
         consider the totality of the evidence when reaching a conclusion as
         to his profile. The FtTJ considered that the appellant was  a  "low
         level" OLF member and supporter, as set  out  in  the  decision  at
         [37]. Whilst the judge accepted that had been arrested and detained
         along with thousands of others, the judge considered that as he was
         released, he would be of no further interest to the regime. At [38]
         the judge considered that his profile remained "very low" and  that
         his activities in the diaspora were "self-serving"  and  would  not
         bring him to any adverse attention.

     90. However, as identified in the expert report, there were other  risk
         factors relevant to this particular appellant in terms of his  area
         of origin  and  family  history.  There  is  no  dispute  that  the
         appellant is from Wollega in the Oromia region, which was described
         in the expert evidence  as  "known  for  decades  for  its  radical
         national support base and, as such, has served as a key recruitment
         ground (and stronghold) of the OLF."  The  expert  also  identified
         that the area was "openly flying OLF flags as liberated zones".

     91. This was  also  supported  by  the  evidence  relied  upon  by  the
         respondent (see the CPIN and the FFM report) which  made  reference
         to the ongoing conflict between the militant wing of the  OLF  (the
         OLA) and the government forces and civilians had been  targeted  by
         the government in retaliation (at 14.3.17 and 14.3.11. The material
         set out that conflict in the area of Guji and Wollega  was  ongoing
         (14.2.13 and that a military command post been established  by  the
         government throughout Western Oromia and that more than a  thousand
         people have been arrested for links to the OLF.

     92. In terms of family history, it  had  not  been  disputed  that  his
         grandfather had been killed by the government as a  result  of  his
         political opinion and that both of his parents  had  been  arrested
         and detained for three months.

     93. Whilst the FtTJ did consider  the  country  materials  in  the  FFM
         report and in particular the DFID at [31] when considering the risk
         to members of the OLF to arrest and those of Oromo  ethnicity,  the
         same material set out that it  would  "depend  on  your  geography,
         history and background." Therefore, the respondent's  evidence  did
         not undermine  or  contradict  the  evidence  relied  upon  by  the
         appellant that he fell into a category  of  enhanced  risk  factors
         which included his area of  origin  and  his  family  history  (see
         expert evidence set out at A39).  The  appellant's  evidence  noted
         that his family history would be considered a "black mark"  against
         him.

     94. Whilst the FtTJ considered that the appellant had  undertaken  some
         sur place activities for the OLF in the UK but that this was "self-
         serving", no further analysis was undertaken other than  a  general
         note that it would not bring him to the attention  of  the  regime.
         However, the expert report did set out at A45 that there was a real
         risk of harm of reprisals as a result of the security forces  tight
         monitoring of cyberspace.

     95. The last issue relates to the appellant's background. At paragraphs
         [16 - 20] the FtTJ considered the medical  report  and  psychiatric
         report provided  on  behalf  of  the  appellant  and  set  out  his
         reasoning as to the deficiencies in that evidence.  However,  based
         on the medical report that referred to the scars on the  appellant,
         the judge found that he "may well have been arrested  and  detained
         as a result.  I  accept  the  possibility  that  he  suffered  ill-
         treatment and injuries whilst in detention" (at [21]).

     96. It is  important  to  have  regard  to  the  circumstances  of  the
         individual  where  that  person  has  already   been   subject   to
         persecution or serious harm and therefore falls into  the  category
         of persons to whom to Rule 339K of the Immigration  Rules  applies
         mirroring Article 4 of the Qualification Directive.  That Rule  is
         in the following terms:

             "The  fact  that  a  person  has  already  been   subject   to
             persecution or serious harm, or  to  direct  threats  of  such
             persecution and such harm,  will  be  regarded  as  a  serious
             indication of the person's well-founded fear of persecution or
             real risk of suffering serious harm,  unless  there  are  good
             reasons to consider that such persecution or serious harm will
             not be repeated".

     97. The FtTJ took the view that as the appellant had been released from
         detention he would not be at risk. However, that conclusion did not
         take into account the other  aspects  that  provided  him  with  an
         enhanced risk profile as set out above, and as  the  appellant  had
         stated in his evidence after he left Ethiopia members of  his  cell
         had been arrested.

     98. In conclusion, there have been changes since the CG decision of  MB
         and that the president has taken positive steps  towards  resolving
         the Oromo issues, but the general thrust of the  country  materials
         demonstrate that it is too early to conclude that the changes  that
         have been taken and measures that have been  introduced  will  have
         any effect upon members and supporters of the OLF and the  risk  of
         serious harm that they may face. Whilst the OLF  are  no  longer  a
         banned organisation  and  the  material  refers  to  their  leaders
         returning from exile, it remains the position that  the  government
         have continued to  use  arbitrary  arrest  and  detention  to  stem
         dissent and as the expert evidence demonstrates, the  abuses  occur
         against  the  background   of   continuing   ethnic   tension   and
         instability. The evidence relied upon by both parties  continue  to
         make reference to human rights abuses that have  continued  despite
         the legalisation of  certain  organisations  and  as  both  parties
         accept, in the light of that material it is not  been  demonstrated
         that the evidence relied upon by the respondent was of a sufficient
         cogency or of a durable nature to depart from the country  guidance
         decision  of  MB  notwithstanding  the   length   of   time   since
         promulgation of that decision.

     99. In the case of the appellant, he falls within the  risk  categories
         identified in the decision of MB, as he is a member  and  supporter
         of the OLF who has been arrested and detained as a result  of  that
         membership. Furthermore, in his particular case it is accepted that
         there are enhanced risk factors which apply which  distinguish  him
         from a "low level member" and which point to a greater risk profile
         which concern the area he originates from, his  family  history  of
         OLF support and dissent and that the support provided by way of his
         activities in the UK. On his evidence, members of his cell had been
         arrested after he had left Ethiopia.

    100. It is therefore agreed between the parties that the decision of the
         FtTJ involved the making of an error on a  point  of  law  for  the
         reasons set out in the  grounds  and  that  based  on  the  factual
         findings made by the judge in addition to the enhanced risk factors
         which were not taken into account and set out above that the  error
         was material. Had that risk profile been taken account of in  light
         of the expert report and the CPIN and FFM, the appellant would have
         succeeded in his appeal.

    101. For those reasons, I am satisfied that  it  has  been  demonstrated
         that the decision of the FtTJ did involve the making of an error on
         a point of law and that  the  decision  shall  be  set  aside.  The
         decision is re-made as follows: the appeal is allowed on asylum and
         human rights grounds (Article 3).



Notice of Decision:

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the making of  an  error
on a point of law and therefore the decision of the FtT is set aside.

The appeal is remade as follows: the appeal is allowed on asylum  and  human
rights grounds (Article 3)



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him.  This direction applies both to the  Appellant  and
to the Respondent.  Failure to comply with  this  direction  could  lead  to
contempt of court proceedings.


Signed Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds

     Dated    14 May 2021







                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS


         1.   A person seeking permission to appeal  against  this  decision
         must make a written application to the  Upper  Tribunal.  Any  such
         application must be received  by  the  Upper  Tribunal  within  the
         appropriate period after this  decision  was  sent  to  the  person
         making the application. The appropriate period varies, as  follows,
         according to the location of the individual and the  way  in  which
         the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:


         2.   Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is in
         the United Kingdom at the time that the application for  permission
         to appeal is made, and is not in detention  under  the  Immigration
         Acts, the appropriate period is 12 working days (10 working days if
         the notice of decision is sent electronically).


         3.   Where the person making the application is in detention  under
         the Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working  days  (5
         working days if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


         4.   Where the person who appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is
         outside the United Kingdom at the time  that  the  application  for
         permission to appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days (10
         working days if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


         5.   A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or  a  Sunday,
         Christmas Day, Good Friday, or a bank holiday.


         6.   The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on  the
         covering letter or covering email.

