
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11030/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester CJC via Skype    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11 November 2020                  |On 16 November 2020                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

                                     AS
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Holmes, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DECISION AND REASONS (V)

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

      1. The appellant has appealed against a  decision  of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal ('FTT') promulgated on 18 May 2020, dismissing his  appeal
         on asylum and human rights grounds.  As the appellant  has  made  a
         claim  for  international  protection  I  have  made  an  anonymity
         direction.

Background

      2. The appellant is a citizen of Iraq of Kurdish ethnicity.  His  home
         area was in Sulaymaniya, in the Kurdish Region of Iraq.  His  claim
         for asylum was based upon a fear of persecution from his father, in
         relation to whom he claimed the authorities would not  be  able  to
         provide  sufficient  protection,  for  reasons  relating   to   the
         dishonour the appellant was said to have brought by  assisting  his
         mother with divorce proceedings and allegations of  domestic  abuse
         against his father.  The FTT did not consider the appellant to have
         provided a credible account, and his appeal was dismissed for  this
         reason.

Appeal to the Upper Tribunal (UT)

      3. Counsel representing the appellant before the FTT (not  Mr  Holmes)
         drafted three grounds of appeal, in relation to which permission to
         appeal was granted by FTT  Judge  Keane  in  a  decision  dated  14
         September 2020.  Judge Keane summarised the grounds of appeal to be
         as follows - the FTT judge:

          1) substituted her  own  understanding  as  to  what  constituted
             reasonable conduct in  finding  that  the  appellant's  father
             would not use his contacts with the PDK in order to locate the
             appellant and thereafter harm him.

          2)  had  regard  to  an  immaterial  consideration  in  seemingly
             according weight to the fact that the appellant's  witness,  a
             Mr Majid, did not attend the hearing;

          3) failed to take into account the appellant's explanation as  to
             why  his  mother   continued   to   live   with   his   father
             notwithstanding his propensity to violence.

      4. At the hearing before me Mr Holmes sought permission to  amend  the
         grounds of appeal in order to rely upon a fourth ground of  appeal:
         the FTT failed to give adequate reasons  for  rejecting  the  court
         documents and whatsapp messages relied upon by the appellant and  /
         or failed to consider that evidence in the round.  Mr  McVeety  did
         not oppose the application for permission to rely upon ground 4 and
         I granted the application.  Although there was  considerable  delay
         of some five months since grounds of appeal should have been filed,
         Mr McVeety made it clear that he was not  prejudiced  by  this  and
         could see the  practical  utility  in  dealing  with  all  relevant
         matters, particularly the court documents.   Ground  4  as  drafted
         can properly be described as a 'Robinson obvious' ground of  appeal
         with strong prospects of success for the reasons I set  out  below.
         It is regrettable that Counsel drafting the grounds of  appeal  did
         not identify the issue.  Nevertheless I indicated that in  all  the
         circumstances it was appropriate for permission to  be  granted  to
         rely upon ground 4.

      5. Both representatives agreed with my suggestion that I  should  hear
         submissions on ground  4  first  because  it  appeared  to  be  the
         strongest of the pleaded grounds of appeal.  They also agreed  that
         if ground 4 was made out, the other  adverse  credibility  findings
         were unsafe and the FTT decision should be set aside  and  remitted
         to the FTT.

      6. After hearing brief submissions from both parties I indicated  that
         I was satisfied that ground 4 was made out for the  reasons  I  set
         out below.

Error of law discussion - ground 4

      7. The appellant's solicitors submitted a  mini-bundle  containing  21
         pages of court documents from  Iraq  with  associated  translations
         under a covering letter to the Tribunal dated 24 May  2019.   These
         court documents are extensive and varied.  They broadly  correspond
         with the appellant's chronology that in recent  years  he  assisted
         his mother in her divorce court  proceedings  against  his  father,
         wherein allegations of domestic abuse against the father were made.
          The whatsapp messages are of less import and only  relevant  to  a
         peripheral issue in the case.  They simply indicate that the mother
         had heated words with a person said to be a woman  the  father  was
         having an affair with.  I therefore focus upon the court documents.

      8. I note from a case management review hearing note dated  2  January
         2020  that  the  court  documents  mini-bundle  was  given  to  the
         presenting officer at a case management hearing of that  date.  The
         court  documents  mini-bundle  was  clearly  available  within  the
         Tribunal's file, albeit it is to  be  found  at  the  back  of  the
         treasury tagged section at the  right  of  the  file.   Once  would
         normally expect bundles to be in the left hand section of the file.
          It is unclear why the court documents mini-bundle was not added to
         one  of  the  two  large  'hearing  bundles'  relied  upon  by  the
         appellant.  In any event, the FTT must have been aware of the court
         documents as these are referred to at [13], [21], [42] and [55]  of
         the FTT's decision.  It is however not entirely clear  whether  the
         FTT was  aware  or  considered  the  court  documents  mini-bundle.
         Although the respondent's decision letter dated October 2019 refers
         to the court documents, the respondent's bundle only  includes  the
         untranslated documents (whereas the mini bundle contains the copies
         of the court documents and their respective translations).

      9. Both representatives before  me  accepted  that  the  FTT  had  not
         referred to the court documents mini-bundle in the decision and  it
         remains  unclear  whether  the   judge   considered   the   English
         translations or not.  It is regrettable that both the appellant and
         the respondent failed to include the English  translations  in  the
         respective bundles they prepared for the FTT  hearing,  albeit  the
         appellant had at an earlier point filed  and  served  the  separate
         mini-bundle.

     10. The FTT judge clearly indicated at [43] that she had considered all
         of the documentary evidence before her.  That gives little  comfort
         in circumstances wherein it is unknown whether the judge knew  that
         the court documents mini-bundle (with the translations) was  before
         her or not.  That is not the end of  the  matter  because  the  FTT
         judge clearly indicated at [45] that she "had regard to all of  the
         evidence   presented   by   the   appellant".    The    appellant's
         representative referred the judge to the court documents but  again
         it is uncertain whether  the  judge  was  aware  that  the  English
         translations were contained in  a  mini-bundle  separate  from  the
         other bundles.

     11. In any event, I accept Mr  Holmes'  submission  that  although  the
         judge stated that she considered all the documentary evidence,  she
         made no clear findings in  relation  to  the  documentary  evidence
         contained in the mini-bundle.  This  was  prima  facie  significant
         evidence corroborative of  the  appellant's  key  elements  to  the
         appellant's account: his mother initiated divorce proceedings,  she
         alleged domestic abuse against his father, he assisted her  in  the
         court process.   The FTT was obliged to consider this  evidence  in
         the  round  prior  to  rejecting  the  appellant's  own   evidence.
         Instead, at [55] the FTT found the court documents  could  not  "be
         relied upon in the context of  [the  appellant's]  evidence".   The
         judge appears to have considered  the  court  documents  unreliable
         merely because she had rejected the appellant's own evidence.  That
         this is so is clear from the structure of the decision itself.   At
         [45] the judge emphasised that  although  she  considered  all  the
         evidence, she did not find the appellant to be a  credible  witness
         of fact.  The judge went on to give reasons why  she  regarded  the
         appellant's testimony to be incredible from  [45]  to  [54]  before
         saying this at 55:

             "I have had regard to  the  case  of  Tanveer  Ahmed  but  the
             appellant has failed to show  that  the  court  documents  and
             whatsapp messages can be relied upon in  the  context  of  his
             evidence"

     12. Mr McVeety submitted that the judge quite properly directed herself
         to Tanveer Ahmed v SSHD [2002] INLR 345, which is authority for the
         proposition that the FTT should consider whether a document is  one
         on which reliance should properly be placed after  looking  at  all
         the evidence in the round.  Mr McVeety however  accepted  that  the
         documentary  evidence  in  question  must  itself  nonetheless   be
         considered in the round.  He acknowledged that  he  was  unable  to
         take me to any part of the decision  wherein  the  judge  expressly
         addressed the apparent corroborative detail in the court documents.
            In  my  judgment,  he  failure  to  specifically   address   the
         documentary evidence in the court documents mini-bundle is an error
         of law.  As Mr McVeety observed it was entirely open  to  the  FTT,
         having considered this evidence to have found it unreliable  for  a
         number of possible reasons (some  of  which  are  set  out  in  the
         respondent's decision letter).  The mini-bundle contained  evidence
         of potential significance to key aspects of  the  appellant's  case
         and demanded more careful scrutiny.  I therefore accept that ground
         4 has been made out and as agreed by the parties there is  no  need
         to consider the remaining grounds of appeal.



Notice of decision

     13. The FTT decision contains a material error of law and is set aside.
          The matter is remitted to the FTT to be heard de novo by  a  judge
         other than Judge Chowdhury.


Signed: UTJ Plimmer                              Date: 12 November 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Plimmer
