
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11633/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 27 April 2017                      |On 18 May 2017                        |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER


                                   Between

                                     F T
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Butterworth, Counsel instructed by Lambeth Law
Centre
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless  the  Upper  Tribunal  or  a
Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  the  original
Appellant in this determination identified as  FT.  This  direction  applies
to, amongst others, all parties. Any failure to comply with  this  direction
could give rise to contempt of court proceedings.

    1. First-tier Tribunal Judge Black, in a decision  promulgated  on  9th
       December 2016, dismissed the appellant's appeal against the decision
       of the respondent dated 30th September 2016.  Permission  to  appeal
       was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Page.


    2. The grounds relied upon by the appellant assert, inter alia:
        . It had been accepted by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Neyman  in  an
          earlier appeal heard in March 2006  that  the  appellant  was  an
          opponent of the Islamic Regime in Iran and had been  involved  in
          low level activity;
        . That there was evidence before First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Black
          that the appellant had  been  involved  in  sur  place  political
          activity in the UK;
        . That neither  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Black  nor  First-tier
          Tribunal Judge Neyman found the appellant was not sincere in  his
          political opposition;
        . That First-tier Tribunal Judge Black failed to consider and  make
          findings upon evidence before her; in particular letters from the
          People's Mujahadeen organisation and Anglo Iranian Academics;
        . That Judge Black had concluded there  was  no  link  between  the
          Constitutional Movement of Iran and the People's  Mujahadeen  but
          had failed to consider his claimed sur place activities;




    3. There was also reference to the confusion between  the  initials  of
       two organisations but little seems to turn on that  given  they  are
       initials of the English translation of Iranian organisations.


    4. The applicant relies upon letters submitted in support of his claim.
       In particular a letter dated 27  September  2010  from  Sia  Rajabi,
       president of the Anglo Iranian Academics in the  UK,  where  in  the
       second paragraph, referring to attacks by the  Iranian  authorities,
       it says "the pick of these attacks was in July 28th 2009".   In  the
       next paragraph it says:

         "Ever since the attack worldwide campaigns of various  nature  have
         been launched in defense of Camp Ashraf.   Mr  Tosi  has  taken  an
         active  part  in  numerous  demonstrates,  meetings  and   lobbying
         activities and in support of Camp Ashraf".


    That seems to be saying the appellant has been active in the  UK  since
    2009.


    5. Judge Black does not address these various letters. Although, as  Mr
       Melvin submits, none of the writers  of  the  letters  attended  the
       hearing and they are 'old', it is still incumbent upon the judge  to
       consider them in reaching her decision, particularly given there had
       been an earlier decision in March 2006 where there were findings  of
       a lack of relevant activity that would render the appellant at  risk
       of being persecuted if he were removed to Iran. The judge has  erred
       in law in failing to consider evidence that was before her.


    6. The question remains whether, had she taken them into  account  they
       would have made a material difference to her  decision.  It  may  be
       that a judge considering the evidence as a whole would take the view
       that they were of little weight either because of their age, lack of
       verification or lack of attendance at the hearing by the writers but
       I simply do  not know what view Judge Black took of those letters or
       the weight she placed upon them, if any.


    7. I am satisfied the failure to consider the four or five  letters  is
       material and I set aside the decision to be remade.


    8. The scheme of the Tribunals Court and Enforcement Act 2007 does  not
       assign the function of primary fact finding to the  Upper  Tribunal;
       s.12(2) of the TCEA 2007 requires me to remit the case to the First-
       tier Tribunal with directions or remake it for myself. The facts  of
       this appeal are disputed and the findings of fact made by the First-
       tier Tribunal are set aside in their entirety. I conclude  that  the
       decision should be  remitted  to  a  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  to
       determine the appeal.



Conclusion of Decision

The First-tier Tribunal Judge made an error of law and the decision  is  set
aside to be remade.
I remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.


Signed
[pic]
UTJ Coker
17th May 2017


