
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:  PA/11060/2019 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided under Rule 34 without a      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|hearing                              |On 12 October 2020                   |
|on 6 October 2020                    |                                     |


                                   Before:

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GILL


                                   Between

                                     M M
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


                                  Anonymity

I make an order under r.14(1) of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008 prohibiting the disclosure or publication of  any  matter  likely
to lead members of the public to identify the original appellant. No  report
of these proceedings  shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  him.   This
direction applies to both the appellant and to the respondent and all  other
persons. Failure to comply with this direction could  lead  to  contempt  of
court proceedings. I make this order because this  is  a  protection  claim.
The parties at liberty to apply to discharge this order, with reasons.

    This is a decision on the papers without  a  hearing.  The  appellant's
    written submissions did not address the question whether  it  would  be
    appropriate for a decision  to  be  made  on  the  papers.  No  written
    submissions were received from the respondent. The documents  described
    at paras 5-6 below were submitted. A face-to-face hearing or  a  remote
    hearing was not held for the reasons given at  paras  8-19  below.  The
    order made is set out at para 57 below. (Administrative Instruction No.
    2 from the Senior President of Tribunals).

Representation (by written submissions):
For the appellant:     Mr A Caskie, instructed by Maguire Solicitors.
For the respondent:    (No representation).


                                  DECISION

 1. The appellant, a national of Iraq  born  on  1  January  1985,  appeals
    against a decision  of  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  S.T.  Fox
    (hereafter the "Judge") who, in a decision promulgated on  21  February
    2020 following a hearing on 17 December 2019, dismissed his  appeal  on
    asylum, humanitarian protection and  human  rights  grounds  against  a
    decision of the respondent of 16 October 2019  to  refuse  his  further
    submissions of 20 June 2019.

 2. On 3 July 2020, the Upper Tribunal sent to  the  parties  a  "Note  and
    Directions"  by  Mr  C.M.G.  Ockelton,  Vice  President  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal, in which he stated that he had  taken  the  provisional  view
    that it would  be  appropriate  in  the  instant  case  to  decide  the
    following questions without a hearing:

         (a)      whether the decision of the Judge involved the  making  of
             an error of law; and

         (b)      if so, whether it should be set aside.

 3. Mr Ockelton  then  gave  directions  which  set  a  timescale  for  the
    appellant to make written submissions on questions (a) and (b), for the
    respondent to lodge submissions in reply and for the appellant to lodge
    further submissions in response. He also gave directions which provided
    for any party who considered that despite the  foregoing  directions  a
    hearing was necessary to consider questions (a) and/or  (b)  to  submit
    reasons for that view within a certain timescale.

 4. The time limits for compliance with the directions of Mr Ockelton  were
    extended by a decision of Mr A Hussain, lawyer of the  Upper  Tribunal,
    pursuant to delegated judicial  powers,  in  a  "Decision  and  Further
    Directions" dated 20 July 2020 sent to the parties on 21 July  2020  by
    email.

 5. In response to the  "Note  and  Directions",  the  Upper  Tribunal  has
    received  from  the  appellant  written  submissions  by  Mr  A  Caskie
    submitted under cover of an email dated 28 August 2020 timed  at  12:41
    hours and again by email dated 28 August 2020  timed  at  13:52  hours.
    This email did not contain the attachment referred to at para 2 of  the
    written submissions, that is, a marked up copy of the Judge's decision.
    Following the Upper  Tribunal's  request  for  this  document,  it  was
    received by email dated 6  October  2020  timed  at  09:21  hours  from
    Maguire Solicitors. It appears  that  the  three  emails  from  Maguire
    Solicitors were not copied to the respondent.

 6. The Upper Tribunal has not received any submissions on the respondent's
    behalf in response to the "Note and Directions".



The issues

 7. I have to decide whether it is appropriate to decide question  (a)  and
    (b) set out above. If I decide that it is  appropriate  to  decide  the
    said questions without a hearing and if I  do  set  aside  the  Judge's
    decision, then I will have  to  decide  whether  the  decision  on  the
    appellant's appeal against the respondent's decision should be  re-made
    in the Upper Tribunal or whether the appeal should be remitted  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal (hereafter the "Issues").

Whether it is appropriate to proceed without a hearing

 8. As I  have  said  above,  the  Upper  Tribunal  has  not  received  any
    submissions from the respondent. The appellant's written submissions do
    not address the question whether it would be appropriate for the  Upper
    Tribunal to decide the Issues without a hearing.

 9. I do not rely upon the mere fact that the appellant and the  respondent
    have not made  any  submissions  as  justifying  proceeding  without  a
    hearing. I have considered the circumstances for myself.

10. The appeal in the instant case is straightforward.

11. I am aware of, and take into account, the force of the points  made  in
    the dicta of the late Laws LJ at para 38 of Sengupta  v  Holmes  [2002]
    EWCA Civ 1104 concerning the power of oral argument; and the  dicta  in
    the decision in R v Sussex Justices, ex parte McCarthy [1924] 1 KB  256
    to the effect that justice must be done and be  seen  to  be  done,  to
    mention just two of the cases in which we have received  guidance  from
    judges in the higher  courts  concerning  the  importance  of  an  oral
    hearing.

12. I am aware of and have applied the guidance of  the  Supreme  Court  at
    para 2 of its judgment in Osborn and others v Parole Board [2013]  UKSC
    61.

13. Given that my decision is limited to the Issues, there is  no  question
    of my making findings of fact or hearing oral evidence  or  considering
    any evidence at this stage.

14. In addition, I take into account the seriousness of the issues  in  the
    instant appeal for the appellant. This appeal relates to his protection
    claim which is a serious matter. It also relates to his Article 8 claim
    human rights claim based, in part, on his relationship with his partner
    and their two children and his partner's child. This is also  a  matter
    of some seriousness.

15. I have considered  all  the  circumstances  very  carefully  and  taken
    everything into account, including the overriding objective.

16. I considered the Judge's decision,  the  grounds  and  the  submissions
    before me. I was of the view, taken provisionally at this  stage,  that
    there was nothing complicated at all in the assessment of the Issues in
    the instant case, given that the grounds are simple and straightforward
    and the Judge's decision  straightforward.  I  kept  the  matter  under
    review throughout my deliberations. However, at the  conclusion  of  my
    deliberations, I was affirmed in the view I had taken on a  preliminary
    basis.

17. Whilst the Tribunal is now listing some cases for face-to-face hearings
    and using technology to hold hearings remotely in other cases where  it
    is appropriate to do so, the  fact  is  that  it  is  not  possible  to
    accommodate all cases in one of these ways without undue delay  to  all
    cases. Of course, the need to be fair  cannot  be  sacrificed  even  if
    there would be a lengthy delay in order to hold a hearing  face-to-face
    or remotely or even if there is a consequent delay on other cases being
    heard.

18.  There  are  cases  that  can  fairly  be  decided  without  a  hearing
    notwithstanding that the outcome of the decision may not be  in  favour
    of the party  who  is  the  appellant.  In  the  present  unprecedented
    circumstances brought about by the coronavirus pandemic, it is my  duty
    to identify those cases that can fairly be decided without a hearing.

19. Having considered the matter with anxious scrutiny, taken into  account
    the overriding  objective  and  the  guidance  in  the  relevant  cases
    including in particular Osborn and others v Parole Board,  I  concluded
    that it is appropriate, fair and just for me to exercise my  discretion
    and proceed to decide the Issues without a  hearing,  for  the  reasons
    given in this decision.

Questions (a) and (b) - whether the Judge  erred  in  law  and  whether  his
decision should be set aside

Background and summary of the decision of Judge Macdonald

20. The appellant claimed asylum on 29 August 2008. His  asylum  claim  was
    refused on 10 November 2008.  His  appeal  against  this  decision  was
    dismissed by Immigration Judge J G Macdonald in a decision  promulgated
    on 19 January 2009. Although an order was made for the decision on  the
    appellant's appeal to be reconsidered, Senior Immigration  Judge  Deans
    dismissed the appellant's appeal in  a  decision  promulgated  31  July
    2009. Judge Deans said that he was satisfied that Judge  Macdonald  had
    not materially erred in law.

21. It should be noted that the  respondent  was  not  represented  at  the
    hearing before Judge Macdonald.

22. The basis of the appellant's asylum claim before Judge Macdonald may be
    summarised as follows: On 5 August 2008, the appellant  was  approached
    by a terrorist group (Al-Qa'ida) and told to bring particular employees
    of the company for which the appellant worked as a  driver  to  a  pre-
    arranged location to be be-headed eventually by the group. He was  told
    by one of the terrorists that they would kill him if he did not  do  as
    they had requested. The appellant told his company  what  had  happened
    and they advised him to move away. The appellant's uncle then  arranged
    for his journey out of Iraq. The appellant later  discovered  that  the
    terrorists had destroyed his family home on 7 August  2008.  He  feared
    being persecuted by the group if he is returned to Iraq.

23. In addition, the appellant said that his father used  to  be  with  the
    security forces in the Ba'ath Party. He was killed on 17  May  2005  by
    Iraqi civilians for harming civilians when was in the Ba'ath Party. The
    appellant fears that he will face problems in Iraq due to his  father's
    former association with the Ba'ath Party.

24. Judge Macdonald accepted the appellant's  evidence  that  he  had  been
    approached by the terrorist group on 5 August  2008  and  that  he  was
    forced to flee at very short  notice  because  of  the  threat  from  a
    terrorist group who may well have links to  or  be  part  of  Al-Qa'ida
    (para 30).

25. Judge Macdonald did not make any  finding,  in  terms,  concerning  the
    credibility of the appellant's evidence that  his  father  had  been  a
    member of the security forces of the  Ba'ath  Party  and  that  he  was
    killed by civilians for harming civilians when he  was  in  the  Ba'ath
    Party. However, in the course of his  assessment  of  whether  internal
    relocation was a viable option, he said the following at para 34  which
    may  suggest  that  he  may  have  accepted  the  credibility  of   the
    appellant's evidence concerning his father:

         "The suggestion that the Appellant will be at risk because  of  the
         Baathist activities of his father seems to me to be both vague  and
         speculative and perhaps for that  reason  was  not  founded  on  in
         submissions by [the appellant's representative]."

26. In the appeal before Judge Macdonald, the appellant's  nationality  was
    in  dispute.  Judge  Macdonald  summarised  the   appellant's   witness
    statement at paras 2-11 of his decision. According to para 11 of  Judge
    Macdonald's decision, the appellant said in his witness statement  that
    he had provided his Iraqi citizenship card and Iraqi civil affair  card
    to his solicitors. This part of para 11 of Judge  Macdonald's  decision
    reads:

         "He [the appellant] has provided his  Iraqi  citizenship  card  and
         Iraqi civil  affair  card  to  his  solicitors  which  confirm  his
         nationality".

27. Judge Macdonald accepted that the appellant was  a  national  of  Iraq,
    stating at paras 22 and 24 as follows:

         "22.     I do have a certificate of Iraqi nationality  setting  out
             the name of the Appellant and giving  the  full  name  of  his
             father noting that his father was born in "Jaloula" as was his
             mother. In the absence of the Home Office I was not given  any
             reason to doubt the Integrity of these documents. Accordingly,
             contrary to what is  said  In  paragraph  22  of  the  refusal
             letter, the  Appellant  has  provided  objective  evidence  to
             support his claim to be an Iraqi national. The Home Office  do
             acknowledge at paragraph 22 that he did  answer  some  of  the
             questions  in  relation  to  his  nationality   correctly   at
             interview.

         24.       He  has   provided   documents   confirming   his   Iraqi
             nationality."

28. Judge Macdonald dismissed  the  appellant's  asylum  claim  because  he
    concluded that it would be safe and not unreasonable for the  appellant
    to relocate in Iraq, away from his home area of Jalawla in  the  Diyala
    province in Iraq.

The Judge's decision

29. Turning to the decision of the Judge, it is fair to say that there  are
    a number of grammatical and other errors in the decision, as Mr  Caskie
    states in his written submissions.  Nevertheless,  it  is  possible  to
    summarise his key conclusions/findings as follows:

         (i)      The appellant was not a credible  witness  (paras  34  and
         35). The core of his account lacked credibility (para 35).  He  was
         an economic migrant (para 36).

         (ii)     In relation to the  appellant's  identification  documents
         and the whereabouts of the documents, the Judge said as follows:

             "11.      ... He provided documents that confirmed his racking
                  [sic] nationality at his  initial  interviews.  Today,  he
                  maintains that these documents are still in the possession
                  of the Respondent. The Respondent does not deny  this.  In
                  his oral evidence he attempted to persuade me that he  had
                  never such documents in the first instance. When  pressed,
                  he resided [sic] from that position and accepts  that  the
                  Respondent perhaps holds his relevant documentation."

             "24.      As indicated above I am satisfied that the Appellant
                  and  the  Respondent,  between  them  have  the   relevant
                  identity documents that would align [sic]  his  return  to
                  Iraq...."

             "29.      ... He has the relevant identification documents....
                  "

             "33.      He maintained his attempted  denial,  not  being  an
                  Iraqi national, and not having any  documents  that  would
                  support his identity or nationality. There is a clear  and
                  unequivocal record  of  these  documents  existing,  being
                  handed by him to the Respondent, who currently  holds  the
                  documents. This attempted denial once again can only  have
                  a negative impact upon his credibility."

         (iii)    In relation to whether the appellant  has  any  family  in
         Iraq, the Judge said as follows:

             "24.      ... He maintains that he still  has  family  in  the
                  area and they would be available to assist and support him
                  in any endeavour is upon return. A bland averment, in  the
                  alternative from the Appellant is not sufficient  evidence
                  to  persuade  me  to  go  against  the  relevant   country
                  guidance."

             "29.      ... He has family in Iraq..."

             "60.      ... He can  make  use  of  his  family  connections,
                  relatives former friends and neighbours and colleagues  to
                  seek assistance from them to reintegrate.  He  speaks  the
                  language. He is familiar with the culture and  customs  as
                  is his current partner. He has  a  relevant  documentation
                  available to him to assist in [sic] return."

         (iv)     In relation  to  the  appellant's  relationship  with  his
         partner, their two children and his stepson, the Judge said,  inter
         alia, as follows:

             "37.      With  regard  to  section  117  of  the  Nationality
                  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  20021  make  the  following
                  observations and findings. As indicated  at  paragraph  16
                  above, the Appellant and his partner both entered  into  a
                  relationship knowing his immigration status. At that  time
                  neither could claim to be in neophyte of  the  immigration
                  environment  and  process.  For  the  purpose  of  today's
                  hearing the Appellant fully accepts that that relationship
                  was precarious and remains so...." "

             "56.      Section 55 issues necessarily come to the fore and I
                  take into account the Appellant's  relationship  with  his
                  stepson, partner and two children. I am aware of the  need
                  to safeguard and promote the welfare of  children  in  the
                  UK. His partner's status in the UK has not  been  recorded
                  in any document before me today. I am led to believe  that
                  she has Leave to Remain, perhaps on foot of  a  successful
                  asylum claim. She however along with the children live  in
                  Birmingham. He lives in  Glasgow.  It  must  be  extremely
                  difficult for them to maintain any relationship over  such
                  a long distance. [pic]Other than the evidence provided  by
                  the Appellant and his partner, there is  no  corroboration
                  that the relationship still  subsists  to  any  meaningful
                  degree, by demonstrating frequency in contact, physically,
                  by  mail,  email,  other  mode  or  telephone  call.   The
                  Appellant admits in his evidence that he has had  recourse
                  to borrow money from others simply to help  them  survive.
                  Lack of finances of the sea  [sic]  a  very  limiting  and
                  restrictive factor in maintaining such a relationship over
                  a long distance. Its impact cannot be ignored. I also note
                  the letters of support in the Appellant's bundle. None  of
                  these witnesses have come forward to give  evidence  today
                  and to be cross examined."

             "57.      There appears to be no dispute between  the  parties
                  that this relationship exists between the  Appellant,  his
                  partner and children. It is not in dispute that two of the
                  children are the Appellant's. He claims responsibility for
                  the eldest child, his stepson. His claim to be  active  in
                  their lives at different levels must be viewed against the
                  background of a considerable geographical  separation  and
                  the family's impecunious circumstances. How do they afford
                  to  stay  in  touch?  He  has  not  been  adopted  by  the
                  Appellant. The child is  only  13  years  old.  There  are
                  letters of support from others in the  Appellant's  bundle
                  which lend some credence to the Appellant's  claim  to  be
                  responsible for the eldest child. This would appear to  be
                  a matter of interest, when taken into account the possible
                  coincidence of the relationship  with  his  partner.  That
                  child did not know the Appellant upon his arrival  in  the
                  United Kingdom and  it  took  some  time  for  him  to  be
                  integrated into the partner's family. In  the  alternative
                  that relationship would appear to have  been  forged  with
                  indecent haste. That  would  have  had  consequences.  The
                  child is aware of his real father. They all appear to have
                  the ability to  communicate  freely  and  in  unrestricted
                  terms of  by  using  Kurdish  Sorani  language.  There  is
                  insufficient evidence before me today that  would  satisfy
                  me that the Appellant has demonstrated that the child  has
                  fully integrated into society in the  United  Kingdom  and
                  that there would be difficulties  reintegrating  into  the
                  Appellant's home country of Iraq. All three children  will
                  benefit from their short stay in the United Kingdom.  That
                  experience will stand them in good  stead  elsewhere.  The
                  appellant's partner does not make a case that she would be
                  happy to [sic] the family to be broken up. In that context
                  I considered reasonable to unfair [sic] that she would  be
                  happy to accompany her partner, if her claim to being in a
                  subsisting and genuine relationship is credible."

             58. ... The Appellant and  his  family  all  accept  that  the
                  relationship was entered into in  full  knowledge  of  his
                  precarious that is [sic] and that the relationship remains
                  precarious.[pic]"

             (My emphasis)

Assessment

30. The appellant's written submissions raised  several  new  grounds  that
    were not raised in the original grounds and in  respect  of  which  the
    appellant did not have permission. For example, paras 1-3 contend  that
    the  Judge's  decision  "contained   50   typographical,   grammatical,
    misgenderings,  or  other  obvious  errors  of  expression  or  law  as
    highlighted in the enclosed marked up copy of the  determination"  such
    that the Tribunal should consider simply setting it aside because of  a
    procedural defect, i.e. the absence of an  adequate  determination.  In
    this regard, para 1 refers to and relies upon an unreported decision of
    the Upper Tribunal in Sareh, PA/03488/2017.

31. However, whilst it is true that  para  2(i)  of  the  original  grounds
    stated that paras 30-32 and 56-58 of the Judge's decision did not  make
    grammatical sense, it was not pleaded as a ground that  the  number  of
    errors in the decision was  such  that,  on  that  account  alone,  the
    decision was inadequate and should be set aside. The  ground  that  was
    raised was that, as a result of the fact that paras 30-32 and 56-58  of
    the Judge's decision  did  not  make  grammatical  sense,  the  Judge's
    findings were unclear, which is not the same ground. Furthermore,  this
    ground was raised in connection with the Judge's decision on Article 8,
    whereas paras 1-3 of the grounds extend to include the protection claim
    given that it is contended that the Judge's entire decision  should  be
    set aside.

32. Although I am aware that Sareh was a decision of a panel of  the  Upper
    Tribunal which included the Vice-President and although  I  acknowledge
    that decisions of the Vice President command considerable  respect,  it
    is nevertheless the case that the decision was an unreported  decision.
    Mr Caskie therefore requires permission to rely upon it. No application
    was made for permission to raise the new ground advanced at  paras  1-3
    of the appellant's written submissions or to rely upon Sareh.

33. Other examples of grounds being raised in the written submissions which
    were not raised in the original grounds are as follows:

         (i)      Para 4 which contends that the  Judge  failed  to  make  a
         finding on the immigration status of the appellant's partner.

         (ii)     Para 7 which contends that the Judge gave no  reasons  for
         not accepting that the appellant is likely to secure employment  in
         the United Kingdom.

         (iii)    Para 8 which contends that the Judge  erred  in  requiring
         corroboration at para 28 of his decision.

         (iv)     Para 9 which contends that the  Judge  applied  the  wrong
         standard of proof at para 42.

         (v)      Para 13 which contends that  "...  the  Judge  appears  to
         proceed in ignorance of the requirements of the provision of Asylum
         Support and the impact of that on a family that  was  formed  after
         each adult member of the family had claimed  asylum  so  that  they
         were not for Home Office purposes dependents upon one another. That
         was a further relevant matter the Judge should have known about (it
         is a mater [sic] of law) that he left out of account."

         (vi)     Para 14 which contends that the Judge adopted, at paras 50
         and 53, a superseded model for the  assessment  of  the  Article  8
         claim,  i.e.  whether  there  is  an  arguable  case  outside   the
         Immigration Rules.

34. The directions given in the "Note and Directions" do  not  replace  the
    requirements in the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008  for
    appellants to have permission to argue their  grounds.  An  application
    for permission to rely  upon  the  additional  grounds  raised  in  the
    appellant's written submissions should have been made.

35. In the absence of any such  application,  I  decline  to  consider  any
    grounds raised in the appellant's written submissions  which  were  not
    raised in the original grounds.

36. As I have said at para 5 above, the appellant's  emails  of  28  August
    2020 with his written submissions were not copied or addressed  to  the
    respondent. However, the respondent is not prejudiced by my  proceeding
    to decide this appeal notwithstanding that she has not been served with
    the appellant's written submissions for the following reasons:

         (i)      I have decided to disregard the new grounds raised in  the
         appellant's written submissions for which the  appellant  does  not
         have permission; and

         (ii)     the respondent had an opportunity (which she did not take)
         to file and serve a Rule 24 reply notwithstanding that she has  not
         been served with the appellant's written submissions.

37.  Accordingly,  my  decision  to   proceed   to   decide   this   appeal
    notwithstanding that the  respondent  has  not  been  served  with  the
    appellant's written submissions does not prejudice  the  respondent  in
    any way.

38. I turn now to the Judge's decision.

The Judge's decision on the protection claim

39. In relation to the appellant's protection claim, I  am  satisfied  that
    the Judge erred in law in making his  adverse  credibility  assessment,
    for the following reasons:

         (i)      Firstly, in making his finding that the  appellant's  core
         account lacked credibility, he failed to take into account that the
         appellant had been found by Judge Macdonald to be credible  in  his
         evidence as to the core of his asylum claim. There was  no  mention
         in the Judge's decision of the guidance  in  Devaseelan  v  SSHD  *
         [2002] UKIAT 702. Indeed, he seemed to be  unaware  of  it,  as  it
         seems he was unaware that Judge Macdonald had found  the  appellant
         to be a credible witness.

         (ii)     Secondly, the  reasons  the  Judge  gave  for  making  his
         adverse credibility assessment were a wholly inadequate  basis  for
         rejecting the appellant's credibility concerning the basis  of  his
         asylum claim and for finding that he was an economic  migrant.  The
         Judge gave his reasons for his adverse  credibility  assessment  at
         paras 30-33 and at para 38. I have ignored the remaining paragraphs
         because the Judge  merely  stated  his  conclusions  on  the  facts
         without providing any reasons. Paras 30-32 concern the  appellant's
         evidence about his family life claim in the United Kingdom.  It  is
         difficult to see the relevance of the reasoning at paras  30-32  to
         an assessment  of  the  credibility  of  the  appellant's  evidence
         concerning the reasons for fearing being returned to Iraq. Para  38
         of the Judge's decision concerned s.8 of the Asylum and Immigration
         (Treatment of Claimants, etc.) Act 2004. Section 8 is an inadequate
         basis for rejecting the entirety of the appellant's evidence  about
         the basis of his asylum claim. As will be seen  from  my  reasoning
         below, the Judge's reasoning at para  33  of  his  decision  cannot
         stand. It follows therefore that, even if this had been a  case  in
         which Devaseelan was not applicable (which is not  the  case),  the
         Judge's adverse credibility assessment was fatally flawed.

         (iii)    The errors described at (i) and (ii) above are each  fatal
         to the Judge's adverse assessment of credibility.  The  credibility
         of the appellant's account of the reasons why he  feared  returning
         to Iraq was material to any assessment of the future  risk,  having
         regard to the guidance in SMO, KSP & IM  (Article  15(c);  identity
         documents) Iraq CG [2019] UKUT 00400 (IAC).

40. In addition, on the question whether the appellant has family in  Iraq,
    para 24 of the Judge's decision,  quoted  at  my  para  29(iii)  above,
    appears to make two contradictory statements, i.e. that "he" maintained
    he still has family in the area and also that the appellant had made "a
    bland averment in the alternative".  Elsewhere,  the  Judge  stated  at
    several points that the appellant has family in Iraq. It  appears  that
    he made an assumption that the appellant was still in contact with  his
    family. He did not engage with the appellant's evidence at  para  3  of
    his witness statement (AB/1) that he had lost contact with  his  family
    since leaving Iraq in 2008 and did not know their whereabouts.  Whether
    or not the appellant is in contact  with  his  family  in  Iraq  is  an
    important matter, given the guidance in SMO concerning  the  importance
    of a CSID.

41. I turn now to the Judge's consideration of this aspect of the  guidance
    in SMO.

42. In this regard, I have examined  carefully  the  Judge's  decision  and
    Judge Macdonald's decision in an attempt to ascertain what evidence was
    before the Judge concerning the whereabouts of the appellant's identity
    documentation.

43. The grounds contend that the respondent had asserted that she  had  the
    appellant's identity documents and that  the  Judge  erred  in  law  in
    merely accepting that assertion. At para 11 of his decision (quoted  at
    my para 29(ii) above), the Judge said that  "he  [i.e.  the  appellant]
    maintained that these documents were still in  the  possession  of  the
    respondent" and that "the respondent does not deny this". At  para  24,
    he said that he was satisfied that the  appellant  and  the  respondent
    between them have the relevant identity documents. At para 33, he  said
    that there is a  "clear  and  unequivocal  record  of  these  documents
    existing, being handed by him to the respondent, who currently hold the
    documents".

44. I do not accept the contention in the grounds that the  respondent  had
    asserted in the appeal before the Judge that she was in  possession  of
    the appellant's identity documents. Furthermore, I am  satisfied  that,
    to the extent that the Judge assumed that this was the case,  he  erred
    in doing so. My reasons are as follows:

         (i)      That the respondent did not deny the appellant's assertion
         that the respondent had his identity  documents  (para  11  of  the
         Judge's decision) was not an assertion by the respondent  that  the
         documents were in her possession. To  the  contrary,  the  decision
         letter noted at para 24 (page 11 of 19) that  Judge  Macdonald  had
         noted that the appellant had given his Iraqi citizenship  card  and
         Iraqi civil affair card to his solicitor. Para 24 of  the  decision
         letter specifically states that the appellant was in possession  of
         the documents needed to get re-documented.

         (ii)     If  the  Judge  was  satisfied  that  the  respondent  had
         asserted that the identity documents were  in  her  possession,  he
         would not have needed to say, at para 24, that  the  appellant  and
         the respondent between them have the identity documents.

         (iii)    It is unclear  what  evidence  was  before  the  Judge  to
         support his observation at para 33, that there  was  a  "clear  and
         unequivocal record of these documents existing, being handed by him
         to the respondent, who currently hold the documents", given that:

             (a) para 11 of Judge  Macdonald's  decision  referred  to  the
             appellant's evidence in his  witness  statement  that  he  had
             provided his Iraqi citizenship card  and  Iraqi  civil  affair
             card to his solicitors and there was no  evidence  before  the
             Judge that the solicitors had  passed  the  documents  to  the
             respondent; and

             (b) Judge Macdonald said at para 22 of his  decision  that  he
             had a certificate of Iraqi nationality but the respondent  was
             not represented at that hearing.

45. All that can be said with any certainty, given everything that was said
    by Judge Macdonald  at  paras  11,  22  and  24  of  his  decision  and
    everything that was said by the Judge at paras 11, 24, 29 and 33 of his
    decision, is that the current whereabouts of the  appellant's  identity
    documents is unclear.

46. It is therefore plain  that  the  Judge's  assessment  of  the  country
    guidance in SMO is vitiated by his assumption  that  the  appellant  is
    able to obtain the documents, wherever they happen  to  be.  Given  the
    importance of such documentation being available to a returnee,  it  is
    plain that the  Judge's  decision  on  the  appellant's  asylum  claim,
    humanitarian protection claim and the related Article  3  claim  simply
    cannot stand.

47. In view of what I have said at paras 42-45 above, the case may  benefit
    from a case management hearing before the decision on the appeal is re-
    made.

48. Although this will be a matter for the Judge who hears  the  appeal  on
    the next occasion, the appellant should note that the evidence to which
    I have referred shows that he  last  had  possession  of  his  identity
    documents. He said in his witness statement that he had given  them  to
    his solicitor and Judge Macdonald said  that  identity  documents  were
    produced before him. The appellant is on notice that he  will  need  to
    produce evidence from his  solicitor  as  to  the  whereabouts  of  the
    identity documents.

The Judge's decision on the Article 8 claim

49. In relation to the appellant's Article 8  claim,  the  grounds  contend
    that the child of the appellant's partner was a  qualifying  child  and
    that the Judge therefore erred in failing to consider s.117B(6) of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, i.e. whether it would  be
    reasonable for the child to leave the United Kingdom.

50. However, I do not accept that the evidence before the Judge showed that
    the child was a qualifying child. In her  witness  statement  dated  29
    November 2019 (AB/5), the appellant's partner said that she  left  Iran
    in 2013 for the United Kingdom. The hearing before the Judge took place
    on 17 December 2019. Accordingly, it cannot be said that  the  evidence
    before the Judge showed that the child had lived in the United  Kingdom
    continuously for at least 7 years, on any reasonable view.

51. Nevertheless, I am satisfied  that  the  Judge  erred  in  law  in  his
    assessment of the  appellant's  Article  8  claim,  for  the  following
    reasons:

         (i)      At  para  68  of  the  respondent's  refusal  letter,  the
         respondent noted that the appellant was living in Glasgow and  that
         his partner and the  three  children  were  living  in  Birmingham.
         Nevertheless, the respondent stated that it was accepted  that  the
         appellant  was  in  a  genuine  subsisting  relationship  with  his
         partner, that he had a parental relationship with his two  children
         and had a parental relationship with  his  partner's  child.  These
         were clear concessions on the part of the respondent.

         (ii)     However, at para 56 of his decision, the Judge  questioned
         whether the relationship between  the  appellant  and  his  partner
         "still subsists to any meaningful degree ...". It appears  that  he
         was also taking issue with whether the  appellant  had  a  parental
         relationship with  his  partner's  child  as  he  referred  to  the
         appellant  having  forged  "that  relationship  ...  with  indecent
         haste".

         (iii)    It is therefore clear  that  the  Judge  went  behind  the
         respondent's concession that the appellant had a genuine subsisting
         relationship with his partner, without giving  the  appellant  fair
         notice thereof. It may also be that he went behind the respondent's
         conclusion that the appellant had a parental relationship with  the
         partner's child without giving the appellant fair notice.

         (iv)      These  errors  were  plainly  material  to  the   Judge's
         assessment of proportionality. They are sufficient to  vitiate  the
         Judge's assessment of proportionality.

52. For all of the reasons given above, I am satisfied that the  Judge  did
    materially err in law in  reaching  his  decision  on  the  appellant's
    protection claim and his Article 8 claim. I  therefore  set  aside  his
    decision in its entirety. None of his findings can stand.

53. It is therefore unnecessary for me to deal with the  remainder  of  the
    grounds.

54. The next question is whether the decision  on  the  appellant's  appeal
    should be re-made in the Upper Tribunal or whether the appeal should be
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.

55. In the majority of cases, the Upper Tribunal  when  setting  aside  the
    decision will re-make the relevant decision itself. However,  para  7.2
    of the Practice Statements for the Immigration and Asylum  Chambers  of
    the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  the  Upper  Tribunal   (the   "Practice
    Statements") recognises that it may  not  be  possible  for  the  Upper
    Tribunal to proceed to re-make the decision when it is satisfied that:

    "(a)   the effect of the error has been to deprive a party  before  the
         First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other opportunity for that
         party's case  to  be  put  to  and  considered  by  the  First-tier
         Tribunal; or

    (b)    the nature or extent of  any  judicial  fact  finding  which  is
         necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be re-made  is
         such that, having regard to the overriding objective in rule 2,  it
         is appropriate to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal."

56. In my judgment, this case falls within para 7.2 (a). It cannot be  said
    that the appellant has had a fair hearing. His case has simply not been
    considered. The Judge did not summarise the basis  of  the  appellant's
    protection claim. He did not refer to the findings of Judge  Macdonald.
    Although his decision is a lengthy one, it is noticeably lacking in any
    specific content about the appellant's protection claim. He  repeatedly
    stated  his  conclusions  without  giving  reasons.   Furthermore,   he
    repeatedly said that the appellant had family in Iraq without  engaging
    with his evidence in his witness statement that  he  has  lost  contact
    with his family. In any event, this  case  plainly  falls  within  para
    7.2(b).



Notice of Decision

57. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making  of  errors
    on points of law such that the decision is set aside.  This  appeal  is
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing on  the  merits
    on all issues by a judge other than Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    S.T. Fox.

This case would benefit from a  case  management  review  hearing,  for  the
reasons given at paras 42-45 above. That may also provide the  parties  with
an opportunity to narrow the factual issues.


Signed      Date: 6 October 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Gill


        _____________________________________________________________


                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS


1.    A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must  make
a written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any such application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent.


2.    Where the person who appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).


3.    Where the person making the application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


4.    Where the person who appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal  is  outside
the United Kingdom at the  time  that  the  application  for  permission  to
appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if  the
notice of decision is sent electronically).


5.    A "working  day"  means  any  day  except  a  Saturday  or  a  Sunday,
Christmas Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.


6.    The date when  the  decision  is  "sent'  is  that  appearing  on  the
covering letter or covering email

