







Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                              Appeal
Number: PA/11996/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |   Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 12th December 2017                  |On 22nd December 2017                |
|                                       |                                     |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCCLURE

                                   Between

                                     MU
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Sharaz Ahmed Counsel instructed by JS Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Z Ahmad Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan.

    These proceedings concern the personal life of the  appellant.  In  the
    circumstances I consider it appropriate to make an anonymity direction.

 2. This is an appeal by the appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Conrath. The  appellant  had  made  an  application  for
    asylum, humanitarian protection and relief otherwise on Article 2 and 3
    grounds.

 3. The appellant claims to be a homosexual. The judge did not  accept  the
    appellant's claim  and  gave  reasons  for  rejecting  the  appellant's
    account of why he left Pakistan. It  is  not  challenged  that  if  the
    appellant is indeed a homosexual, he would be at risk in Pakistan.  The
    issue raised in the grant of leave is that the appellant  had  produced
    supporting evidence in the form of letters and documents. It is claimed
    that the judge has failed to take such evidence into account.

 4. The grounds of appeal indicate  that  the  judge  has  failed  to  make
    findings in respect of letters of support,  the  photographic  evidence
    and the letters and statements in support. The documentation appears in
    the appellant's bundle between pages 15 to 72.

 5.  At page 15 there  is  a  religious  declaration  from  the  Al  Farooq
    Institute. There is no indication as to what authority  or  status  the
    Institute has. The document is dated November 2011. The  appellant  had
    been in the United Kingdom since 2009. No explanation was given  why  a
    religious  institution  in  Pakistan  should  be  making  a   religious
    declaration in respect of an individual that is not within Pakistan and
    has not been for a number of years. The conduct complained  of  relates
    to his actions in the UK and not to his previous actions in Pakistan.

 6. There is a divorce document. The appellant was married in the past  and
    has divorced. There is a letter of support with  identifying  documents
    from GG and emails between the appellant and GG. The  judge  in  detail
    has dealt with his evidence, as is evident from paragraph 29.

 7. There are a number of emails between the 2 individuals. There are cards
    for a number of clubs there are letters from  friends  and  volunteers.
    There are photographs including photographs of the appellant ostensibly
    in an embrace with another man.

 8. In the main the judge at paragraph 22 notes the evidence that has  been
    put before him. The judge in the decision  having  noted  the  evidence
    deals specifically with the evidence at  the  hearing  giving  detailed
    reasons for not accepting elements of it.

 9. I note specifically paragraph 38 that the judge refers to the fact that
    he has considered all the documents  in  the  case  and  all  the  oral
    evidence. Consistent with the cases of MR (Somalia) 2010 UKSC 49  where
    a judge has specifically stated that he has considered all the evidence
    presented, guidance is given that an appeal tribunal should be slow  to
    overturn a decision of the judge merely by reason of the fact  that  he
    has failed to refer to specific pieces of evidence.

10. The judge has indicated  that  he  has  taken  all  the  evidence  into
    account. He examines the major elements of the appellant's account  and
    the oral evidence that was before him giving valid reasons for  finding
    that that evidence was not such as to  prove  that  the  appellant  was
    genuinely gay. Whilst it has to be accepted that the judgement does not
    necessarily refer to all of the documents the  judge  has  given  valid
    reasons for the findings of fact and the conclusions  reached.  In  the
    circumstances the judge has given sufficient  reasons  for  making  the
    findings that he did. The judge does not have  to  refer  to  each  and
    every piece of evidence.

    I therefore find that there is no material  error  of  law  within  the
    decision. The appeal is dismissed.










Notice of Decision


11. I dismiss the appeal


Signed





Deputy           Upper           Tribunal           Judge            McClure
Date 21st December 2017






Direction regarding anonymity

Under Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or Court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify the appellant  or  any  member  of  their  family.  This
direction applies both to the Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
and to the Appellant. Failure to comply with this direction  could  lead  to
contempt of court proceedings.
Signed





Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge  McClure                                    Date
21st December 2017





