
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
PA/11307/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 5 April 2018                           |  On 16 April 2018                |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LATTER


                                   Between

                                      AT
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Reza of JKR, solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

An order has been made under Rule 14(1) of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008  prohibiting  the  disclosure  or  publication  of  any
matter likely to lead to the appellant being identified. Failure  to  comply
with this order could lead to a contempt of court.

1.    This is an appeal by the appellant against a decision  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal dismissing his appeal against the  respondent's  decision
    of 25 October 2017 refusing his protection and human rights claim.

2.    The appellant is a citizen  of  Bangladesh  born  on  [  ]  1991.   He
    arrived in the UK on 12 December 2009 with a student visa  valid  until
    31 December 2011.  On 29 November 2011 he applied for leave  to  remain
    as a Tier 4 student, but this was refused.  In August 2015 and December
    2016, he  made  applications  for  leave  to  remain  on  compassionate
    grounds, but both were unsuccessful.  On 19 December 2016 the appellant
    was encountered whilst working illegally and on 28 April  2017  he  was
    served with a removal notice.  He then claimed asylum on 2 June 2017.

3.    He claimed that he would face persecution on return to  Bangladesh  as
    a gay man.   The  respondent  accepted  the  appellant's  identity  and
    nationality and that gay men in Bangladesh formed a  particular  social
    group.  However, she was not satisfied that the appellant was gay.  She
    described his evidence as vague and lacking in detail and that, in  any
    event, he would be  able  to  relocate  away  from  his  home  area  in
    Bangladesh.

4.    At the hearing before the  First-tier  Tribunal,  the  appellant  gave
    oral evidence as did two of his friends.  The judge  recorded  at  [21]
    that both these witnesses said they were in the habit  of  meeting  the
    appellant regularly in gay clubs and other venues, where  there  was  a
    large Bengali community, and both believed him to be gay.

5.    The judge set out her findings on the appellant's sexuality  at  [32]-
    [38].  She did not accept that he was gay or that  he  would  face  any
    real risk of serious harm or ill-treatment on return to Bangladesh. She
    went on to consider article 8 and in particular whether  the  appellant
    had established a private life in the UK within article 8 (1).  At [51]
    she said that it was clear from the evidence of his two friends that he
    had established a private life in the UK and a social  life  especially
    within the Bengali community, although there were no  findings  on  the
    nature and extent of his private  life.  She  added  that  he  did  not
    currently have a long-term partner.  She dismissed the appeal  on  both
    asylum and human rights grounds.

6.    In the grounds of appeal,  it  is  argued  that  the  judge  erred  by
    failing to make  a  proper  assessment  of  the  evidence  of  the  two
    witnesses called in support of the appeal.  One had confirmed that  the
    appellant was gay because of his activities in gay clubs which  he  had
    witnessed and the second  had  given  evidence  that  he  had  met  the
    appellant in a gay club and they had been intimate.  The grounds  argue
    that the judge did not give any reason why she  was  disregarding  this
    evidence.

7.    At the hearing before me Mr Jarvis conceded that the  judge  erred  in
    law by failing to deal adequately with the evidence of these  witnesses
    in so far as it related to the appellant's claimed  sexuality.   Whilst
    their evidence had been briefly  summarised  in  [21]  the  judge  only
    referred to it in her analysis  of  the  evidence  in  the  context  of
    whether the appellant had established a private life in the UK. She had
    not made any findings on the that evidence in the context of the asylum
    claim.

8.    I accept that this concession is correctly  made.   Whilst  the  judge
    identified a number of factors capable of undermining  the  appellant's
    evidence about his sexuality, she has failed to take into  account  the
    evidence of the two witnesses in her assessment of whether his  account
    of his sexuality was credible to  the  lower  standard  of  proof  and,
    therefore, left a relevant matter out of account.   If,  in  fact,  the
    judge rejected this aspect of their evidence, she  has  not  given  her
    reasons for doing so.

9.    Both representatives submitted that in the  circumstances  the  appeal
    should be remitted for a full rehearing before First-tier Tribunal.   I
    agree that this is the proper course.

Decision

10.   The First-tier Tribunal erred in law and the  decision  is  set-aside.
    The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  for  reconsideration
    by way of a full rehearing by a different judge.

11.   In the light of  the  issues  raised  in  this  asylum  appeal,  I  am
    satisfied that this is a proper case for an order to be made under Rule
    14 (1) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 and I make
    an order prohibiting the disclosure or publication of any matter likely
    to lead to the appellant being identified.




Signed:                        H            J            E            Latter
                 Dated: 11 April 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Latter
