
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11981/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided under Rule 34 Without a      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Hearing                              |On the 12 October 2020               |
|On 5 October 2020                    |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                     RSS
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS

    1. The appellant  appeals  with  permission  a  decision  of  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge Richardson ('the Judge'), promulgated on  26  February
       2020, in which the Judge dismissed the appeal on protection and human
       rights grounds.

    2. Permission to appeal was granted by another judge of  the  First-tier
       Tribunal, the operative part of the  grant  being  in  the  following
       terms:

           "3.    In a brief and erudite judgement, the Judge has dismissed
           the appellant's claims principally, it would appear, on  account
           of the fact that he did not accept he was undocumented and  that
           he knew his page and family book details.

           4. That may well be the case but it is arguable, and I accept in
           relation to all four grounds, that at the Judge may have  fallen
           into error.

           5. In ground 1 the Judge  arguably  does  not  engage  with  the
           appellant's own account, in ground 2 the Judge  arguably  failed
           to consider properly the country guidance case  and  the  errors
           alleged in ground 3 and ground 4 speak for themselves."

    3.  Following  the  grant  of  permission  the  Upper  Tribunal   issued
       directions to the parties indicating  a  provisional  view  that  the
       question of whether the Judge had erred in law in a  manner  material
       to the decision to dismiss the appeal  could  be  determined  on  the
       papers without a hearing.  The parties were invited  to  state  their
       view on such a proposal and provided with  time  to  file  additional
       material they were seeking to rely upon. The time for complying  with
       such directions has passed.

    4. The Overriding Objective is contained in the Upper Tribunal Procedure
       Rules. Rule  2(2)  explains  that  dealing   with   a   case   fairly
       and   justly   includes:   dealing  with   it   in   ways  that   are
       proportionate  to  the  importance  of  the   case,   the  complexity
       of   the   issues,   etc;   avoiding   unnecessary   formality    and
       seeking flexibility  in  the  proceedings;  ensuring,   so   far   as
       practicable,  that the parties are able to participate fully  in  the
       proceedings; using  any  special  expertise  of  the  Upper  Tribunal
       effectively; and avoiding delay, so far  as  compatible  with  proper
       consideration of the issues.

    5. Rule 2(4) puts a duty on the parties to help the  Upper  Tribunal  to
       further the overriding objective; and to  cooperate  with  the  Upper
       Tribunal generally.

    6. Rule 34  of  The  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
       provides:

           '34.-

           (1)    Subject to paragraphs (2) and (3), the Upper Tribunal may
                make any decision without a hearing.

           (2)    The Upper Tribunal must have regard to any view expressed
                by a party when  deciding  whether  to  hold  a  hearing  to
                consider any matter, and the form of any such hearing.

           (3)    In immigration judicial  review  proceedings,  the  Upper
                Tribunal must hold a hearing before making a decision  which
                disposes of proceedings.

           (4)    Paragraph (3) does not affect  the  power  of  the  Upper
                Tribunal to-

                (a)    strike out a party's case, pursuant to  rule  8(1)(b)
                    or 8(2);

                (b)    consent to withdrawal, pursuant to rule 17;

                (c)    determine an  application  for  permission  to  bring
                    judicial review proceedings, pursuant to rule 30; or

                (d)     make  a  consent  order  disposing  of  proceedings,
                    pursuant to rule 39, without a hearing.'

    7. It has not been shown to be inappropriate or unfair to  exercise  the
       discretion provided in Rule 34 by enabling the error of law  question
       to be determined on the papers.  Nothing on the facts or in law makes
       consideration of the issues on the papers  without  oral  submissions
       not in accordance with overriding objectives at this stage.

Background


    8. The appellant is a citizen  of  Iraq  born  in  1993.  The  appellant
       applied for asylum in 2016 which was refused and  an  appeal  against
       that decision dismissed by  another  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  who
       found the appelanst  lacked  credibility.  On  29  August  2019,  the
       appellant made a fresh for asylum whish was refused by the respondent
       on 18 November 2019 against which the appellant appealed  before  the
       Judge.

    9. The Judge noted the key issue in the current appeal was  whether  the
       appellant can obtain an Iraqi identity card known  as  a  CSID  which
       would allow him to  travel  within  Iraq  with  relative  safety,  as
       without such a document the appellant claimed he will be at risk of a
       real breach of article 3 ECHR if  required  to  travel  from  Baghdad
       airport to his home town of Jalawla.

   10. The Judge refers to the country guidance in force at the date of  the
       hearing, SMO and Others [2019] UKUT 00400.

   11. In relation to contact with his family in Iraq the Judge  records  at
       [10- 11]:

           "10.   He says that he has sought to contact his family in  Iraq
                but has had no contact with them since he left Iraq. He  had
                contacted a person in Iraq on Facebook in 2016 who had  told
                him his family were in a refugee camp in Kirkuk.  He has not
                been able to have any more news about them since then so has
                approached the Red Cross to seek their assistance in tracing
                any family members. It was unclear from his evidence  as  to
                what stage the Red Cross  enquiry  had  reached  as  he  was
                unable to attend the most recent meeting with them.

           11.    During his oral evidence he was asked as  to  whether  he
                had ever held a CSID and if so what had happened to  it.  He
                said that all of his ID documents, save  for  one  that  had
                been left at home had been taken by ISIS when  he  had  been
                seized and imprisoned by  them.  It  was  explained  to  the
                appellant that the previous judge had not accepted  that  he
                had been detained by ISIS but he maintained his  account  on
                this point. In submission Ms Ahmed suggested  that  I  could
                accept the original finding by Judge Law that he had come in
                to contact with ISIS and that it was at this point  that  he
                had lost  his  identity  documents  but  that  was  not  the
                appellant's evidence and therefore I am not  satisfied  that
                the appellant lost his Iraqi identity documents as claimed."

   12. At [14] the Judge found it will be open to the appellant to apply for
       a CSID in the UK. The Judge noted if the appellant did not  have  his
       identity documents the question will be whether he was unaware of the
       book and page number of his family registration  details  with  there
       being no evidence to suggest he was  unaware  of  such  details.  The
       Judge records as a person who previously had employment and worked as
       a driver, he was likely to have held  documents  which  contain  such
       details that he would have been aware of.

   13. At [18] Judge records not  being  satisfied  that  the  appellant  is
       unable to successfully apply for a CSID either in the UK or by  proxy
       with the assistant of his family members in Iraq.

   14. The Judge is said to have erred in law  as  at  [5]  of  his  witness
       statement the appellant clearly stated he did not know his  book  and
       page number of the family registration details, claiming that matters
       were not "important" to remember.

   15. The claim the Family Book details are not important  is  contrary  to
       the country guidance caselaw which reinforces  the  importance  of  a
       CSID for which such details will be required.   The  appellant  would
       have needed identity documents to obtain employment and a valid  CSID
       to enable him to go to school he stated he studied at for seven years
       in  his  screening  interview.  Any  information  required  could  be
       obtained from this source.

   16.  As the appellant had not persuaded the Judge his claim to have  lost
       his identity documents is credible, it was not made  out  they  would
       not be available or accessible by the appellant.

   17. Following the introduction of the new Biometric Identity Cards (INID)
       in Iraq the CSID has been phased out and it is unlikely the appellant
       would be able to obtain a  replacement  CSID  either  in  the  United
       Kingdom or in Iraq now. The Upper  Tribunal in SMO, KSP &  IM  (Iraq)
       confirm that, as the INID programme continues  to  expand,  more  and
       more CSA offices will have an INID terminal making obtaining  a  CSID
       by proxy more difficult: "The likelihood of obtaining  a  replacement
       identity document by the use of a proxy,  whether  from  the  UK   or
       on  return  to  Iraq,  has  reduced  due  to  the introduction of the
       INID system. In order to obtain an INID, an  individual  must  attend
       their local CSA office in person to enrol their biometrics, including
       fingerprints and iris scans. The CSA offices in which INID  terminals
       have  been  installed  are  unlikely  -as  a  result  of  the  phased
       replacement of the CSID system  -to  issue  a  CSID,  whether  to  an
       individual in person or to a proxy."

   18. It is accepted the new form of Iraqi identity card (INID) can only be
       obtained in Iraq, but the country  information  does  not  support  a
       finding that no other form of identity document is  available  to  an
       Iraqi national at this time.  Whilst for Iraqi nationals outside Iraq
       there is no facility for a INID to be issued the  appellant  has  not
       established on the evidence that this means those outside  Iraq  have
       no means of obtaining any other form of identity document to  confirm
       they are who they claim to be and an entitlement to be recognised  as
       a national of Iraqi.

   19. A country report 'Kurdistan Region of Iraq (KRI) Report  on  issuance
       of the new Iraqi ID card' by the Danish Immigration  Services,  dated
       November 2018 in relation to possibility for issuance of new ID cards
       to Iraqis living abroad, record that when asked what  Iraqi  citizens
       abroad can do to either renew an old ID-card or to replace an ID-card
       that is lost, Director Azaz replied that  Iraqi  citizens,  who  live
       abroad, need to go to Iraq to obtain a new  national  ID  card.  When
       asked if it was possible for issuance  of  old  ID  cards  to  Iraqis
       living abroad he responded that an Iraqi citizen abroad, who wants to
       apply for an old ID card, an ID document that  is  still  in  use  in
       Iraq, must go to an Iraqi embassy to have their  fingerprints  taken.
       In addition, an applicant must bring a power  of  attorney,  and  the
       three main documents:  the  old/expiring  ID  card,  the  nationality
       certificate, and the  residency  card  (only  held  by  the  head  of
       household). The way to prove Iraqi nationality to the embassy is by a
       power of attorney. The embassy will forward the  application  to  the
       Ministry of Foreign Affairs and  the  Ministry  of  the  Interior  in
       Baghdad. The process is very long and can easily take from six months
       to a year. The source added that  there  are  many  problems  in  the
       procedure, and that the applicant must give proof of life.  When  the
       application is approved, the applicant will be issued an old ID  card
       - not the new national ID card.

   20. In relation to obtaining a replacement CSID  in  the  UK,  the  Upper
       Tribunal in SMO, KSP   &   IM   (Iraq)  at   paragraph   383  endorse
       paragraph  26  of AAH  (Iraqi  Kurds -internal  relocation)  Iraq  CG
        [2018] UKUT 00212 (IAC) which  details   the   numerous  and  varied
       documents  that are required in order to obtain a CSID from the Iraqi
       Embassy in the UK.  Paragraph 26 of AAH states: "If applying  through
       a consulate abroad the requirements are different.  Having  contacted
       the consulate in London, and checked on  the  website  of  the  Iraqi
       embassy in Sweden, Dr Fatah states that the authorities will  require
       the applicant to first make a statement explaining  why  he  needs  a
       CSID  and  attach  this  to  his  application   form,   which    must
       countersigned  by   the   head   of   the   applicant's  family   and
       stamped  by  the  consulate  or  embassy;  he   must   then   produce
       his Iraqi passport and proof of status in the  country  where  he  is
       applying, the name of a representative (proxy) in Iraq, an additional
       form completed by the head of the applicant's family  verifying  that
       the contents of his application form were true,  four  colour  copies
        of  his  INC,  and  10  colour  photographs. Crucially the applicant
       must be able to produce something which can establish the location of
       his family's details in the civil register.  This should be  a  CSID,
       an INC or birth certificate. If none of these are  available  to  the
       applicant he must supply the identity documents of his parents.  This
       evidence again accords with that  of  Landinfo  (December  2017)  who
       conclude that it can be difficult to obtain replacement ID  documents
       from an embassy abroad for the individual who is unable to verify his
       or her identity." The appellant submits  it  is  reasonably  unlikely
       that he will not be able to obtain a replacement CSID in the UK as he
       does not have access to the required documents,  but  this  not  made
       out.

   21. The respondent's latest Country Policy & Information  Note  dated  30
       June 2020 contains information at Appendix I  from  the  Respondent's
       Returns Logistics Department. This states the following:

           "CSID cards are being phased out  and  replaced  by  INID  (Iraq
           National Identification) cards. It is not currently possible  to
           apply for an INID card outside of Iraq. As  a result, the  Iraqi
           embassy in London are advising their  nationals  in  the  UK  to
           apply instead for a 'Registration Document(1957)' which they can
           use to apply for other documents such as passports  or  an  INID
           card once they have returned to Iraq." Thus, it appears that the
           Iraqi Embassy in London will not issue a CSID but  instead  will
           issue a 'Registration Document (1957)'  which  can  be  used  to
           apply for an INID in Iraq.   SMO, KSP & IM (Iraq) is very  clear
           that to safely pass through checkpoints in Iraq it is  necessary
           to show a CSID or an INID and other forms of  identity  document
           (even a passport) is not acceptable. It is  submitted  that  the
           appellant would be unable to travel safely across Iraq  even  if
           he were able to be issued with a 'Registration Document  (1957)'
           by the Iraqi Embassy in London. A copy of this document  appears
           at Annex A to this judgment.

   22. It is clear the Registration Document is an official document  issued
       by the authorities in Iraq as confirmation of an individual's  status
       as an Iraqi national. It is also clear that the stated  intention  of
       the Iraqi authorities is that possession of  such  a  document  is  a
       means to enable an individual to obtain  further  identity  documents
       required which, in light of the up-to-date country  information  must
       refer to the new Identity Document, when they do not have  the  means
       to obtain the same for themselves in Iraq.

   23. The appellant's argument has always been that he  could  not  contact
       any family in Iraq. In his screening interview when the appellant was
       asked what family he had in Iraqi, he stated his parents, brother and
       sister, maternal and paternal uncles. The appellant's claim  to  have
       lost contact with such family members was found to  lack  credibility
       which is finding within the range of those available to the Judge  on
       the evidence. The appelanst also stated his parent and his own family
       were living in Kirkuk not Jalawla. The claim to have lost contact and
       be unable to trace his family members was found to lack credibility.

   24. The appellant claimed that no family member would be able  to  obtain
       all of the documents required by paragraph 26 of AAH  such  that  the
       appellant could be issued a CSID or  ID  document  in  the  UK.   The
       difficulty for the appellant with such submission is that many things
       that he has claimed have been shown not to be true.  As  he  has  not
       contacted his family in Iraq, which the Judge did not accept  is  not
       possible, the appellant cannot establish that the requisite documents
       could not be obtained. The appelanst fathers or paternal uncles'  own
       entries in the family book will enable the appellants family  details
       to be traced.  It is not shown the  application  form  could  not  be
       completed by the male family members as appointed agent or the family
       in Iraq could not themselves  appoint  a  person  approved  for  this
       purpose, if needed.

   25. The appellant also attended school  in  Iraq,  according  to  replies
       given by him in his  screening  and  asylum  interview,  where  there
       should also be required details concerning  his  CSID  number  and/or
       other  information  confirming   his   official   identification   in
       accordance with normal procedures as noted above.

   26. As the appellant has not made out that he cannot be returned to  Iraq
       with an identity document issued by the Iraqi authorities it  is  not
       made out he will not be able to be returned to Baghdad and, in  light
       of the return of availability of internal flights within Iraq, travel
       to the IKR. The submissions made regarding the need for documentation
       to pass through roadblocks so far as they relate to  travel  by  land
       has not been shown to  be  relevant  although,  if  land  travel  was
       required, the appellant fails to  establish  that  the  documentation
       that he will possess, which will not be removed from  his  possession
       on arrival at the airport, will not be sufficient to  enable  him  to
       travel internally. The appellant has also not  established  that  his
       family in Iraq cannot vouch for his identity if required.

   27. It is not made out the appellant will face a real risk  of  suffering
       persecution, serious harm, or Article 3 ill treatment in light of the
       findings made.

   28. It is not disputed that the appellant could not remain long  term  in
       Baghdad as he has no family or other connections in Baghdad.

   29. The appelanst stated his family live in Kirkuk. It is  now  the  case
       that the level of violence in this area is not  sufficient  to  cross
       the Article 15(c) threshold.

   30. It is not made out on the evidence that the  appellant  would  become
       destitute in the short time he would have to spend in  Baghdad  while
       he made arrangements to re-join his parents in Kirkuk or elsewhere.

   31. Also, as stated in AAH, the family would be under  an  obligation  to
       assist the appellant.  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce in AAH found that:

           "3.    For an Iraqi national returnee (P) of Kurdish  origin  in
           possession of a valid CSID or Iraqi passport, the  journey  from
           Baghdad to the IKR, whether by air or land,  is  affordable  and
           practical and can be made without a real  risk  of  P  suffering
           persecution, serious harm, Article 3 ill treatment nor would any
           difficulties on the journey make relocation unduly harsh. ?

           8. If P has family members living  in  the  IKR  cultural  norms
           would  require  that  family   to   accommodate   P.   In   such
           circumstances P would, in general,  have  sufficient  assistance
           from the family so as to lead a 'relatively normal life',  which
           would not be unduly harsh.  It  is  nevertheless  important  for
           decision-makers to determine the extent of any assistance likely
           to be provided by P's family on a case by case basis."

   32. In relation to the prospects of an internally displaced person  being
       able to obtain an INID Danish Immigration Services  report,  November
       2018:

           "Implementation of the new national ID card in Erbil

           15.    The Directorate of Nationality and Civil Status in  Erbil
                issued new national ID cards to 25 percent of the  citizens;
                while in Baghdad, 75 percent of the populations already  got
                their new national ID card.

           16.    With regard to IDPs in Erbil, they must go to their place
                of origin to apply for a new national ID card.  There  is  a
                plan to open an office for IDPs, but it might take more than
                one year to establish. Director Azaz further said that  when
                this office is established, and, for instance,  if  an  IDP,
                who is from Mosul, obtains an ID card from this  office,  it
                would appear on the ID card that  the  card  was  issued  in
                Mosul. This could  potentially  cause  a  problem  for  IDPs
                living and getting married in KRI.

           17.    For disabled or  very  old  people,  the  Directorate  of
                Nationality and Civil Status may  go  to  the  home  of  the
                person to register him or her there. The office will bring a
                mobile laptop and equipment to take the person's  biometrics
                in their home."

   33. The respondents latest CPIN on the issue of redocumentation states-

           'Redocumentation

           6.1    Assistance

           6.1.1  The British Embassy Baghdad, in a letter dated 4 December
                  2014,  explained  that   given   the   long   history   of
                  displacement  in  Iraq,  there  were  'well   established'
                  procedures whereby those not in possession of their  civil
                  documents could obtain replacement documents

           6.1.2  EASO stated in February 2019: 'In 2014, UNHCR  reportedly
                  assisted with  re-documentation  efforts,  supporting  the
                  Ministry of Migration and Displacement and the Ministry of
                  Interior with establishing  re-documentation  centres  for
                  IDPs who fled Mosul, Salah  al  Din,  Diyala,  Anbar,  and
                  Kirkuk, as well as in Anbar. It assisted 7000 IDP children
                  in 2015-2016, many of whom  were  supported  in  acquiring
                  civil documentation. UNHCR reported that in the course  of
                  2017,  18600  "vulnerable  Iraqis"  had   received   legal
                  documents  and  more  than  23300   had   received   legal
                  assistance  in  relation  to  documentation  through   its
                  centres, mobile courts,  or  mobile  documentation  teams.
                  'According to experiences described by IDPs interviewed by
                  MRG, there are "no standard  registration  of  application
                  requirements" that government offices follow, the  process
                  of applying for reissuance is  complex,  "non-standardized
                  and fraught with allegations of corruption".

           6.1.3  On 1 November 2019, UNHCR published  a  report  on  civil
                  documentation for IDPs. The report provided updates on the
                  'Mobile Civil Documentation Project'  and  stated:  'Since
                  April 2019, UNHCR has collaborated with  the  Ministry  of
                  Interior (MoI) of the  Government  of  Iraq  to  implement
                  mobile missions to dispatch government officials to  issue
                  civil documentation  to  IDPs  in  camps  and  out-of-camp
                  locations. 'By November 2019, with  the  collaboration  of
                  the Kurdistan Regional Government (KRG), MoI has  launched
                  missions to issue  Civil  Status  IDs  (CSIDs)  and  Iraqi
                  Nationality Certificates (INCs) to IDPs in three camps  in
                  Erbil Governorate (Baharka, Harsham, Debaga), three  camps
                  in Ninewa Governorate (Hasansham U2 and U3, AlKhazir)  and
                  five  camps  in  Duhok  Governorate  (Chamishko,   Darkar,
                  Bersive 1 and 2, Garmawa). As of the end of November,  MoI
                  issued a total of 7,123 CSIDs and 11,226 INCs to IDPs. 'In
                  addition, between 26 October and 3 November, MoI piloted a
                  mission in a UNHCR-supported community centre in  Kasnazan
                  sub-district in Erbil  Governorate  to  issue  Unified  ID
                  Cards (UNIDs) to IDPs living in urban areas. As a  result,
                  MoI issued a total of 471 UNIDs for  IDPs  displaced  from
                  Anbar Governorate.  During  November,  MoI  also  launched
                  missions  to  issue  UNIDs  in   camps   in   Sulaymaniyah
                  Governorate (Ashti) and  Kirkuk  Governorate  (Laylan  1).
                  'Throughout the  missions,  UNHCR  and  partners  provided
                  material  and  technical  support  to  MoI  by   preparing
                  applications,  establishing  registration   centres,   and
                  providing necessary equipment such as computers,  printers
                  and office supplies. UNHCR and partners will  continue  to
                  work  with  MoI  to  expand  the  missions  to   different
                  governorates  to  facilitate   IDPs'   access   to   civil
                  documentation.'

           6.1.4  UNHCR published a fact sheet of the documentation of IDPs
                  in October 2019 and stated that 'As part of its effort  to
                  help IDPs obtain  documentation,  since  2018,  UNHCR  has
                  rehabilitated 2 offices in Kirkuk  Governorate  and  three
                  offices in Ninewa Governorate and donated five vehicles to
                  the Mosul Civil Affairs Directorate Office. Rehabilitation
                  of 4 more offices in Ninewa  is  ongoing.'65  Furthermore,
                  'In November  [2019],  the  Ninewa  Directorate  of  Civil
                  Affairs, Passports and Residencies inaugurated  the  first
                  national  identification  card  centre  in  Ninewa.  UNHCR
                  rehabilitated the  building  and  provided  furniture  and
                  devices.'

   34. The appellant, if classed as an IDP, fails to make out he  would  not
       be eligible  for  assistance  from  the  UNHCR  to  assist  with  the
       redocumentation process including obtaining a New  identity  document
       in accordance with the above guidance if unable to return to his home
       area, although in relation to that area the Judge found at [20]:

           20.    The Upper Tribunal considered the  risk  posed  in  Dyala
           Province at para 268 to 272 of SMO, KSP & IM.  In summary it was
           found the risk posed by ISIL activity in the area did not  reach
           the Article 15 (c) threshold. Ms Ahmed relied on press reporting
           of ISIL activities, for example {AB Tab B page 11} but reporting
           on isolated  incidents  does  not  provide  me  with  sufficient
           evidence to overturn a recent country  guidance  case  which  is
           carefully considered this issue. Therefore I am not able to find
           that the appellant qualifies for humanitarian protection through
           seeking to return to his hometown.

   35. It is not made out the Judge erred  in  law  and  not  believing  the
       appellant. The Judge clearly considered all  the  evidence  with  the
       required degree of anxious scrutiny and gives  sufficient  reason  to
       support the findings made.

   36. The finding the appellant  is  not  genuine  regarding  contact  with
       family members and the rejection of the  appellant's  claim  to  have
       lost his Iraqi identity documents are findings within  the  range  of
       those open to the Judge on the evidence.

   37. It is important to read the decision  as  a  whole.  All  the  claims
       adverse to the appellant's case made before the  First-tier  Tribunal
       were found to lack credibility. It  is  also  a  case  in  which  the
       appellant relies upon case law and country evidence  to  support  his
       claim to be unable to obtain the necessary  documentation  to  enable
       him to live reasonably in Iraq but the ability or otherwise to do  so
       is fact specific. The appellant has not helped his case by relying on
       what the First-tier Tribunal effectively found are lies. The  factual
       matrix as found does not support  the  appellant's  claim  that  when
       applying the guidance contained in SMO and country information he  is
       entitled to a grant of international protection. The appellant is  no
       more than a failed asylum seeker who has not established even to  the
       lower standards applicable in an asylum appeal that he cannot  obtain
       an officially issued identity document,  that  he  does  not  have  a
       support network available to him on  return  to  Iraq,  or  has  lost
       contact with his family. The evidence clearly supports a finding that
       it is the opposite of what the appellant is claiming that is the true
       position.



Decision

   38. There is  no  material  error  of  law  in  the  Immigration  Judge's
       decision. The determination shall stand.

  Anonymity.

   39. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to  rule  45(4)(i)  of
       the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.

       I make such order pursuant to  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
       (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.


Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 5 October 2020

