
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11503/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 8th October 2018                           |On 23rd October 2018          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                 patrick [n]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION  NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Adejumo, Victory Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Tan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the appellant's appeal against the  decision  of  Judge  Mensah
    made following a hearing at Bradford on 8th December 2017.

Background

 2. The appellant is a citizen of the Cameroon born on 28th June 1979.   He
    arrived in the UK on 24th April 2017  and  claimed  asylum  two  months
    later.  He said that he  would  be  at  risk  on  return,  having  been
    arrested on two occasions, the first as a result of his line  manager's
    refusal to display political material on behalf of the  main  political
    party in the Cameroon, the CPDM, and the second after an incident  when
    he was involved with a number of friends criticising the government  in
    a local bar and posting hostile messages about the government on social
    media.

 3. The judge accepted the appellant's account of the first arrest in Kumba
    but not the second.  She said that it lacked credibility, in the  light
    of the appellant's experience following the first arrest, that he would
    openly criticise the government  and  post  incriminating  material  of
    himself on the internet.  He was not  a  political  activist  who  felt
    compelled to risk his life to protest  against  the  government  but  a
    drink sales person who had no interest in politics.

 4. The appellant sought permission to appeal on the grounds,  effectively,
    that the determination lacked reasoning.   Having  accepted  the  first
    arrest, the judge had not identified good reason why serious harm would
    not be repeated and had not engaged with  the  extensive  evidence  put
    forward by the appellant.  Furthermore, she had failed to consider  and
    apply the country guidance case of  FK  (SDF  member/activist  -  risk)
    Cameroon  CG  [2007]  UKAIT  0047  and  had  not  considered  paragraph
    276ADE(i), (vi).

 5. Mr Tan defended the determination.  He submitted  that  the  judge  had
    accepted that the appellant would be at risk on return to his home area
    as a consequence of having  had  difficulty  with  the  local  governor
    there, but she was entitled to reject the evidence of the second arrest
    and to find that his actions were at odds with his previous experience.

 6. Ms Adejumo relied on her grounds and submitted that the decision  ought
    to be set aside.

 7. I am persuaded that the judge did not give  adequate  reasons  for  her
    decision.

 8. I have read the extremely detailed witness  statements,  the  first  of
    which runs to some 47 closely typed paragraphs over 11 pages,  and  the
    second 10 paragraphs  over  3  pages.   The  judge  accepted  that  the
    appellant's account was consistent with the country materials presented
    to her.  She was also satisfied that he had given a credible account of
    being arrested in Kumba.  However, in concluding  that  she  could  not
    accept the account of the second arrest she did not take account of all
    of the information put forward by the appellant.

 9. She comes to the conclusion that the appellant would  not  have  risked
    being critical of the government on the second occasion because of  his
    experience of the first arrest.  However, in the witness statement  the
    appellant recounts having been at a party on one night and a bar on the
    second when there was a great deal of  drinking  and  it  was  in  this
    context that the messages/images were circulated through  WhatsApp  and
    Facebook.

10. At paragraph  22  she  appears  to  criticise  the  appellant  for  not
    producing corroborative evidence when this is not required.

11. The inconsistencies she mentions at paragraph 23 relate in the main  to
    issues of omission rather than commission.

12. Moreover the determination is brief.  The judge does not  set  out  the
    evidence in the witness statement nor the  oral  evidence.   Given  the
    above, I am satisfied that the criticisms made in the  grounds  of  the
    judge's reasoning are made out.

13. The determination is set aside.  It will have to be remade at a hearing
    before a  different  Immigration  Judge  other  than  Judge  Mensah  at
    Bradford.

No anonymity direction is made.



[pic]



Signed                              Date 17 October 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor

