

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                    Appeal Number:
PA/11983/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 11th December 2018                   |On 20th December 2018               |
|                                        |                                    |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS

                                   Between

                                     KH
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss Khan, Counsel instructed on behalf of the
                    Appellant
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant, with permission, appeals against  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal, who, in a determination  promulgated  on  the  8th
    June 2018, dismissed his claim for protection.

 2.  The appellants claim is set out in the determination of the  FtTJ  and
    in the summary set out in the decision letter dated  4  November  2017.
    The appellant first claimed that when he was about  two  or  three  his
    father had some problems with  close  relatives  over  some  land.  The
    appellant did not know who was in control of the land now  and  he  had
    never seen or  had  any  contact  with  them.  He  gave  no  reasonable
    explanation in his interview as to how they would now be able  to  find
    the appellant. It was observed in the refusal letter that this  "family
    feud" was not mentioned during the screening interview. At paragraphs 9
    - 11 the judge considered this claim but found that his account of  the
    family  feud  was  almost  "non-existent";  all  he  could   tell   the
    interviewer was that it concerned land and it arose when he was two  or
    three years of age which is 30 years ago. He had never had contact with
    the feuding parties on either side. Given the  vagueness  and  lack  of
    information in his witness statement or his oral  evidence,  the  judge
    rejected any fear based on that family feud.

 3. The second and core issue of his claim was that he was in fear  of  two
    individuals of his wife's family; her uncle SAA and her  brother-in-law
    HS. His account was that he would be targeted throughout  Iraq  because
    of his out of tribe marriage that went against his wife's family wishes
    and that because he sold alcohol for a living. His claim was  that  his
    family's relatives were powerful in government in Iraq.

 4. The claim was refused by the Secretary of State in a decision letter of
    4 November 2017 although it is right  to  record  that  the  respondent
    accepted his nationality, ethnicity and that he was a married man.

 5. In a decision promulgated on  8th  June  2018  the  FtTJ  made  adverse
    credibility findings in relation to the  appellant's  account  and  his
    appeal was dismissed.

 6. The judge set out his  findings  of  fact  and  as  to  credibility  at
    paragraphs 9-26. I will make reference to those findings of fact in  my
    analysis of the grounds relied upon by Miss Khan, Counsel behalf of the
    appellant.

 7. The Appellant sought permission to appeal that decision and  permission
    was granted by FtTJ Neville on the 13th July 2018.

 8. Dealing with the first ground, it challenges the  judges  determination
    at paragraph 26 and cites, only partially, that paragraph as follows:-

    "There was no evidence that either of these men were in  government  or
    had power and influence of any meaningful description anywhere in  Iraq
    and certainly no evidence that they had power and influence  everywhere
    in Iraq."

 9. The grounds seek to assert that the judge made that finding in error as
    it  was  contrary  to  the  expert  report.  Miss  Khan,  in  her  oral
    submissions, stated that the judge had placed weight  on  the  expert's
    report when making earlier findings and  thus  the  judge  should  have
    placed weight on his report at paragraphs 76 and 77 where he found that
    SAS was a prominent preacher in Iraq and at (77) that there were images
    of him with different military figures. It is considered that he  would
    have power and influence.

10. However the grounds fail to take into account  the  two  men  that  the
    judge was referring to and also to the  first  part  of  paragraph  26,
    which is the concluding paragraph and the numerous findings of fact set
    out in the preceding paragraphs from paragraph 9 onwards that  directly
    relate to the appellant's evidence and that of his wife.

11. The judge sets out a number of adverse credibility  findings  not  only
    based on the appellant's inconsistent evidence relating to the  profile
    of the family members he claimed to fear but also on the basis that the
    appellant's  evidence  was  wholly  contrary  to  the  expert  evidence
    produced on his behalf in important respects.

12. The  judge  carefully  analysed  the  appellant's  account  and  it  is
    important to remember that the basis and the core of his factual  claim
    related  to  the  appellant's  wife's  tribal  affiliation.  The  judge
    considered the appellant's claim concerning the profile of  his  wife's
    uncle who he claimed was head of the tribe (see paragraph 12)  and  set
    out the appellant's evidence from interview that he had  met  this  man
    once but he was influential over many tribes. As to the profile of  the
    other person he had  identified  as  being  in  fear  of,  HS,  he  had
    confirmed in the interview that there were only  two  people  from  the
    family members whom he was in fear of (see question 83). The judge  set
    out his evidence in interview that the second person HS worked for  the
    government and had bodyguards. In interview he was not able to give any
    further evidence of their profile or prominence. The judge then  turned
    to the witness statement which had been filed significantly  after  the
    interview. The appellant in that statement described his  wife's  uncle
    and brother-in-law as powerful people due to their tribal and political
    connections.

13. The judge set out at paragraph 13 that the appellant could give  little
    or no further information about HS. As to his wife's uncle,  the  judge
    set out the appellant account that his wife told him that  he  was  the
    head of the sub tribe Al-Rabia which was part of the Qureshi tribe. The
    judge then records  the  inconsistent  evidence  by  the  appellant  by
    stating  that  his  brother-in-law's  father  was  prominent   in   the
    government but HS was not. This is  contrary  to  what  he  had  stated
    previously and set out in his substantive interview. The judge went  on
    to set out the evidence relating to SAA at paragraph 14 and  said  that
    his father belonged to the national reconciliation  committee  in  Iraq
    and that both SAA (wife's uncle) and HS travelled with an armed  guard.
    He then gave further information about the position of HS stating  that
    he works for his father and the reason why he said HS was prominent  in
    government because when he came to beat the appellant up  he  was  with
    uniformed bodyguards.

14. At paragraph 15 the judge set  out  the  oral  evidence  given  by  the
    appellant concerning his wife's uncle and gave greater detail about him
    being head of the tribe and having "lots of men and influence in a  lot
    of places, influence throughout Iraq." This however is contrary to  the
    expert evidence at section 5.3 paragraph 6.8 where Dr Fatah stated that
    the "majority of persons belonging to the Quraishi tribe  in  Iraq  are
    considered to be working class and have no influence in  politics.  The
    Qureshi tribe in Iraq are not highly regarded." When this  was  put  to
    the appellant he said that the expert was wrong but offered no evidence
    in support beyond his own oral account.

15. The judge referred to the  evidence  at  paragraph  16  concerning  the
    profile of the family members he claimed to fear and when asked whether
    he feared HS (the man he originally an interview said  he  feared)  and
    HS's father he said "I fear H" and again said he did not know  what  he
    did in government it was then recorded that  the  appellant's  evidence
    was that HS's role government was to guard HS's father.

16. The judge then went on to state his conclusions having made an analysis
    of that evidence as set out above. He found the appellant's evidence to
    be "vague, inconsistent and developed" (see paragraph [17]). The  judge
    then proceeded to set out the reasons why he had found that to  be  the
    case and by reference to the evidence given not only by  the  appellant
    but also his wife and in the context of the expert evidence.

17. The judge identified that the appellant had said his wife's  uncle  was
    head of the Qureshi tribe but had then in his  witness  statement  said
    that he was head of the sub tribe Al-Rabia.  He  then  backtracked  and
    stated that it was a mistake. The judge rejected  his  explanation  for
    that inconsistent  evidence  because  the  appellant's  wife's  witness
    statement had also repeated the same evidence.

18. The judge also  found  the  appellant's  claim  was  inconsistent  when
    stating that  his  wife's  brother-in-law's  father  was  prominent  in
    government but his brother-in-law HS (whom he'd originally  claimed  to
    be in fear of an interview) was not. As the  judge  recorded,  he  then
    changed his  evidence  again  by  claiming  HS  was  prominent  in  the
    government (see paragraph 16).

19. The judge considered his account developed in his witness statement and
    was  now  claiming  that  SAA's  father  belonged   to   the   national
    reconciliation  committee  of  Iraq  without  submitting  "a  shred  of
    credible evidence that this was true, and without explaining  what  his
    role in this  committee  all  how  it  made  even  more  powerful  than
    originally claimed." The judge also found that the appellant had failed
    to explain why he omitted to mention this in  2016  when  he  gave  his
    asylum  interview  or  between  then  and  when  he  made  his  witness
    statement. The judge also observed that the claim was added to when the
    appellant stated at the hearing that this man was  not  only  a  senior
    member of the government but held two posts; one being in charge of the
    national interest office but he didn't know the other post.  The  judge
    found that it failed to explain why this information  had  changed,  in
    the eight day period between  making  the  statement  and  giving  oral
    evidence. The judge also found that  he  made  a  late  change  in  his
    account stating that HS was in charge of his father's bodyguards.

20. It can therefore be  seen  that  the  judge  set  out  the  appellant's
    inconsistent evidence concerning the core of his claim and who  it  was
    he actually feared and why.

21. The judge then considered the appellant's wife's evidence at  [19]  and
    gave reasons which are open to him on the evidence as to why  he  found
    her evidence to be inconsistent with that of the  appellant.  He  found
    her evidence that her husband  did  not  know  much  about  the  family
    members because "my husband does not pay attention to such  detail  and
    as it is not important to him" as bizarre and contrary to the  core  of
    the claim of having fled Iraq because of fear of  the  family  members.
    The judge found that she failed to explain how the  little  information
    her husband did know changed during the  course  of  the  hearing.  The
    judge also found her evidence was  inconsistent  with  the  appellant's
    evidence by stating "H is prominent in the government  because  of  his
    father.  He  works  as  part  of  his  father's  personal   guard"   in
    circumstances where the appellant denied in one of his accounts and the
    man was in government and in another claim that he was in charge of his
    father's bodyguards."

22. Importantly he found her account as to the position and description  of
    the tribe to be inconsistent and rejected her explanation that she  had
    made a mistake in the witness statement (see paragraph 20).  The  judge
    found she was inconsistent even in the reasons as to why she  had  made
    such an important error stating "whichever of these explanations  would
    were true, if either was true, I find that it was a  fundamental  error
    that I would not expect someone genuinely referring to  their  families
    tribe, a crucial part of the culture."

23.  At  paragraph  23  the  judge  set  out  the  expert  evidence   which
    contradicted the appellant's evidence and  that  of  his  wife  and  in
    particular identified that the expert had  made  no  reference  to  the
    family feud. Secondly, the  expert  made  no  mention  of  the  alleged
    prominent place in government of either of the two  men  the  appellant
    claimed to fear in Iraq (the original two men identified) but did  make
    reference to the Qureshi tribe which was considered to be working class
    and is having no influence in politics and was not highly regarded. The
    judge found that that was  inconsistent  with  the  appellant  and  his
    wife's claim.

24. The expert evidence also could find no  trace  of  SAA's  father  is  a
    member of the national reconciliation  committee  (as  claimed  by  the
    appellant) nor could he find any trace of HS.  He  also  confirmed  the
    appellant's claim that the entire tribe would seek vengeance on him was
    inaccurate and he repeated  that  the  Qureshi  tribe  was  not  highly
    regarded (see 86 and 127). The expert also  confirmed  that  the  Rabia
    tribe was the larger tribe and that the Qureshi tribe is the sub  tribe
    (paragraph 70).

25. It was therefore open  to  the  judge  to  find  that  the  appellant's
    evidence was fundamentally inconsistent regarding the core of his claim
    which related to tribal affiliations.

26. It is right that the expert report identified that SASA  (HS's  alleged
    father) was a prominent preacher in Iraq and refers to numerous  videos
    of him online and that it was considered that he would have  power  and
    influence. However the expert was not able to  determine  the  name  of
    SASA's son and that he was also not named as a member of the committee.



27. However the judge found, having analysed the  evidence  in  depth  that
    neither the appellant nor his wife had mentioned the  profile  of  this
    man as a preacher. The inference from that finding is that if they  had
    they any real knowledge or fear of this man they would have  identified
    his correct profile and that was for those reasons that the  judge  set
    out his final conclusions at  paragraph  26  "I'm  satisfied  that  the
    appellant's  total  account  was  so  riddled  with  discrepancies  and
    contradictions that are the reasons that I've given I do not believe he
    was a witness of truth in his claim...".

28. The grounds only make reference to part of paragraph 26 and ignore  the
    earlier findings. The judge was  clearly  stating  that  there  was  no
    evidence to support the appellant's claim  that  the  two  men  (wife's
    uncle or brother-in-law) were in government or had power and influence.
    Whilst the grounds referred to the profile of the man  is  said  to  be
    HS's father, as a prominent preacher, the grounds failed to  take  into
    account that neither the appellant or his wife had identified  that  he
    was a preacher and that that undermined their account.

29.  Consequently  the  judge  gave  adequate  reasons  for  rejecting  the
    appellant's account and did so in accordance with the expert evidence.

30. Dealing with the ground 2, it refers to paragraph 24 and that the judge
    had  confused  the  names  of  two  of  the  people  and  therefore  it
    demonstrated a lack of anxious scrutiny throughout  the  determination.
    That is evidently not the case as the grounds concede, that this  is  a
    judge who was aware of the various individuals and who they  were  when
    the determination is read as a whole. Whilst the judge referred to  the
    wrong name of the man who the  appellant  said  was  a  member  of  the
    national reconciliation committee the judge had properly identified him
    previously as can be seen at paragraph 18. Any error was  not  material
    in any event because the person identified by the appellant was said to
    be a member of that committee could not be traced by the expert who had
    their name.

31. The last ground relies on the  evidence  of  the  video  clip  and  two
    photographs. It was open to the judge  to  reach  the  conclusion  that
    little or no weight should be given to  the  video  clip.  Firstly,  he
    found the video clip was shown on the representative's  laptop  and  it
    had no English-language commentary or transcript. Secondly, he found it
    to showed a number of  people  milling  about,  and  thirdly  what  the
    appellant had said about this clip in his  evidence  was  significantly
    different to what it claimed in his witness statement.

32. As to the two photographs, the judge stated that  their  submission  in
    evidence had been  unexplained  (paragraph  25).  However  the  grounds
    relied upon by Miss Khan are that the  photographs  had  in  fact  been
    explained and by way of support Counsel's note is cited in the grounds.
    However those photographs do not  assist  because  whilst  one  of  the
    individuals may be the appellant's wife, it is not identified  who  the
    other people are in the photographs or in what context  the  photograph
    was taken. The photos were also not shown to the expert.

33. I am therefore satisfied that those  grounds  do  not  demonstrate  any
    error of law in the judge's determination. Furthermore  as  Mr  McVeety
    submits, even if there was an error (and as I have set  out  I  do  not
    find that there is any error) the grounds do not seek to challenge  the
    judge's assessment of internal relocation alternatives as  set  out  at
    paragraph 31 - 36 and therefore those findings would still  remain  and
    would demonstrate that the claim made could not succeed.

Decision:

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    an error on a point of law and the appeal is dismissed; the decision of
    the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him.  This direction applies both to the  Appellant  and
to the Respondent.  Failure to comply with  this  direction  could  lead  to
contempt of court proceedings.






Signed [pic]
                                Date: 12th December 2018


Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds
