
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11186/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Liverpool                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 18th August 2017                   |On 27th September 2017                |
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD

                                   Between

                                    j s t


                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss Sachdev, Solicitor, Bury Law Centre
For the Respondent:    Chris Bates, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan  and  a  Sikh.   He  together
    with his wife and two children clandestinely entered the United Kingdom
    in April 2016 and thereafter claimed asylum.
2.   In essence his claim was that  he,  his  wife  and  children  lived  in
    Jalalabad where he took over his father's business of running a  fabric
    shop.  All was well until  2014  when  a  group  of  Muslims,  whom  he
    believed to be Taliban, came into his shop  and  demanded  money.    He
    paid them some money and two or three months later  they  returned  and
    demanded more money.  He paid.  A few months later again they  demanded
    more money and once again he paid them.  When the men  returned  a  few
    months later he refused to pay.  He was told that he either had to  pay
    up or become a Muslim or face the consequences.  He did  not  make  any
    further payment.

3.   However four or five months after that visit he and  his  oldest  child
    were on the way home after closing up  the  shop.   The  appellant  was
    beaten on the head and his eldest son was kidnapped.  He  reported  the
    matter to the police who could not help him because they did  not  know
    who it had been that had undertaken the kidnap.  The appellant remained
    in the area for some months trying to find his son  but  to  no  avail.
    After the event arrangements were made for them to leave  the  country,
    he signed over his shop and gave his wife's jewellery to the  agent  in
    return for transportation.

4.   The respondent in the decision  under  challenge  did  not  accept  the
    credibility  of  the  appellant  nor  of  the  difficulties  which   he
    presented.  The matter came before  First-tier  Tribunal  Alis  on  4th
    January 2017.  The appeal was dismissed in  all  respects.   The  Judge
    finding that the appellant lacked credibility as to  the  substance  of
    his claim.

5.   The first reason for finding the claim  to  lack  credibility  was  the
    lack of reference made by the appellant to threats being issued to him,
    particularly that  he  should  convert  to  Islam.   Though  the  Judge
    accepted there had been mention of a general threat  in  the  screening
    interview itself, it was the view of the Judge that the  appellant  had
    sought to exaggerate his evidence in this  area  and  for  that  reason
    credibility was undermined.

6.   Miss Sachdev, in her submissions, invites  me  to  find  that  actually
    clear reference had been made throughout as to the threats and not just
    in question 38 of the interview.   She indicates that such mention  was
    made at questions 113 and 224 of the  interview  and  specific  mention
    made in the statements of the appellant of 28th September 2016 and 20th
    December 2016.  Also, specific mention of such threats and  the  nature
    of the threats were also contained in  the  wife's  statement  of  20th
    December 2016.  Mr Bates, who represents the respondent, readily agreed
    that the Judge was in error in the approach taken to  those  particular
    threats as it was clearly a significant part of the case  as  presented
    by the appellant throughout that threats were issued to him as a  Sikh,
    suggesting that he was in danger if he refused to convert.

7.   The second reason which was given by the  Judge  is  that  set  out  in
    paragraphs 75 and 76  of  the  determination,  namely  that  it  lacked
    credibility for those who obtained money from the appellant to wait for
    months at a time before demanding more money and also  that  it  lacked
    credibility that, having kidnapped his son, they did  not  contact  the
    appellant further to make demands.  It was expressed in the grounds  of
    appeal that it was dangerous for the Judge to speculate upon how  third
    parties would act or indeed that there should be any predictability  as
    to their behaviour.  Indeed the Tribunal  decision  in  TG  and  Others
    (Afghanistan) CG [2015] UKUT 00595 (IAC) indicated that some members of
    the Sikh and  Hindu  communities  in  Afghanistan  continue  to  suffer
    harassment at the hands of Muslim  zealots.  It  is  clear   that  some
    individuals  may  face  difficulties  including  threats,   extortions,
    seizure  of  land  and  acts  of  violence  in  the   course   of   any
    discrimination that is afflicted against Sikh and Hindu families.

8.   Miss  Sachdev  submits  that  if  the  Judge  had  concerns  about  the
    truthfulness of the account as to why no demands had  been  made,  such
    should have been a matter put to the appellant during the course of the
    hearing.  This is particularly so given the fact  that  in  the  second
    witness statement of the appellant he sets out a reason  why  they  did
    not come back after the kidnap, namely that they knew that he  did  not
    have money and that they took his son for their own  use  instead.   Mr
    Bates submits that the Judge was entitled to  come  to  the  conclusion
    that he did in relation to that matter.

9.   The third matter affecting credibility was set  out  in  paragraph  77,
    namely of inconsistent evidence about whether  others  were  asked  for
    money.  At interview the appellant was  unable  to  say  whether  other
    local businesses were asked for money, whereas in his oral evidence  he
    said that people in  the  temple  had  told  him  that  they  had  been
    targeted. It is clearly a matter that the Judge  is  entitled  to  rely
    upon, but should of course to be seen in the context of TG  and  Others
    ,namely that it was  a  feature  of  life  of  the  Sikh  community  in
    Afghanistan to be subjected to demands.   The fact that  the  appellant
    sought to indicate that he could not say whether other local businesses
    were asked for money, perhaps is not the most  significant  feature  in
    the case as a whole.

10.  In paragraph 73  the  Judge  comments  that  the  appellant  failed  to
    mention the threats  being  made  in  either  his  first  statement  at
    interview or second statement.  For reasons as have  already  been  set
    out, that is incorrect but it is a finding which  the  Judge  makes  as
    significantly undermining credibility.  This was particularly so in the
    light of the comments at paragraph 74 of the determination which are as
    follows:-

         "Whilst I  take  on  board  the  article  at  pages  47-69  of  the
         appellant's bundle I do not find that the court  venue  contributed
         to his inability to answer that question or his decision to mention
         this demand as part of these visits for the  first  time.   I  find
         that the appellant had added this to his  account  to  enhance  his
         claim and that does raise questions about the  reliability  of  the
         rest of his account about what happened."

11.  Thus it is submitted on behalf of  the  appellant  that  the  incorrect
    findings  as  to  the  threats  made  has  fundamentally  tainted   all
    consideration which the Judge has given to the issue of credibility.  I
    find further support for that concern in paragraph 78 where  the  Judge
    makes reference to the fact that the "appellant's account  is  littered
    with significant inconsistency  and  I  find  that  in  this  case  the
    appellant has not been targeted or threatened  as  he  claimed".   Even
    noting certain inconsistencies it is perhaps overstating  the  case  to
    speak of the account being littered with significant inconsistencies.

12.  For those reasons I am driven to the conclusion that the Judge  was  in
    error in drawing certain conclusions against the appellant and that the
    findings of credibility are fundamentally unsafe.

13.  It seems  to  me  that  that  is  of  considerable  importance  in  the
    application of TG and Others and particularly in one respect as set out
    in paragraph 85(v) of the determination namely:

         "Whether it is reasonable to expect a member of the Sikh  or  Hindu
         communities  to  relocate  is  a  fact-sensitive  assessment.   The
         relevant factors to be considered include those set  out  at  (iii)
         above.  Given their particular circumstances and declining  number,
         the practicality of settling elsewhere for members of the Sikh  and
         Hindu communities must  be  carefully  considered.   Those  without
         access to  an  independent  income  are  unlikely  to  be  able  to
         reasonably relocate because of depleted support mechanisms."

14.  This is linked with the finding at paragraph 87(ii):

         "They claim to have funded by their trip by selling  the  lease  to
         the shop and the appellant's wife jewellery needing those funds  to
         pay an agent to bring them from their  home  in  Jalalabad  to  the
         United Kingdom.  I have rejected the appellant's account of what he
         claimed to have happened to him and his  family.   This  undermines
         his claim to have both liquidated all his assets in  his  claim  to
         have no family in Jalalabad either on his side of the family or his
         wife's side of the family."

    It seems to me, therefore, fundamental  to  considering  the  issue  of
    return for there to be a clear and safe finding  as  to  the  issue  of
    credibility, such as particularly relevant to the issue  of  return  to
    Jalalabad and also potentially relevant to the issue of whether a  Sikh
    family can reasonably return to Kabul or elsewhere in Afghanistan.

15.  In all the circumstances I set aside the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal  and  in  accordance  with  the  senior  president's  Practice
    Direction indicate that the matter should be remitted to the First-tier
    Tribunal for a de novo hearing to determine the issues  of  effect,  in
    particular to  carefully  consider  the  safety  or  reasonableness  of
    return.

Notice of Decision

16.  The appeal is allowed to the extent the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision
    is set aside to be remade.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                 [pic]                 Date  25 September 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge King TD

