
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number PA/11752/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Heard at Field House   Decision and Reasons Promulgated
On 29th January 2019   On 13th February 2019



                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PARKES


                                   Between

                               MD HASAN MAHMUD
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr Ume-Ezeoke (Counsel, instructed by Pillai & Jones
Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant's claim for asylum was rejected and his appeal dismissed
    for the reasons given in the decision of Judge Mailer promulgated on
    the 29th of November 2018. The Appellant sought permission to appeal to
    the Upper Tribunal in grounds of the 10th of December 2018 asserting
    that there were various errors with the substantive decision and that
    the Judge had not considered article 8. Permission was refused with
    respect to the asylum aspect of the Appellant's case but it was noted
    that Judge Mailer had not considered article 8 and permission to appeal
    to the Upper Tribunal was granted on that basis alone. There was no
    renewed application for permission to appeal on the asylum grounds.

 2. The Appellant had raised article 8 in the Grounds of Appeal albeit
    incorrectly. Having recited article 8 it was stated in paragraph 15 of
    the Grounds of Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal that the Secretary of
    State had no right to interfere in an individual's private life.

 3. In the Appellant's witness statement prepared for the First-tier
    Tribunal hearing the Appellant stated at paragraph 29 that he was now
    suffering from depression. In paragraph 30 the Appellant stated that
    since coming to the UK he had treated the UK as his home and had set up
    a life here, having spent considerable amount of time here he was
    adapted to the English system and could not see himself moving back to
    Bangladesh. in paragraph 40 the Appellant referred to having engaged in
    many social activities regularly attending the mosque and similar
    places. It does not appear that the Appellant gave further evidence and
    it does not appear that the article 8 aspect was developed before Judge
    Mailer in argument.

 4. For the Appellant it was argued that the appeal should be remitted. The
    Appellant was not at the Upper Tribunal hearing and Mr Ume-Ezeoke had
    not had the opportunity to ask him about the case. It was possible that
    evidence had not been provided on the advice of his solicitors. It was
    observed that the Appellant had been interviewed in English and did
    have a level of education.

 5. I refused the application for the Appellant to be given more time. The
    Appellant did not submit any evidence for the appeal before Judge
    Mailer and there was no application to submit additional evidence
    before the Upper Tribunal. Fairness is obtained by giving a party to
    the proceedings the opportunity to prepare their case and in this
    appeal the Appellant had had more than sufficient opportunity to
    prepare and present evidence both before the First-tier Tribunal and
    the Upper Tribunal. That he did not take that opportunity does not make
    the proceedings unfair. In the circumstances I have decided the case on
    the evidence that was presented to the First-tier Tribunal.

 6. The starting point for the consideration of the Appellant's article 8
    claim is the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Keane of the 27th of
    September 2016. I can depart from that decision is there evidence that
    was not available to Judge Keane that would justify taking a different
    approach. In brief the Appellant did not attend that appeal and his
    appeal was decided on the papers. Judge Keane found that the Appellant
    did not meet the Immigration Rules and there were no exceptional
    circumstances that would justify a grant of leave outside the rules,
    the full reasons are given in paragraph 7 of his determination. There
    was no challenge to that decision.

 7. The Appellant's Notice and Grounds of Appeal are dated the 4th of
    October 2018 and he had had since the application was made to prepare
    his case. In addition to that the Appellant had had the benefit of the
    decision of Judge Keane which indicated why his human rights
    application had previously failed. The Appellant has had the benefit of
    legal advice and the absence of evidence to justify departing from
    Judge Keane's decision has to be seen in that light.

 8. There is no evidence that would justify finding that the Appellant
    meets the Immigration Rules or that there are circumstances not
    addressed by the rules that would justify a grant of leave outside the
    rules. There is no evidence that would justify revisiting the earlier
    decision of Judge Keane and I decline to do so.

 9. Technically there was an error in the decision of Judge Mailer in the
    absence of any consideration of article 8 but in the circumstances it
    is not material. There was nothing in the evidence that would have
    availed the Appellant and in the circumstances the decision of Judge
    Mailer stands as the disposal of this appeal. His decision can be read
    along with these reasons which suffice to explain why the gap is not
    material to the outcome as it is inevitable that the appeal would have
    been dismissed on article 8 grounds.

CONCLUSIONS

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside the decision.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of
the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 and I make no
order.
((Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008)

Fee Award

In dismissing this appeal I make no fee award.


Signed: [pic]

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal (IAC)

Dated: 1st February 2019





















                          (c) Crown copyright 2019
