
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/11582/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 19 April 2018                       |On 20 April 2018                  |
|                                          |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAFFER


                                   Between

                                     IC
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs N Ahmed of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Miss Z Ahmed a Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. The brevity of this decision is due to the commendable focus of the
         Representatives and narrowness of the issue.

Preliminary matter

      2. Pursuant to Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
         Rules 2008 (SI 2008/269) I make  an  anonymity  order.  Unless  the
         Upper Tribunal or a Court directs otherwise,  no  report  of  these
         proceedings or any form of publication thereof  shall  directly  or
         indirectly identify IC or any of her family members. This direction
         applies to, amongst others, all parties. Any failure to comply with
         this direction could give rise to Contempt of Court proceedings.  I
         do so in order to preserve the anonymity of IC whose claim to  have
         been forced into prostitution and trafficked form a  core  part  of
         the case yet to be determined.

Background

      3. The Respondent refused IC's application  for  asylum  or  ancillary
         protection  on  26  October  2017.  Her  appeal  against  this  was
         dismissed by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Lawrence  ("the  Judge")
         following a hearing on 8 December 2017.

The grant of permission

      4. Judge Baker granted permission to appeal (25 January 2018) as it is
         arguable that the Judge materially erred in failing to consider the
         claims to have been forced  into  prostitution  and  to  have  been
         trafficked.

Respondent's position

      5. No rule 24 notice was issued. Miss Z Ahmed conceded that  the  only
         time  the  Judge  considered  the  issues  of  being  forced   into
         prostitution and trafficked was when he rejected those accounts  in
         [21] by simply saying she was not trafficked, handed over, or  sold
         on. There was no consideration of  her  evidence,  and  no  reasons
         given for the decisions.  That is plainly a material error of law.

Discussion

      6. Given the concession made by the Respondent, and having  considered
         it myself, I am satisfied that a material error of law occurred  in
         that 2 of the 3 grounds of the claim  have  been  rejected  without
         being adequately considered.

      7. I noted that the finding that IC had not been the subject of  abuse
         by her step-father had not been challenged in the  grounds  seeking
         permission to appeal. I was not asked to open up that  issue.  Even
         if I had have been, I would have refused to do so, as it  is  clear
         from reading the decision that the Judge gave multiple, cogent, and
         sustainable findings for that conclusion. Accordingly, the findings
         in [9] to [20] stand.

      8. Given these findings, I am also satisfied  having  heard  from  the
         representatives that it is appropriate to remit the  matter  for  a
         new hearing on the issues of being  forced  into  prostitution  and
         trafficked, as the errors go  beyond  those  contained  within  the
         Presidential Guidance for retention in the Upper Tribunal.

Decision:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

    I set aside the decision.

    I remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal for a  new  hearing  with
    the findings at [9] to [20]  being  preserved,  but  not  before  Judge
    Lawrence as he appears to have made his  mind  up  on  the  outstanding
    issues without considering the evidence.





Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saffer
19 April 2018
