
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11760/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 26 November 2019                  |On 6 December 2019                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                            HIS HONOUR JUDGE BIRD
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

                                  SAMI [M]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the appellant:     None
For the respondent:    Mr Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. The appellant has appealed  against  a  decision  of  the  First-tier
       Tribunal ('FTT') sent on 16 July 2019,  in  which  it  dismissed  his
       appeal on human rights grounds.

Background

    2. The appellant is a citizen of Egypt.  He entered the  United  Kingdom
       ('UK') a long time ago in 1994.  His immigration history is therefore
       lengthy but it suffices to say that he has not had leave to remain in
       the UK since 9 October 2015.

    3. The appellant has been convicted of offences in  2010  for  which  he
       received a custodial sentence of three months  concurrent,  suspended
       for 12 months.

    4. On 4 September 2015 he was convicted of theft, false imprisonment and
       assault occasioning actual bodily harm  for  which  he  was  given  a
       custodial sentence of 45 months in total.  The victim of these latter
       offences was the appellant's ex-wife and the mother of his  children.
       The sentencing remarks of the sentencing judge  make  it  clear  that
       although the appellant was separated from his ex-wife at the time, he
       nonetheless falsely imprisoned her and  subjected  her  to  violence,
       over a number of hours on 25 August  2014.   The  appellant  has  two
       children in the UK, a son born in December 1997 ('A') and a  daughter
       born in July 2001 ('B').  A was therefore 21 and B nearly 18, at  the
       date of the hearing before the FTT.

    5. On 10  August  2016  the  respondent  issued  the  appellant  with  a
       deportation order and refused his application to remain on the  basis
       of Article 8, ECHR in a decision dated 19  September  2017.   It  was
       this decision  that  the  appellant  appealed  to  the  FTT,  without
       success.

FTT hearing

    6. The appellant was represented by Counsel at the  hearing  before  the
       FTT.  His Counsel accepted that the appellant no longer  relied  upon
       asylum or Article 3, ECHR but rested his case upon  his  family  life
       with his daughter and his private life in  the  UK.   The  FTT  heard
       evidence from the appellant and A and reached the following  findings
       of fact:

        i) Although the appellant has a genuine and subsisting relationship
           with B, a qualifying child, the effect of his deportation on her
           would not be unduly harsh in the light of the matters set out at
           [40] and [41], including the  fact  that  the  majority  of  his
           contact with his nearly adult daughter has  been  by  telephone.
           The appellant was therefore unable to meet  the  high  threshold
           demanded by the unduly harsh  test  in  paragraph  399A  of  the
           Immigration Rules.

       ii) The appellant was unable to establish that he  met  any  of  the
           three  requirements  contained  in   paragraph   399A   of   the
           Immigration Rules - see [42] to [45].

      iii) There were no additional compelling reasons to allow his  appeal
           under Article 8 - see [46].

    7. The FTT therefore dismissed the appeal for these reasons.

Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

    8. The appellant appealed against this decision and permission to appeal
       was granted by FTT Judge O'Brien in a decision dated 12 August  2019.
       We refer to the grounds of appeal in more detail below.



Hearing

    9. At the hearing before us there was no appearance  by  the  appellant.
       We noted that he no longer had any representatives acting for him. We
       are satisfied that the appellant was notified of the hearing date,  a
       notice dated 18 September 2019 together with directions  bearing  the
       same date, having been sent to the home address that was provided for
       him.

   10. There has been no explanation for the appellant's failure  to  comply
       with directions or his failure to attend the  hearing.   In  all  the
       circumstances, and  bearing  in  mind  the  overriding  objective  we
       decided that it was in the interests of justice to proceed  with  the
       hearing.

   11. We indicated to Mr Tufan that there was no material error of  law  in
       the FTT's decision (for the reasons we set out below), and we did not
       need to hear from him.

Discussion

   12. Paragraphs 399 and 399A of the Immigration Rules are reflected within
       s. 117C of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002  ('the
       2002 Act').  This is a  case  in  which  the  FTT  provided  adequate
       reasons why the exceptions in that section could not be met.

   13. The written grounds of appeal challenge the decision of  the  FTT  in
       three respects, which we address in turn.

   14. First, the submission at [1] of the grounds that the FTT  disregarded
       B's witness statement is wholly devoid of  merit.   The  FTT  clearly
       took into account all the relevant evidence emanating from  B  -  see
       [20], [24], [30] and [31].  At [31] the FTT  expressly  indicated  it
       had taken into account B's witness statement.  The suggestion in  [2]
       of  the  grounds  that  B  could  not  relocate  to  Egypt  fails  to
       acknowledge that the FTT found that B could remain in the UK with her
       mother without any undue harshness.

   15. Second, the submission in [4] to [5] of the  grounds,  that  the  FTT
       failed to take into account relevant matters or apply s.  117C(6)  of
       the 2002 Act is not a material error of law.  In RA  (s.117C  "unduly
       harsh": offence: seriousness)  Iraq  [2019]  UKUT  00123  (IAC),  the
       President said this:

           "22.   It is important to keep in mind that the test in  section
           117C(6) is extremely demanding. The fact that, at this point,  a
           tribunal is required to engage in a wide-ranging proportionality
           exercise, balancing the weight that appropriately  falls  to  be
           given to factors on the proposed deportee's side of the  balance
           against the weight of the public interest, does not in any sense
           permit the tribunal to engage in the sort of exercise that would
           be appropriate in the case of someone  who  is  not  within  the
           ambit of section 117C. Not  only  must  regard  be  had  to  the
           factors set out in section 117B, such as giving little weight to
           a  relationship  formed  with  a  qualifying  partner  that   is
           established when the proposed deportee was in the United Kingdom
           unlawfully, the public interest in the deportation of a  foreign
           criminal is high; and even higher  for  a  person  sentenced  to
           imprisonment of at least four years."

       And then immediately supported this by referring to the reasoning  of
       Jackson LJ in NA (Pakistan) & Another v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 662:

           "23.   Jackson LJ put it as follows:-

                    "33.     Although   there   is    no    'exceptionality'
                    requirement, it inexorably follows  from  the  statutory
                    scheme  that  the  cases  in  which  circumstances   are
                    sufficiently compelling  to  outweigh  the  high  public
                    interest in deportation will be  rare.  The  commonplace
                    incidents of family life, such as ageing parents in poor
                    health or the natural love between parents and children,
                    will not be sufficient.

                    34.    The best interests of  children  certainly  carry
                    great weight, as identified by Lord Kerr in HH v  Deputy
                    Prosecutor of  the  Italian  Republic  [2012]  UKSC  25;
                    [2013]  1  AC  338  at  [145].  Nevertheless,  it  is  a
                    consequence of criminal conduct that  offenders  may  be
                    separated from their children for many  years,  contrary
                    to  the  best   interests   of   those   children.   The
                    desirability of children being with both  parents  is  a
                    commonplace of  family  life.  That  is  not  usually  a
                    sufficiently compelling  circumstance  to  outweigh  the
                    high public interest in deporting foreign criminals.  As
                    Rafferty LJ observed in Secretary of State for the  Home
                    Department v CT (Vietnam) [2016] EWCA Civ 488 at [38]:

                        "Neither   the   British   nationality    of    the
                        respondent's children nor their  likely  separation
                        from their father for a long time  are  exceptional
                        circumstances which outweigh the public interest in
                        his deportation.""

   16. The FTT was entitled  to  conclude  that  there  was  an  absence  of
       compelling  circumstances  at  [46]  having  made  factual   findings
       entirely open to it, with the  exception  that  the  appellant  could
       reside with his second wife in Egypt, which we turn  to  later.   Had
       the FTT applied the "extremely demanding" test in  s.117C(6)  to  the
       appellant's case (even taken  at  its  highest)  and  balanced  these
       against the strong public interest in his deportation, in  the  light
       of his immigration history and very serious offending, it would  have
       inevitably concluded that the high test could not be met.

   17. Even if it was a mistake of  fact  for  the  FTT  to  find  that  the
       appellant could live with his wife upon return to Egypt (as submitted
       at [7] of the grounds), this error is immaterial given the high  test
       to be applied and the FTT's clear findings that he would be  able  to
       support himself in Egypt.

   18. Third, even assuming as submitted at [6] of the grounds, that the FTT
       was wrong not to treat Ms Pargeter as a country expert, this is not a
       material error of law.  This is because at [35], the FTT went  on  to
       deal with her evidence in the alternative.  This is  clear  from  the
       sixth line: "Even if I were to treat her as an expert,  I  find  that
       the expert has left a number of important aspects of the  appellant's
       life out of her consideration...".

   19. We are therefore satisfied that the written grounds of appeal are not
       made out and the appeal must therefore be dismissed.



Notice of decision

   20. The decision of the FTT does not contain a material error of law  and
       we do not set it aside.


Signed: UTJ Plimmer

Ms M. Plimmer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date: 4 December 2019
