
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11853/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Determined under rule 34             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 21 September 2020                 |On 28 September 2020                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STEPHEN SMITH


                                   Between

                                     AF
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                          DECISION AND REASONS (P)

This is a pater  determination  which  has  not  been  objected  to  by  the
parties.  The form of remote hearing was P (paper determination that is  not
provisional). A face to face  hearing  was  not  held  because  it  was  not
practicable, and all issues could be determined in a remote hearing.

The documents that I was referred to are in  a  bundle  of  186  pages,  the
decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated  on  21  January  2020,  the
grounds for permission to appeal and post-permission  submissions  from  the
appellant, the contents of which I have recorded.

The order made is described at the end of these reasons.

 1. The appellant, AF, is a citizen of  Iran  born  in  1967.   He  appeals
    against a decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Skehan  promulgated  on
    21 January 2020  dismissing  his  appeal  against  a  decision  of  the
    respondent dated 18 November 2019 refusing his fresh asylum claim.

 2. An anonymity  order  was  made  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  which  I
    maintain.

Factual background

 3. The appellant arrived in this country in January 2017  on  a  visitor's
    visa.  In January 2017, he claimed asylum on the basis of  his  claimed
    imputed political opinion and the perception of the Iranian authorities
    that he was a Christian.  The claim was refused, and an appeal  against
    that  refusal  was  dismissed  by  Judge  Herbert  OBE  in  a  decision
    promulgated on  5  March  2018.  Judge  Herbert  had  some  credibility
    concerns about  the  appellant's  claim,  and  found  that,  while  the
    appellant may well have had a subjective fear of  persecution,  it  was
    not a fear that was rooted in objective justification:  see  [60].  The
    operative conclusion was at [62]; the appellant, the judge found, would
    not have a profile in the eyes of the authorities such that he would be
    at risk, and would not do anything other than continue  his  life  with
    his wife and children, and continue as a non-practising Shia Muslim.

 4. On 13 May 2019, the appellant made further submissions in support of  a
    materially different claim. The appellant claims that in  late  October
    2018, a telephone call he made to his wife, who still  lives  in  Iran,
    must have been  intercepted  by  the  Iranian  authorities.  In  it  he
    insulted the Iranian regime in robust terms. He claims this led to  the
    authorities telephoning his wife to ask her about  the  telephone  call
    and her husband, and later attending her home. The police took his wife
    away for questioning, he claims. The incident  was  captured  on  CCTV,
    which Judge Skehan viewed. The appellant's wife  wrote  an  account  of
    what happened in an email to the appellant on 1 November 2018. In April
    2019, the police again visited his wife's apartment.  This  time,  they
    confiscated the CCTV equipment, telephones and  the  appellant's  son's
    computer. The appellant's wife and son were taken away for questioning,
    being detained for a total of four hours. The appellant's wife  sent  a
    further email outlining what had happened. The appellant contends  that
    he is at risk of being persecuted in Iran on account of  his  apostasy,
    given he has insulted the regime, and is an atheist. His case  is  that
    atheists are viewed by the regime as "infidels", and that he is at risk
    accordingly.

 5. The  judge  accepted  that  the  appellant  demonstrated  that  it  was
    reasonably likely that he was  "not  religious"  and  that  he  was  an
    atheist, but rejected his case that the authorities  in  Iran  had  any
    interest in him due to his atheism.  The  appellant's  wife's  evidence
    (that is, the documents she provided; she did not  participate  in  the
    hearing) did not mention either  atheism  or  the  appellant's  claimed
    imputed political opinion.  After  reviewing  some  of  the  background
    materials which were said to concern the position of atheists  in  Iran
    (see [12]), the judge reached her  operative  credibility  findings  at
    [16]. At subparagraph (a),  the  judge  said  that  the  appellant  had
    provided no reasons for the apparent sudden interest on the part of the
    authorities in the appellant upon their initial  visit  to  his  wife's
    apartment in late October 2018. As  for  the  CCTV  evidence,  "at  its
    highest, the video shows a police person attending the house. This must
    be weighed alongside the remainder of  the  evidence  provided  by  the
    appellant." In relation to the April 2019  incident,  the  judge  found
    that the appellant's evidence did not mention the  alleged  anti-regime
    comments that he made to his wife on 4 April 2019. It was odd, remarked
    the judge, that the appellant would  repeat  his  anti-regime  comments
    while speaking to his wife on the telephone, given the consequences  he
    claimed his wife had to face the last time he did so. In any event, the
    April 2019 telephone call had primarily entailed the  appellant's  wife
    informing him of the tragic death of his cousin  in  some  floods;  the
    judge did not accept  that  such  news  would  lead  to  the  appellant
    changing the topic of conversation to focus on his dissatisfaction with
    the regime. It was unlikely that the police would be interested in  the
    appellant in April 2019; he had left Iran some 12  years  before  that,
    and it was not clear, found the judge, why the police would have such a
    sudden interest in him leading to a raid on his property.

 6. The judge found  that  the  appellant  had  not  demonstrated  that  he
    suffered an objective risk  of  being  persecuted  on  account  of  his
    atheism: see [17].

 7. At [14] and [19], the judge examined the  country  guidance  concerning
    Christians in Iran (FS and others (Iran - Christian Converts)  Iran  CG
    [2004] UKIAT 00303) and the return of failed asylum  seekers  generally
    (SSH and HR (illegal exit: failed asylum seeker) Iran  CG  [2016]  UKUT
    00308 (IAC)) respectively.  She considered the need for Christians  and
    failed asylum seekers to demonstrate some reason  why  the  authorities
    would take interest in them.  The appellant had demonstrated no reasons
    for any such interest.  She dismissed the appeal.

Permission to appeal

 8. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson on the
    basis that it was arguable that the judge failed to take  into  account
    all relevant evidence.  Specifically, she did not mention  or  consider
    an email dated 1 November 2018 from the appellant's wife concerning the
    claimed visit from the authorities in  October  2018.     It  was  also
    arguable that the judge failed  properly  to  consider  the  background
    materials concerning the position of atheists in Iran.

Consideration under rule 34

 9. Judge Jackson gave directions stating that it was her provisional  view
    the questions of  whether  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    involved the making of an  error  of  law,  and,  if  so,  whether  the
    decision should be set aside, could be determined  without  a  hearing.
    The appellant was directed to provide any written submissions on  those
    issues within 14 days, which he did. Judge Jackson  directed  that  the
    respondent had 21 days within which  to  respond.  There  has  been  no
    response from the respondent.

10. Paragraph 4 of  the  Senior  President  of  Tribunal's  Pilot  Practice
    Direction: Contingency arrangements in the First-tier Tribunal and  the
    Upper Tribunal dated 19 March 2020 provides that,  "where  a  chamber's
    procedure rules allow decisions to be made without a hearing, decisions
    should usually be made in this way, provided this is in accordance with
    the overriding objective, the parties' ECHR  rights  in  the  chamber's
    procedure rules about notice and consent."  Rule  34  of  the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 provides, where relevant:

         "(1)     Subject to paragraphs (2) and (3), the Upper Tribunal  may
             make any decision without a hearing.

         (2)  The Upper Tribunal must have regard to any view expressed by a
             party when deciding whether to hold a hearing to consider  any
             matter, and the form of any such hearing."

11. The starting point for my consideration  as  to  whether  it  would  be
    appropriate to determine the issues identified by Judge Jackson without
    a hearing is the  overriding  objective.  Rule  2(1)  of  the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules  2008  provides  that  the  overriding
    objective of the Upper Tribunal is  to  "deal  with  cases  fairly  and
    justly".  That includes, at (2)(c), "ensuring, so far  as  practicable,
    that the parties are able to participate  fully  in  the  proceedings",
    and, at (d),  "using  any  special  expertise  of  the  Upper  Tribunal
    effectively". Also relevant is the need  to  avoid  delay,  so  far  as
    compatible with proper  consideration  of  the  issues:  see  paragraph
    (2)(e).

12. I am mindful of the fact  the  respondent  has  not  responded  to  the
    directions, but I am satisfied that the respondent had been served with
    the directions that accompany Judge Jackson's grant  of  permission  to
    appeal. The appellant did not object to the error of  law  issue  being
    determined on the papers. Bearing in mind the need to avoid unnecessary
    delay, and the absence of an application by the  respondent  to  extend
    time within which her response may be submitted, I am satisfied that it
    is consistent with the overriding objective, and that it would be  fair
    and just, to determine the questions identified for resolution by Judge
    Jackson without a hearing.

Discussion

13. The grounds of appeal, and the supplementary submissions relied upon by
    the appellant, are primarily targeted at the judge's  factual  analysis
    of the evidence relied upon by the appellant. An appeal  only  lies  to
    the Upper Tribunal on a point of law and not on a point  of  fact.  The
    question, therefore, for my  consideration,  is  whether  the  findings
    reached by the judge were open to her on the evidence  or  whether,  as
    the appellant contends, she fell into an error of the sort described at
    R (Iran) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2005]  EWCA  Civ
    982 at [9].

14. The central submission of the appellant relates to the judge's analysis
    of the incidents in late October 2014. It is necessary to set out  what
    the judge said here in full:

         "The appellant  says  that  following  a  call  with  his  wife  on
         24/10/2018, his wife was visited by the authorities who  questioned
         her in relation to his whereabouts. No  reason  is  given  for  the
         authority's [sic] apparent interest in the appellant."

15. The appellant submits that it was not open to the judge on the evidence
    to say that "no reason" was given for  the  apparent  interest  of  the
    authorities. He submits that the judge failed  to  have  regard  to  an
    email from the appellant's wife, sent shortly after the incident  on  1
    November 2018, in which  his  wife  set  out  in  further  detail  what
    happened, from which, it is submitted, the judge should have been  able
    to ascertain what the reasons for the visit were. The material part  of
    the email stated as follows:

         "Greetings. I [name given], am the wife of [the appellant]. It  was
         on 24 October 2018 [Persian calendar: 02/08/1097] at 6  PM  when  I
         was  talking  with  my  husband  [the  appellant]  about  life  and
         everything. Suddenly, my husband became very agitated and lost  his
         cool and started swearing against the regime. After I had ended the
         telephone call with my husband I received a call just five  minutes
         later from  the  police.  They  threatened  me  with  violence  and
         imprisonment. I cried a lot. I asked them what the matter  was  and
         what I had done. They told me to shut up and said  that  everything
         that had been said had been recorded. They added that my  husband's
         file still had a black mark against  it.  They  asked  me  when  my
         husband was going to return. I said that if he was  going  to  come
         back, they would know before I did. It was not too long - in  fact,
         it was 9 o'clock the same evening - that they rang the doorbell.  I
         opened the door and saw that it was the police. The police told  me
         that I had to go to the police station."

16. The email continues with the appellant's wife describing  how  she  was
    taken to the police station and questioned for around  three  hours  on
    topics such as what her husband is doing in the United Kingdom, when he
    is coming back, and whether she had any news of him. She then describes
    returning home upon being released by  the  police  to  find  that  the
    telephone line was not working. She asked the  telephone  company  what
    had happened, and they told that they had been ordered to cut the line.

17. Although the judge referred in general terms to  the  appellant's  wife
    having submitted "emails" in the plural, that was  in  the  context  of
    reciting the appellant's account of the  second  police  visit  to  his
    wife, which took place on 4 April 2019: see [7.e]. At  [8],  the  judge
    summarised the documentation in the bundle that she  considered  to  be
    salient. The judge's discussion in this paragraph relates only  to  the
    account given in the second email sent by the appellant's  wife,  dated
    28 April 2019. The judge does not mention the 1 November 2018 email  at
    any point in her decision.

18. While it is while it is trite law that a judge does not need to  repeat
    back to the parties the evidence upon which they have relied, the judge
    was under a duty to resolve key factual conflicts, and to give  reasons
    which were rationally open to her on the evidence before her. The judge
    dismissed the appellant's  account  of  the  initial  interest  of  the
    authorities in his wife on the basis that "no reason"  had  been  given
    for their apparent interest in him. It may be that what the judge meant
    was that  there  was  no  reason  for  the  authorities  to  have  been
    monitoring his wife's telephone line in Iran in the  first  place,  and
    for that reason she was rejecting the entire account. Alternatively, it
    may be that the judge had overlooked this email as, after all, she made
    no reference to it at any point in her decision. Putting aside for  one
    moment the question  of  how  an  asylum  seeker  could  reasonably  be
    expected to know why a murderous and brutal regime chooses to focus  on
    one person rather than another, I find that the uncertainty that arises
    from [16.a] prevents the reader of the decision from understanding  the
    basis upon which  this  key  aspect  of  the  appellant's  account  was
    rejected.  It is not clear whether the judge overlooked the  email,  or
    whether she considered it, and placed a question mark over  the  entire
    incident on account of her concerns that "no reason is given"  for  the
    apparent interest of the authorities.  I find the judge's  analysis  at
    [16.a] does not disclose sufficient reasons for her  rejection  of  the
    claimed incident in late October 2020.

19. The "no reason" findings  at  [16.a]  formed  the  foundation  for  the
    remaining findings of fact.  At [16.b], the judge noted  that  she  had
    viewed the CCTV evidence provided  by  the  appellant  of  the  claimed
    October 2018  incident  outside  the  apartment.   She  summarises  the
    footage in the decision, and her summary is consistent with the account
    given by the appellant (and the email of 1 November to  which  she  did
    not refer), although it does not appear to display the appellant's wife
    being taken for questioning.  The judge added that  the  CCTV  evidence
    "must be weighed alongside the remainder of the  evidence  provided  by
    the appellant." It is, of course, correct to state the evidence must be
    viewed in the round.  The difficulty arises here, however, because  the
    judge appears to be  anchoring  her  sceptical  analysis  of  the  CCTV
    footage on the basis of her flawed analysis at [16.a].

20. There are other aspects of the judge's analysis of the core account  by
    the appellant which were open to her on  the  evidence.   However,  the
    judge failed to take into account key evidence in the  form  of  the  1
    November 2018 email, and in doing so failed to give sufficient  reasons
    for her findings at [16.a], and so, as a result, tainted the  remainder
    of her credibility analysis.

21. I find  that  the  above  error  goes  to  the  heart  of  the  judge's
    credibility analysis and was, therefore, an error such that the  entire
    decision must be set aside with no findings of fact preserved.

22. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  to  be  heard  by  a
    different judge, with no findings of fact preserved.

Notice of Decision

The decision of Judge Skehan involved the making of an error of law  and  is
set aside with no findings of fact preserved.

The matter is  remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  be  heard  by  a
different judge.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Stephen H Smith            Date 21 September 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Stephen Smith
