
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/11941/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard remotely at Field House      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|By UK Court Skype                  |                                   |
|On 11 September 2020               |On 5 October 2020                  |
|                                   |                                   |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE OWENS


                                   Between

                                     MN
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     MS Rutherford, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


           DECISION MADE PURSUANT TO RULES 34, 39 & 40 (3) OF THE
               TRIBUNAL PROCEDURE (UPPER TRIBUNAL) RULES 2008

   1. The appellant appeals with permission against the decision  of  First-
      tier Tribunal Judge French sent on 2 April 2020.



   2. Both parties agreed that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
      involved the making of an error of law for the reasons set out in  the
      grant of permission. They were right to do so.


   3. It was procedurally unfair for the  judge  not  to  have  put  to  the
      appellant her concerns about  the  accuracy  or  the  content  of  the
      Facebook material. The presence and content of the  Facebook  material
      was significant to the issue of whether the appellant is  at  risk  on
      return to Iran. The judge also failed to make findings on  the  extent
      of the appellant's political activities in the UK.  These  errors  are
      material to the outcome of the appeal.

   4. Further the judge misapplied the law by failing to take  into  account
      the headnote in KB (Kurds) Iran CG [2018] UKUT 430 (IAC).

   5. This states;

         "(5)     Kurdish ethnicity is nevertheless  a  risk  factor  which.
         when combined with  other  factors,  may  create  a  real  risk  of
         persecution or Article 3  ill-treatment.  Being  a  risk-factor  it
         means that Kurdish ethnicity is a factor of particular significance
         when assessing risk. Those "other factors" will include the matters
         identified in paragraphs (6) to (9) below.


         (6)      A period of residence in the KRI by a Kurdish returnee  is
         reasonably likely  to  result  in  additional  questioning  by  the
         authorities on return. However, this  is  a  factor  that  will  be
         highly fact-specific and the degree of interest that such residence
         will excite will depend, non-exhaustively, on matters such  as  the
         length of residence in KRI, what the person was doing there and why
         they left.


         (7)      Kurds involved in Kurdish political groups or activity are
         at risk of arrest, prolonged detention and physical  abuse  by  the
         Iranian authorities. Even Kurds expressing peaceful dissent or  who
         speak out about Kurdish rights also face a real risk of persecution
         or Article 3 ill treatment


         (9)      Even 'low level' political activity or  activity  that  is
         perceived to be political such as  by  way  of  example  only  mere
         possession of leaflets espousing or supporting Kurdish  rights,  if
         discovered, involves the same risk of persecution or Article 3 ill-
         treatment. Each case however, depends  on  its  own  facts  and  an
         assessment will need to be made as to the nature  of  the  material
         possessed and how it would be likely to be viewed  by  the  Iranian
         authorities in the context of the foregoing guidance.


         (10)      The  Iranian  authorities  demonstrate  what   could   be
         described as a 'hair trigger' approach to  those  suspected  of  or
         perceived to be involved in Kurdish political activities or support
         for Kurdish rights. By 'hair trigger' it means that  the  threshold
         for suspicion is  low  and  the  reaction  of  the  authorities  is
         reasonably likely to be extreme".

   6. The judge's findings  at [9]  that  the  appellant  was  not  at  risk
      because she is not  a 'leading figure' and that her  claimed  comments
      'were not calling for the overthrow of the government'  constitute  an
      error of law because the judge has not  applied  the  guidance  in  KB
      correctly.


   7. This error is material, because had the judge not misapplied the  law,
      the judge may have come to a different conclusion on the risk  to  the
      appellant on return.


   8. In the circumstances, the findings as to the appellant's  'sur  place'
      activities and the risk to her as a result of them  are  fundamentally
      undermined and unsustainable.

   9. In the circumstances, given that none  of  the  findings  of  fact  in
      relation to the 'sur place' activities can be preserved, the  part  of
      the appeal relating to 'sur place' activities will have  to  be  heard
      again for new findings to be made  and  for  the  law  to  be  applied
      correctly and accordingly it is appropriate to remit the appeal to the
      First-tier Tribunal.

  10. It is agreed by both parties that the findings in relation  to  events
      in Iran at [1] to [8] have not  been  challenged  and  are  preserved,
      including the findings that the appellant is of Kurdish ethnicity  and
      left Iran illegally; she is not at risk of serious harm on  return  to
      Iran by virtue of her sexuality; nor is she at risk  of  serious  harm
      from her uncle. The only outstanding issue relates to  the  extent  of
      the appellant's 'sur place' activities in the  UK  and  the  potential
      risk to her on return to Iran because of those activities.

  11. Mr Clarke for the respondent raised an issue in that he  asserts  that
      the 'sur place' activities  constitute  a  'new  matter'  pursuant  to
      s85(5) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002. It is  not
      for the Upper Tribunal to determine the issue  of  the  'new  matter'.
      When the remitted appeal comes before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  the
      issue of the 'new matter' can be dealt with. In the  meantime,  it  is
      for the appellant to complete the relevant s120  notices  and  witness
      statements in  relation  to  her  'sur  place'  claim  and  bring  the
      respondent's attention to the 'new matter' prior to the hearing before
      the First-tier Tribunal.


  12. Rule 40 (1) of the Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
      provided that the Upper Tribunal may  give  a  decision  orally  at  a
      hearing which I did. Rule 40 (3) provides that the Upper Tribunal must
      provide written reasons for its decision with a decision notice unless
      the parties have consented to the Upper Tribunal  not  giving  written
      reasons. I am satisfied that the parties have given  such  consent  at
      the hearing.


      Notice of Decision

  13. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making  of  an
      error of law and is set aside.

  14. I remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh  hearing  on
      the 'sur place' issue alone.

Anonymity Order


  15. This appeal concerns  a  claim  made  under  the  Refugee  Convention.
      Having had  regard  to  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
      Tribunal) Rules 2008 and the Presidential Guidance Note No 1 of  2013:
      Anonymity Orders, I therefore consider it appropriate to make an order
      in the following terms:


         "Unless and until a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
        Appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
        shall directly or indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her
        family.  This  direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  both  the
        Appellant  and  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply  with   this
        direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings"


      Signed                       Date: 29 September 2020


      R J Owens
      Upper Tribunal Judge Owens


