
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: PA/11734/2018
                                                               PA/11735/2018
                                                               PA/11737/2018
                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at North Shields (Kings Court) |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 15 August 2019                    |On 04 September 2019                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON

                                   Between

                                   (1)  RV
                                   (2)  AV
                                   (3)  AV

                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr J Collins, Marsh & Partners Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008
Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

 1. This appeal is an by three citizens of Albania against the decision  of
    FtTJ Fisher.  The first appellant is the mother of the second and third
    appellants.  She was born in 1989 and her children  in  2014  and  2018
    respectively, in the United Kingdom, where RV arrived on 29 April  2013
    and claimed asylum on 10 February 2014.   Over  four  years  later  the
    Secretary of State refused the asylum claim  for  reasons  given  in  a
    letter dated 20 September 2018.  The appellants appealed  that  refusal
    to the First-tier Tribunal where Judge Fisher heard their appeal  on  5
    November 2018.  For reasons given in his decision dated 14 January 2019
    Judge Fisher dismissed the appeal on  asylum,  humanitarian  protection
    and human rights grounds.


 2. The judge summarised the first appellant's claim as follows:


         "4.  ...  It  is  convenient,  at  this  point,  to  summarise  the
             Appellant's account.  She said that she had been a student  at
             the University of Shkoder, and was raped in her friend's house
             at the end of 2011.  She claimed that her friend  had  invited
             her for lunch, but left the property as she had  forgotten  to
             purchase  something  which  she  required.   In  her  friend's
             absence, a man came to the door, gained entry and  raped  her.
             The Appellant did  not  report  the  incident  to  the  police
             because her attacker had threatened to kill her if she did so.
              However, she informed her mother, who  then  accused  her  of
             bringing shame on the family.  Half an hour later, her  father
             called and disowned her.  In addition, he threatened  that  he
             would kill her with his own hands.


         5.   The Appellant said that she felt hopeless as a result of these
             conversations.  She considered ending her life by jumping  off
             a bridge, but a man named Adrian found her and  persuaded  her
             not to jump.  They subsequently became friends.


         6.    Approximately  one  month  after  the  first  incident,   the
             Appellant claimed that she was forced in to a car by the  same
             man who had raped her, and two others.  She was  drugged  and,
             when she regained consciousness, she overheard a  conversation
             in which the man spoke of taking her  to  Italy  in  order  to
             exploit her sexually.  She managed to escape when the car  was
             stationary and then called Adrian. Thereafter, she took a  bus
             to Tirana, where she met him, and he took her to his  family's
             home.  She and  Adrian  married  on  28  February  2012.   The
             Appellant said that she did not  inform  her  family  of  this
             because they had disowned her.


         7.   In March 2013, Adrian was attacked by 3-4 men,  who  told  him
             that they were acting on the instructions of  the  Appellant's
             father, and warned him that he  would  not  survive  the  next
             assault.  Thereafter, the attitude of Adrian's family  changed
             towards  the  Appellant.   Adrian  decided  that  he  and  the
             Appellant should leave Albania.  On 2 April 2013, they boarded
             a lorry and arrived in the UK on 29 April 2013.  However,  her
             husband abandoned her on 29  January  2014,  after  which  she
             claimed asylum."


 3. In reaching his conclusions the judge noted the  Secretary  of  State's
    acceptance that the first appellant's account had disclosed  a  Refugee
    Convention reason.  In the light of the respondent, however,  rejecting
    her account, he considered credibility to be of "primary importance".


 4. After directing himself as to the burden and  standard  of  proof,  the
    country information and medical evidence and noting that no  claim  had
    been advanced on health grounds alone, the judge reached these findings
    between paragraphs [29] and [34]:


         "29. It is against the background of  this  material  that  I  have
             considered the Appellant's account.  She said that she and had
             Leti become  best  friends  quite  quickly  after  meeting  at
             university.  In fact,  she  described  their  relationship  as
             being akin to sisters.  Having invited the  Appellant  to  her
             home, Leti then left for a short time.  The Appellant expected
             her to return within 10 minutes, but never saw her  again  and
             indeed, made no effort to do so after  the  events  which  she
             described.  Even if she did believe that Leti was involved  in
             some way in the rape, I do not find it credible that she would
             not have made any attempt to confront someone to whom she felt
             so close about her involvement, or to have enquired as to  the
             well-being of her best friend.  I  do  not  believe  that  the
             Appellant would simply have abandoned any  interest  in  their
             relationship.  Obviously, this detracts from  the  credibility
             of her account.


         30.  The Appellant said  that  she  was  subsequently  abducted  in
             daylight whilst on her way to university, when people were  in
             the vicinity.  It would not appear that  anyone  reported  the
             incident and the Appellant did  not  do  so  afterwards.   She
             suggested that she did not know where to go in order to report
             it to the university authorities, but I remind myself that she
             had been a student there, on  her  account,  from  2007  until
             2012.  It lacks credibility that, over such a long  period  of
             time, she would not have become aware of the facilities in the
             university.  Similarly, if a gang had abducted her, I  believe
             that she would at least have alerted other students, in  order
             to warn them and to put them on their  guard  against  similar
             risks.


         31.  The Appellant gave an account of  a  relatively  sophisticated
             trafficking gang which had the means to sedate  her  when  she
             was dragged in to their vehicle, and whose members  used  some
             form of codes to prevent her from obtaining information  about
             them or their aims.  Despite that, she asked me to accept that
             her captors had left her in the vehicle with  an  open  window
             whilst they crossed a road and entered premises for coffee and
             a cigarette.  I have to say that I do not find this account of
             escape  to  be  at  all  credible.   That   conclusion   casts
             substantial doubt over the Appellant's entire  claim  to  have
             been abducted in the first place.


         32.  Furthermore, it makes no sense to me that, if the  Appellant's
             father was threatening to kill her  with  his  own  hands,  he
             should not act on that threat, especially as he knew where she
             was  staying  at  the  university,   having   paid   for   her
             accommodation for some time.  Instead, she claimed that he had
             waited until she  was  married  and  then  acted  against  her
             husband, rather than against her.  I do not find  that  aspect
             of her account to be credible.


         33.   Section  8  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration  (Treatment  of
             Claimants, etc) Act 2004 provides that, in determining whether
             to believe a statement made by or on behalf of  a  person  who
             makes an asylum or human rights claim,  a  deciding  authority
             shall take account, as damaging the claimant's credibility, of
             any behaviour to which the  section  applies.   The  Appellant
             asserted that she fled from Albania with her husband in  April
             2013 but did not claim asylum until February 2014  after,  she
             said, he had left  her.   The  delay,  in  my  judgement,  was
             designed or likely  to  obstruct  or  delay  the  handling  or
             resolution of the claim,  or  the  taking  of  a  decision  in
             relation to the Appellant, and  so  I  conclude  that  Section
             8(2)(c) is engaged, and the Appellant's credibility is damaged
             in consequence.  Obviously, this finding is  not  my  starting
             point  in  the  assessment  of  credibility,  nor  can  it  be
             determinative, but it does further reduce the  credibility  of
             an account which I have found lacking for the reasons set  out
             above.


         34.  I do not believe that the  Appellant  was  raped  as  claimed.
             This conclusion about part of the core of her case, in itself,
             casts substantial doubt over the remainder  of  her  claim  to
             have been the victim of an attempted abduction because,  as  I
             do not believe her account of rape, I do not accept  that  the
             male involved was subsequently one of those who abducted  her.
             Her account  of  being  abducted  lacks  credibility  for  the
             reasons which I have already set out.  As I have rejected  the
             claim of rape, it follows that  I  do  not  believe  that  the
             Appellant has been disowned by her family  Consequently,  even
             if she and  her  husband  have  separated  as  she  claims,  I
             conclude that she would not be at risk  on  return  and  would
             have the support of her family.  Although she has  not  worked
             as such in the past, the Appellant is qualified as  a  teacher
             in Albania and would be able to find employment."


 5. Permission to appeal was granted by Deputy Upper Tribunal  Judge  Davey
    in response to grounds which included the grounds of challenge  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal as follows:


    (i)  Error in assessing credibility by "conventional  approach"  rather
         than in accordance with trafficking guidance.   With  reference  to
         the decision of the Administrative Court in R (on  the  application
         of) FK v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2016] EWHC  56
         (Admin).


    (ii) Failure to  consider  the  implications  of  the  appellant  being
         perceived as kuva with reference to the tribunal decision in AM and
         BM (Trafficked women) Albania [2010] UKUT 80 (IAC) as  endorsed  in
         TD and AD (Trafficked women) CG [2016] UKUT 00092 (IAC).


    (iii)     A  bare,  inadequate  and  flawed   approach   to   paragraph
         276ADE(1)(vi) of the Immigration Rules.


 6. At the outset of the hearing Mr Collins explained that he had discussed
    the case with Mr Diwnycz and they  had  agreed  that  the  decision  is
    materially flawed based on the grounds of challenge.  Their joint  view
    was that the case should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal on  the
    basis of the further evidence that needs to be  heard.   Neither  party
    required me to provide a  reasoned  decision  in  the  light  of  their
    agreement, a course open pursuant to  rule  40(3)(a)  and  (b)  of  the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.  The only observation I
    make is that I consider it appropriate for the case to be  re-heard  in
    the  First-tier  Tribunal  in  the  light  of  the   absence   of   any
    consideration of the best interests of the  children  affected  by  the
    Secretary of State's decision.  In that respect  Mr  Collins  explained
    that he would clarify the outstanding issue as to the paternity of  the
    younger child.  Accordingly, the decision of Judge Fisher is set aside,
    as agreed between the parties, and the case remitted to the  First-tier
    Tribunal for consideration by a differently constituted Tribunal.



Signed                                  Date 22 August 2019

UTJ Dawson

Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson



