
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11508/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 21 June 2017                               |On 29 June 2017               |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HUTCHINSON


                                   Between

                                     PP
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms R Chapman, Counsel instructed by Cheva Solicitors

For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

 1. The appellant was born on 1 January 1983 and is a citizen of Sri Lanka.
     The appellant first entered the UK with a student visa granted  on  31
    August 2009 and was subsequently granted further leave until  30  March
    2016.  The appellant left Sri Lanka for the final time on 6 April 2015,
    returning to the UK.  The appellant claimed asylum on  29  March  2016.
    The respondent refused that asylum claim in a decision dated 5  October
    2016.  In a Decision and Reasons promulgated on 21 April 2017, Judge of
    the First-tier Tribunal Graham dismissed the appellant's appeal on  all
    grounds.

 2. The appellant appeals, with leave on the following grounds:

    Ground 1

    That the  judge's  findings  were  inadequate.   The  judge  found  the
    appellant credible at [38] and  accepted  that  the  appellant  may  be
    questioned upon return to Sri Lanka.  It was unclear therefore why  the
    judge  did  not  accept  that  the  appellant  faced  a  real  risk  of
    persecution.

    Ground 2

    It was submitted that the judge had had no regard to the  psychological
    report of Dr Rozmin Halari and the judge made no mention of this report
    which was material given the judge diagnosed the  appellant  with  PTSD
    and it was submitted that the judge failed  to  consider  the  lack  of
    available medical treatment in line with GJ and Others (post-civil war:
    returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC).

Error of Law Hearing

 3. It was conceded before me on behalf of the appellant  that  the  second
    ground was not being pursued given (as pointed out in the  respondent's
    Rule 24 notice dated 31 May 2017) that the judge at [50] confirmed that
    the appellant  was  not  pursuing  Article  3  on  medical  grounds  as
    indicated by the appellant's representative.  That is also clearly  the
    case in the Record of Proceedings before me.   I  therefore  considered
    the only remaining ground to relate to the  judge's  findings  and  the
    application of GJ and Others to the findings of fact.

 4. The judge's findings of credibility and fact are set  out  at  [35]  to
    [46] of the Decision and Reasons.  In relation to credibility the judge
    found as follows:

         "35. The appellant's credibility is in issue.   I  have  determined
             the appellant's credibility by considering it in the round.  I
             have found the following factors relevant to  determining  the
             appellant's credibility.

         36.  Whilst I have not found it credible that having  come  to  the
             adverse interest of the authorities in  2006  which  persuaded
             him not to engage in sur plas (sic) activities in the UK;  and
             having returned to Sri Lanka on two previous occasions without
             incident, that the appellant would, almost nine years after he
             had ceased his political activity, become involved with  Tamil
             students  and  encourage  them  to  protest  against  the  new
             Government in Sri Lanka.  Also, the appellant's stated reasons
             for speaking to the students are  contradictory  and  make  no
             sense; either the new Government was sympathetic to Tamils  in
             which case there would be no need to  get  involved  in  anti-
             Government  protests;  or  if  the  new  Government  was   not
             following through with promises made, as the appellant claims,
             then there would appear to be no  basis  for  the  appellant's
             confidence.

         37.  In addition, given that this was a new Government,  there  was
             no way of knowing how the authorities would respond  to  anti-
             Government protests, the  appellant  was  therefore  at  least
             reckless in speaking to and encouraging students  to  actively
             protest against the new Government.

         38.  However, there is support for the appellant's account  in  the
             form of letters between the appellant's representatives in the
             UK and lawyers in Sri Lanka (appellant's bundle 30-33 and  54-
             55) which confirm that his mother was  interviewed  by  police
             about the appellant's actions.  The Presenting Officer has not
             challenged the contents of these  letters.   Therefore,  given
             this supporting evidence I find the appellant's account to  be
             credible."

 5. The judge set out at [35] that the appellant's credibility  had  to  be
    considered in the round.   She  then  went  on  to  make  a  series  of
    seemingly negative findings in relation to the appellant's credibility.
     However, that was balanced at [38] by the  positive  findings  in  the
    appellant's favour in relation to  the  documents  provided,  including
    from  the  appellant's  lawyer  in  Sri  Lanka,  which  supported   the
    appellant's case.

 6. The documents produced included a letter from the appellant's lawyer in
    Sri Lanka detailing  the  questioning  by  police  of  the  appellant's
    mother, including that the police had claimed that the appellant:

         "tried to regroup the LTTE members.  The police further stated that
         P had  induced  a  boy  who  committed  suicide  on  26.11.2016  at
         Kokkuvil.  It was the date of birth of the LTTE's leader Velupillai
         Pirabakaran".

 7. The letter went on to state that the appellant's mother had refuted the
    allegations but that the:

         "police team claimed that P  must  be  a  diaspora  activist.   The
         police instructed my client that she should provide information  to
         the Kopay Station if her son returns to Sri Lanka.   Moreover,  the
         police would notify the Department of Immigration and Emigration to
         detain P on arrival at the airport.  The Grama  Niladhari  for  her
         administrative area has also been notified that P has been a wanted
         person".

    In addition there was a further letter from the lawyer who referred the
    appellant's mother to Mr Devapalan as well as letters  in  relation  to
    the appellant's 2006 detention.

 8. Although the judge's findings at [35] through to [38] might  have  been
    expressed in a clearer fashion I am satisfied, including that the judge
    directed herself that she had to consider the issues in the round, that
    the findings at  [38]  and  following  established  that,  despite  the
    judge's reservations at [36] and [37], the judge nevertheless found the
    appellant credible.

 9. Having made this positive finding  of  credibility  however  the  judge
    found that:

     "Whilst accepting that the appellant may be questioned upon return  to
    Sri Lanka I have not accepted that he faces a real risk of serious harm
    or persecution upon return".

10. The judge went on to find that this was because a student had lost  his
    life and other students had given the appellant's name as having spoken
    to the boy shortly before his death.  The judge was satisfied that  the
    police  were  obliged  to  act,  including  to  find  out  whether  the
    appellant's actions had induced the boy to commit suicide as set out in
    the letter (dated 9 September 2016) from Mr Devapalan, the  appellant's
    mother's solicitor in Sri Lanka.  The judge noted that the  appellant's
    mother had not been arrested and that her interview with the police had
    been pre-arranged.  She had had the opportunity to take up legal advice
    from a retired judge and to instruct an attorney to accompany her.  She
    was not detained nor were any conditions placed on  her  release.   The
    appellant confirmed that she  had  not  been  interviewed  again  since
    February 2016 and had had no further contact with the police.

11. The judge found that given that the appellant's  mother  had  told  the
    police that the appellant had a general chat with the students and  was
    not involved in the boy's death, coupled with her insistence  that  the
    appellant was not involved in politics, either in Sri Lanka or  in  the
    UK, and that the police had not contacted the appellant's mother  since
    the previous year, the judge was satisfied that they had  accepted  her
    account.  The judge found it relevant  that  the  authorities  had  not
    issued an arrest warrant against the appellant and were satisfied  that
    whilst the  police  may  want  to  question  the  appellant  about  the
    incident, there was no evidence to keep him  politically  active  since
    2006, either in Sri Lanka or the UK and the judge went on  to  find  at
    [43] that "I do not accept that this  questioning  would  lead  to  the
    appellant being detained for a lengthy period".

12. Whilst the judge went on to find that the appellant's detention in 2006
    regarding his political activities then would not be of interest to the
    authorities, it was not contended that this in itself put him at  risk,
    although it  was  argued  that  his  previous  activities  might  be  a
    mitigating factor.

13. The country guidance of GJ and Others (post-civil war:  returnees)  Sri
    Lanka CG  [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC) provides as follows in the head note:

         "(1)     This determination replaces all existing country  guidance
             on Sri Lanka.

         (2)  The focus of the Sri Lankan Government's concern  has  changed
             since the civil war ended in May 2009.  The LTTE in Sri  Lanka
             itself is a spent force  and  there  have  been  no  terrorist
             incidents since the end of the civil war.

         (3)  The  Government's  present  objective  is  to  identify  Tamil
             activists in the diaspora who are working for Tamil separatism
             and to destabilise the unitary Sri Lankan state  enshrined  in
             Amendment 6(1) to the Sri Lankan Constitution in  1983,  which
             prohibits the 'violation  of  territorial  integrity'  of  Sri
             Lanka.  Its focus is on preventing both (a) the resurgence  of
             the LTTE or any similar Tamil separatist organisation and  (b)
             the revival of the civil war within Sri Lanka.

         (4)  If a person is detained by the Sri  Lankan  security  services
             there remains a real risk of ill-treatment or  harm  requiring
             international protection.

         (5)   Internal relocation is not an option within Sri Lanka  for  a
             person at real risk from the Sri Lankan authorities, since the
             Government now controls the whole of Sri Lanka and Tamils  are
             required to return to a named address  after  passing  through
             the airport.

         (6)  There are no detention facilities at the airport.  Only  those
             whose names appear on a 'stop' list will be detained from  the
             airport.   Any  risk  for  those  in  whom  the   Sri   Lankan
             authorities  are  or  become  interested  exists  not  at  the
             airport, but after arrival in their  home  area,  where  their
             arrival will be verified by the CID or  police  within  a  few
             days.

         (7)  The current categories of persons at real risk of  persecution
             or serious harm on return to Sri Lanka, whether  in  detention
             or otherwise, are:

              (a) Individuals who are, or are perceived to be, a  threat  to
                  the integrity of Sri  Lanka  as  a  single  unitary  state
                  because they are, or are perceived to have  a  significant
                  role in relation to post-conflict Tamil separatism  within
                  the diaspora and/or a renewal of  hostilities  within  Sri
                  Lanka.

              (b)      Journalists (whether in  print  or  other  media)  or
                  human  rights  activists,  who,  in  either   case,   have
                  criticised the Sri Lankan Government,  in  particular  its
                  human  rights  record,  or   who   are   associated   with
                  publications critical of the Sri Lankan Government.

              (c)      Individuals who have given evidence  to  the  Lessons
                  Learned and Reconciliation Commission implicating the  Sri
                  Lankan security forces, armed forces  or  the  Sri  Lankan
                  authorities in alleged war crimes.  Among  those  who  may
                  have   witnessed   war   crimes   during   the   conflict,
                  particularly in the No-Fire Zones in May 2009, only  those
                  who have already  identified  themselves  by  giving  such
                  evidence would be known to the Sri Lankan authorities  and
                  therefore only they are at real risk of adverse  attention
                  or persecution on return as potential or actual war crimes
                  witnesses.

              (d) A person whose name appears on a computerised 'stop'  list
                  accessible at the airport,  comprising  a  list  of  those
                  against whom there is an  extant  court  order  or  arrest
                  warrant.  Individuals whose name appears on a 'stop'  list
                  will be stopped at the airport  and  handed  over  to  the
                  appropriate Sri Lankan authorities, in pursuance  of  such
                  order or warrant.

         (8)  The Sri Lankan authorities' approach is based on sophisticated
             intelligence, both as to activities within Sri  Lanka  and  in
             the diaspora.  The Sri Lankan authorities know that  many  Sri
             Lankan Tamils travelled abroad as economic migrants  and  also
             that everyone in the  Northern  Province  had  some  level  of
             involvement with the LTTE during  the  civil  war.   In  post-
             conflict Sri Lanka,  an  individual's  past  history  will  be
             relevant only to the extent that it is perceived  by  the  Sri
             Lankan authorities as indicating a present risk to the unitary
             Sri Lankan state or the Sri Lankan Government.

         (9)   The  authorities  maintain  a  computerised  intelligence-led
             'watch' list. A person whose name appears on a 'watch' list is
             not reasonably likely to be detained at the airport  but  will
             be monitored by the security services after his or her return.
             If that monitoring does not indicate that such a person  is  a
             Tamil activist working to destabilise the unitary  Sri  Lankan
             state or revive the internal armed conflict, the individual in
             question is not, in general, reasonably likely to be  detained
             by the security forces.  That will be a question  of  fact  in
             each case, dependent on any diaspora activities carried out by
             such an individual.

         (10) Consideration must always be given to whether, in the light of
             an individual's activities  and  responsibilities  during  the
             civil war, the exclusion clauses are engaged  (Article  1F  of
             the Refugee Convention and Article 12(2) of the  Qualification
             Directive).  Regard  should  be  had  to  the  categories  for
             exclusion set out in the 'Eligibility Guidelines For Assessing
             the International Protection Needs of Asylum-Seekers from  Sri
             Lanka', published by UNHCR on 21 December 2012."

14. I accept that the judge found the appellant credible, with  significant
    weight placed on the documents produced.  In particular the letter from
    Mr Devapalan  which  confirmed  that  the  police  were  aware  of  the
    appellant's  previous  political  activities  in  Sri  Lanka  and  were
    interested in whether the appellant had induced the student  to  commit
    suicide.

15. However, I am not satisfied that the findings the  judge  reached  were
    open to her given her positive credibility findings and the contents of
    the letter which she had accepted.  These included that the police were
    seeking to establish that her son had been trying  to  encourage  Tamil
    boys in Jaffna to restart anti-Government activities and was trying  to
    regroup LTTE members and that they had induced a boy to commit suicide.
     The judge relied on the fact that the authorities  had  not  contacted
    the appellant's  mother  in  the  last  year  and  the  fact  that  the
    appellant's mother had insisted that the appellant was not involved  in
    political activities meant that the judge was satisfied that  they  had
    accepted her account.  However the judge makes no mention of  the  fact
    that the letter explicitly states that the police team claimed that the
    appellant must be a diaspora activist and  the  police  instructed  the
    appellant's mother to provide information if her son returned and  that
    they would notify the Department of Immigration & Emigration to  detain
    the  appellant  at  the  airport.   It  was  further  stated  that  the
    authorities in the administrative area had also been notified that  the
    appellant was a wanted person.

16. The judge appears to acknowledge this  in  her  finding  that  she  was
    satisfied "that the police may want to question the appellant about the
    incident".  However, I am  not  satisfied  that  the  judge  adequately
    addressed the implications of her positive credibility findings..

17. The judge found that she did not accept that the questioning would lead
    to the appellant being detained for a lengthy period; sub-paragraph (4)
    of the head note of GJ indicates if a person is  detained  by  the  Sri
    Lankan authority security services "there remains a real risk  of  ill-
    treatment or harm requiring international protection".

18. Whilst Ms Isherwood submitted that the judge's findings meant in effect
    that the appellant would be questioned about the suicide but would  not
    be detained, a proper reading of the judge's findings of fact in  light
    of the background information  and  Mr  Devapalan's  letter,  that  the
    police believed  the  appellant  to  be  a  diaspora  activist  (albeit
    erroneously), does not support such a finding  of  questioning  without
    detention.  This is particularly  the  case  given  that  Mr  Devapalan
    stated the appellant would be detained on arrival at  the  airport  and
    that the authorities were notified that he was a wanted person.

19. Although sub-paragraph (8) of GJ indicates that the approach of the Sri
    Lankan authorities is  based  on  "sophisticated  intelligence"  as  to
    activities within  Sri  Lanka  and  the  diaspora,  such  sophisticated
    intelligence has not revealed  thus  far  that  the  appellant  is  not
    involved in diaspora  activities  but  has  in  fact  resulted  in  the
    appellant  remains  a  person  of  interest  given  both  his  previous
    activities in 2006, but specifically his alleged activities in 2016  in
    speaking to students.

20. Whilst it was also submitted that the appellant, given the contents  of
    the letter from Mr Devapalan, could succeed under the category  of  the
    head note in GJ (7)(d) I am not satisfied that it has  been  identified
    that the appellant's name was on a computer stop list as there  was  no
    evidence to suggest that there was an  extant  court  order  or  arrest
    warrant,  despite  the  fact  that  the  letter  indicates   that   the
    authorities at the airport had been directed to detain the appellant.

21. Nevertheless, I am satisfied that given the judge's  finding  that  she
    accepted the appellant's account as credible  at  [38],  including  the
    documents produced, it is not possible to reach  any  other  conclusion
    other than that the appellant would be perceived, in line  with  (7)(a)
    of GJ, as an individual perceived to be a threat to  Sri  Lanka  as  he
    would be perceived to  have  a  significant  role  in  the  renewal  of
    hostilities within Sri Lanka.

Conclusion

22. The decision of the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal contains an  error
    of law such as the conclusion must be set aside.  All findings of  fact
    are preserved.  I remake the decision as follows:

Notice of Decision

23. The appellant's appeal is allowed on asylum grounds.

24. As the appellant qualifies for asylum  I  make  no  finding  under  the
    Qualification Directive.

25. The appellant's appeal is allowed on human rights grounds,  Articles  2
    and 3 on the same basis.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Dated: 28 June 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee award was sought or is made.


Signed                                  Dated:  28 June 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson
