

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/11971/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 30 June 2017                       |On 6 July 2017                       |
|                                      |                                     |


                                   Before
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                                    G S A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Gilbert, Counsel instructed by Sriharans
                 solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
An anonymity direction was granted by the First-tier Tribunal. As  the  case
involves protection issues,  it  is  appropriate  to  continue  that  order.
Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any member of his family. This direction  applies
both to the Appellant and to the Respondent. Failure  to  comply  with  this
direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

    1. The Appellant appeals against  a  decision  of  First-Tier  Tribunal
       Judge M R Oliver promulgated on 18  January  2017  ("the  Decision")
       dismissing the Appellant's appeal against the Secretary  of  State's
       decision dated 14 October 2016 refusing  his  protection  and  human
       rights claims.


    2. The Appellant is an Afghan Sikh.  His protection claim is  based  on
       ill treatment suffered by his family at  the  hands  of  Muslims  in
       their home area of Jalalabad.  His father  was  a  shopkeeper.   The
       Appellant says that a local commander named G M came to the shop and
       demanded that his father transfer the  shop  to  G  M.   His  father
       initially refused but G M gave him four days to reconsider and  then
       returned to the shop and repeated his demands.  In the course  of  a
       scuffle which ensued,  the  Appellant's  brother  was  killed.   The
       demands and the Appellant's brother's killing were reported  to  the
       police but they did nothing.


    3. The Appellant then left Jalalabad with his family and they relocated
       to Kabul but G M located them at which point the Appellant's  father
       agreed to transfer the shop to G M and did so by a  legal  transfer.
       The family then left Afghanistan and travelled to Pakistan. He  lost
       contact with the rest of his family on the journey to the UK.


    4. The Appellant claims to be at  risk  of  being  killed  as  was  his
       brother.  He also fears ill  treatment  by  Muslims  more  generally
       having suffered harassment in the past.   He  also  claims  that  he
       would be unable to support himself on return to Afghanistan.  In the
       UK, he lives with his cousin.  He also has three uncles in  the  UK.
       He says he has no family left in Afghanistan who could support him.


    5. The Respondent accepted that the Appellant is an  Afghan  Sikh  from
       Jalalabad.  She did not however  accept  his  claim  concerning  the
       forced transfer of the Appellant's father's shop and did not  accept
       that  he  would  suffer  ill  treatment  by  Muslims  on  return  to
       Afghanistan.  In any  event,  she  decided  that  it  would  not  be
       unreasonable for the Appellant to internally relocate to Kabul.


    6. The Judge dismissed the appeal finding that, even if the history  of
       the forced transfer of the shop were true, that did not give rise to
       a risk on return.  The Appellant's father had  now  transferred  the
       shop to G M and G M would have no further reason to be  looking  for
       the Appellant or his  family.   He  found  that  the  ill  treatment
       suffered by the Appellant in the past amounted to discrimination but
       fell short of being persecution.  In terms of support on return, the
       Judge found that the Appellant's family in the UK could  financially
       assist him to some extent on return.


    7. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Page
       in the following terms (so far as relevant):-


           "The application for permission has disclosed  arguable  grounds
           in that Counsel for the appellant has argued that the judge  has
           misapplied the country guidance case of TG  and  others  (Afghan
           Sikhs persecuted)  Afghanistan  CG  [2015]  UKUT  595  (IAC)  in
           failing  to  properly  consider  the   appellant's   prospective
           circumstances on return and to give  careful  attention  to  the
           considerations listed in the head note of TG.  Counsel  for  the
           appellant argues that the judge's error was material, given  the
           judge's acceptance of the  appellant's  evidence  that  criminal
           elements had taken his family shop and killed  his  brother  and
           that  the  appellant  had  no  remaining  family  -  support  in
           Afghanistan.  Permission to appeal is granted."


    8. The matter comes before me to decide whether the Decision contains a
       material error of law and, if so, to re-make the decision  or  remit
       the appeal for rehearing to the First-Tier Tribunal.

      The grounds and submissions


    9. The Appellant raises four grounds.   The  main  focus  of  the  oral
       submissions was the second and third grounds which are also the main
       focus of the grant of permission, namely that the  Judge  failed  to
       have regard to what is said in TG.  It  is  argued  that  the  Judge
       failed properly to  record  the  guidance  when  citing  it  in  the
       Decision and has therefore arguably erred  in  failing  to  consider
       whether the ill treatment could amount to a breach of Article 3 ECHR
       based on the fact-specific circumstances.  By the third ground,  the
       Appellant also submits that the  Judge  considered  the  Appellant's
       prospective financial circumstances only by reference to  Article  8
       ECHR rather than whether the conditions which  the  Appellant  would
       face amount to a breach of Article 3.  Linked to these  submissions,
       the Appellant also claims by ground one that  the  Judge  failed  to
       consider whether paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of  the  Immigration  Rules
       applies, namely whether there are "very  significant  obstacles"  to
       integration in Afghanistan.  In the alternative, it is argued  that,
       insofar as the Judge found such obstacles did not exist,  he  failed
       to provide adequate reasons for that finding.


   10. Mr Gilbert directed  my  attention  to  the  headnote  in  TG.   The
       relevant paragraphs are as follows:-


            "...(ii)    Members  of  the  Sikh  and  Hindu  communities  in
           Afghanistan do not face a  real  risk  of  persecution  or  ill-
           treatment such as to entitle them to a  grant  of  international
           protection on the basis of their ethnic or  religious  identity,
           per se.  Neither can it be said that the  cumulative  impact  of
           discrimination suffered by the Sikh  and  Hindu  communities  in
           general reaches the threshold of persecution.
            (iii)      A consideration of whether an individual  member  of
           the Sikh and Hindu communities is at real  risk  of  persecution
           upon return to Afghanistan is fact-sensitive.  All the  relevant
           circumstances must be considered but careful attention should be
           paid to the following:
           a. ....
           b. Likely financial circumstances and ability  to  access  basic
              accommodation bearing in mind
               - Muslims are generally unlikely to employ a  member  of  the
                 Sikh and Hindu communities
               - Such individuals may face difficulties (including  threats,
                 extortion,  seizure  of  land  and  acts  of  violence)  in
                 retaining  property   and/or   pursuing   their   remaining
                 traditional pursuit, that of a shopkeeper/trader
               - The traditional source of support for such individuals, the
                 Gurdwara is much less able to provide adequate support.
           c.  The  level  of  religious   devotion   and   the   practical
              accessibility to a suitable place  of  religious  worship  in
              light of declining numbers and the evidence  that  some  have
              been subjected to harm and threats to harm  whilst  accessing
              the Gurdwara;
           d. .....
                 (iv)   Although  it  appears  there  is  a  willingness  at
           governmental level to provide protection, it is not  established
           on the evidence that at a local level the  police  are  willing,
           even if able, to  provide  the  necessary  level  of  protection
           required in Refugee Convention/Qualification Directive terms, to
           those members of the Sikh and Hindu communities  who  experience
           serious harm or harassment amounting to persecution.
                 (v)   Whether it is reasonable to expect a  member  of  the
           Sikh or Hindu  communities  to  relocate  is  a  fact  sensitive
           assessment.  The relevant factors to be considered include those
           set out at (iii) above.  Given  their  particular  circumstances
           and declining number, the practicability of  settling  elsewhere
           for members of the Sikh and Hindu communities must be  carefully
           considered.  Those without access to an independent  income  are
           unlikely to be able to reasonably relocate because  of  depleted
           support mechanisms...."


   11. Mr Gilbert drew my attention to the passages  in  TG  which  support
       those conclusions.  I do not need to set those out but I  have  them
       in mind when reaching my decision.  In short, the  Appellant's  main
       complaint concerns the Judge's failure  to  make  properly  reasoned
       findings in relation to his prospective circumstances on return.  As
       indicated by my recital of the claim above, what the Appellant  says
       is that he has no means of support because the livelihood  on  which
       the family previously depended namely his father's  shop,  has  been
       forcibly transferred to G M.  The Appellant's evidence (as  recorded
       at [18] of the Decision) is that the proceeds of that transfer  were
       the most likely source of the funds  for  the  journey  to  the  UK.
       Furthermore, insofar as it might be  suggested  that  the  Appellant
       could have recourse to the authorities in Afghanistan to reclaim the
       shop, Mr Gilbert points out that the Appellant's case  is  that  the
       shop was  legally  transferred  to  G  M,  albeit  not  voluntarily.
       Accordingly, the Appellant could have no recourse to the shop  as  a
       means of support.


   12. Mr Gilbert then drew my attention to the Judge's  finding  that  the
       Appellant's family in the UK can  provide  support.   As  the  Judge
       noted at [19] of the Decision,  this  was  explored  only  with  the
       Appellant's cousin with whom he lives and who was the  only  witness
       to give oral evidence.  He said in terms that he would not  be  able
       to support the Appellant if he were  returned  as  he  has  his  own
       family to support.   Mr  Gilbert  submitted  that  there  is  a  big
       difference between giving shelter in this country in a house which a
       person  occupies  and  feeding  one  extra  mouth,   and   providing
       additional funds to support a person's accommodation and subsistence
       in a  foreign  country.    Mr  Gilbert  drew  my  attention  to  the
       statements of  the  Appellant's  three  uncles  who  are  apparently
       pensioners.  He pointed out that none of those statements gives  any
       indication as to their means and there  was  therefore  insufficient
       evidence on which the Judge could base his finding that  they  would
       be able to support the Appellant on return.


   13. Mr Gilbert made short submissions also in relation  to  ground  four
       which concerns the Appellant's claim  to  be  at  personal  risk  on
       return.  Mr Gilbert accepted in his submissions that the  Judge  had
       not expressly found that the incidents on which the Appellant relied
       in this regard were credible.  That provoked an exchange with  which
       I deal below when I consider the Judge's findings.


   14. Mr Melvin relied on the Respondent's Rule 24 statement  which  seeks
       to uphold the Decision.  He accepted that the Judge could have given
       greater consideration to the Appellant's  prospective  situation  on
       return.  He also submitted however that the  Judge  found  that  the
       Appellant is not at risk on return.  That is the starting point.  It
       was open to the Judge to find on the evidence that  the  Appellant's
       uncles could assist him.  The fact that they are pensioners does not
       prevent them having sufficient means of support.   He  also  pointed
       out that the Appellant would receive a lump sum on return to  assist
       him to support himself at the outset.


   15. In relation to whether there are  "very  significant  obstacles"  to
       integration, Mr Melvin pointed out that it was not clear whether the
       Appellant had argued his case in that way.  In any event, there  was
       a clear cross-over between that ground and the  ground  relating  to
       the country guidance.


   16. Mr Melvin noted that the Judge referred to TG and engaged  with  it.
       He noted that the guidance  in  that  case  dates  back  to  2014-15
       although he accepted that the guidance has not been overtaken.


   17.  At the end of the hearing, I reserved my decision which I indicated
       that I would give in writing.  Following discussions,  both  parties
       agreed that, if I found an error of law, it would be appropriate  to
       remit the appeal as the challenge is to a  lack  of  findings  on  a
       potentially significant issue.


    Error of law decision and reasons


   18. The Judge dealt with the protection claim at [22]  to  [24]  of  the
       Decision in the following terms:-


            "[22]      The evidence of the appellant is that his family had
           suffered ill-treatment at the hands of Muslims in the past.  The
           example he gave was of low-level harassment.  Such treatment  is
           in accordance with  the  background  evidence  that  Sikhs  face
           discrimination in Afghanistan but that it is generally short  of
           persecution.   It  is  the  particular  campaign  of  harassment
           culminating in the forced take-over of the  shop  on  which  the
           appellant's claim rests.  There is nothing which  suggests  that
           what was done involved more than a  criminal  enterprise.   Once
           the shop was  taken  over  the  enterprise  was  complete.   The
           killing of the appellant's brother has not been shown to be more
           than incidental to the criminal campaign when he tried to thwart
           the crime.  The appellant claims that the family was followed to
           Kabul by [G M].  He has not explained why it was  necessary  for
           [G M] to have a lawful transfer rather than simply stepping into
           the abandoned  shop.   Following  the  transfer  agreed  by  the
           appellant the criminal enterprise was over.  He speculated  that
           the agent was paid from the proceeds of the  shop,  implying  an
           enforced  sale,  inconsistent  with  the  claim  of  an   unpaid
           takeover.  Equally importantly, the appellant was  not  involved
           when the shop was forcibly taken over, being present on  neither
           visit by [G M].


            [23] I have considered the application of TG &  others  (Afghan
           Sikhs persecuted) CG [2015] UKUT 595 and the  respondent's  more
           recent Current Guidance (2016).  The position is unaltered  that
           in general Sikhs, now few in number and largely to be  found  in
           Kabul, face  discrimination  not  amounting  to  persecution  or
           article 3 ill-treatment, but their individual circumstances have
           to be looked at.  In this case the appellant is a young man  who
           did not have  any  personal  targeting.   His  evidence  of  the
           takeover of the shop I find internally inconsistent, because  he
           has argued that his father was forced to transfer the  property,
           but instead of simply taking it by force [G  M]  gave  time  for
           reflection.  The appellant  implied  that  his  father  received
           money for a sale.  It is significant that the  appellant  played
           no part in these events.  There is some background evidence that
           the police, at least in Kabul, are more willing to provide  some
           support and the unsuccessful reporting of  the  crimes  hitherto
           has been to the police outside the capital.


            [24] In these circumstances, I find that the appellant has  not
           shown, even to the lower standard, a real risk that  [G  M]  and
           his people would pose any further  threat  to  his  family,  let
           alone to the appellant.  He has provided no evidence to  suggest
           that beyond [G M] he would face  more  than  discrimination  and
           harassment on return to Kabul."


   19. I deal first with the Appellant's claim to be at  personal  risk  of
       being targeted.  This is the subject of ground four.  As I  note  at
       [13] above, Mr Gilbert did not press this ground as he did not  read
       [22] to [24] of the Decision as accepting the claim that the  family
       was targeted in the past.  I have considered these paragraphs  as  a
       whole.  I accept Mr Melvin's submission that, in particular, at [23]
       the Judge suggests that the claim is  not  accepted  because  it  is
       internally inconsistent  and  implausible.   Mr  Gilbert  made  some
       submissions about the Judge's understanding of the evidence at  [23]
       of the Decision.  However, I do not need to deal with whether  there
       is an error in that regard as I accept that there are  other  errors
       of law disclosed, in particular, by grounds one and three.


   20. Ground three takes issue with the Judge's failure to have regard  to
       TG when considering the Appellant's prospective  circumstances.   It
       is argued that the  Judge  erred  by  considering  that  claim  only
       through  the  lens  of  Article  8  ECHR  rather  than  whether  the
       circumstances would be such as to breach Article 3 ECHR.  Ground one
       also challenges the Judge's findings on this  aspect  of  the  claim
       applying Article 8 ECHR.  The Judge deals with Article 8 at [25]  of
       the Decision as follows:-


            "[25]      He has no family life  in  the  United  Kingdom  and
           cannot satisfy the requirements in this respect of appendix  FM.
           Likewise  he  has  no  claim  to  satisfy  the  requirements  of
           paragraph 276ADE of the rules in respect of  his  private  life.
           His circumstances have all been considered in his  asylum  claim
           and there is no basis for finding that he has a  separate  claim
           for consideration of his article 8 rights outside the  rules  on
           the basis of anything exceptional.  He is a fit young man and no
           satisfactory  reason  has  been  given  why  he  could  not   be
           financially assisted at least to an extent by his four  maternal
           uncles."


   21. The Judge may well have been entitled to find that a claim of  "very
       significant  obstacles"  on  return  is   encompassed   within   the
       protection claim.  However, that assumes that  all  aspects  of  the
       protection claim had already been dealt with. The Judge said that he
       had regard to TG at [23] of the Decision.  However, what follows  is
       only a consideration of the Appellant's claim to be at personal risk
       of being targeted.  There is  no  consideration  in  that  paragraph
       whether the Appellant could obtain financial support  on  return  to
       Afghanistan.


   22. Although the findings of the Judge in relation  to  the  Appellant's
       claim to be at personal risk on return are not clear, it appears  to
       be accepted at [22] and [23] of the Decision that  the  transfer  of
       the shop did take place, the issue being whether that was  a  forced
       sale or a voluntary one.  The Judge  failed  however  to  go  on  to
       consider the implications of that for  the  Appellant  returning  to
       Afghanistan with no source of livelihood and no  family  to  support
       him.  He failed also to have regard to what is said in TG about  the
       reduced likelihood of community support from the  Gurdwara  and  the
       implications of internal relocation on the availability of support.


   23. I accept Mr Gilbert's  submission  about  the  evidence  before  the
       Judge. The statements of the  uncles  are  silent  on  the  question
       whether they could afford to support the Appellant from the UK.  The
       Appellant's cousin expressly stated that he  could  not  offer  such
       support.  The Judge has failed to take that  evidence  into  account
       and has speculated as to what support might be forthcoming from  the
       Appellant's uncles.


   24. For those reasons, grounds one and three are made out.  As I note at
       [13] above, Mr Gilbert's submission that the Judge  did  not  accept
       that the Appellant is at risk  on  an  individual  basis  on  return
       provoked some discussion.  This was in  the  context  of  whether  I
       should say something in my decision about whether the Judge accepted
       the claim as credible if I set aside the Decision.


   25. Having considered this question and in light of  what  I  say  above
       about the lack of clarity in the findings, I have decided that  this
       is a matter best determined  expressly  by  the  Judge  hearing  the
       remitted appeal. For the reasons given at [22] of the Decision, even
       if the Appellant's account of past events is entirely credible, this
       is unlikely to put him at risk of personal targeting.  As I note  at
       [22] above, though, the past events are an important backdrop to the
       claim about  the  Appellant's  prospective  circumstances  as  those
       relate to what potential support may be available to him on  return.
       It is therefore important for there to be clear findings whether the
       Appellant's account about those events is credible.


   26. For  the  foregoing  reasons,  I  am  satisfied  that  the  Decision
       discloses errors of law and I therefore set aside  the  Decision  in
       its entirety. In agreement with the parties' submissions  and  since
       initial findings have not  been  made  on  certain  aspects  of  the
       Appellant's claim, I remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for
       redetermination.




      DECISION
    I am satisfied that the Decision contains material errors of  law.  The
    decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge M  R  Oliver  promulgated  on  18
    January 2017 is set aside. The appeal is  remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for re-hearing before a different Judge.
      Signed           [pic]      Dated: 6 July 2017


      Upper Tribunal Judge Smith
