
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11508/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham CJC                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 8 November 2018                            |On 18 December 2018           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                   ali [i]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Bates, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms A Imamovic, Counsel, instructed by UK & Co
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant (hereafter  "the  Secretary  of  State"  or  "SSHD")  has
    permission to challenge the decision of Judge Obhi  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (FtT) sent on 18 December 2017  allowing  the  appeal  of  the
    respondent (hereafter "the claimant") against the decision made by  the
    SSHD on 25 October 2017 refusing his protection claim.

2.   The SSHD's sole ground is that the substance of  the  judge's  decision
    was overwhelmingly against the claimant and there was no rational basis
    for him having allowed the appeal.  It was suggested that his allowance
    of the appeal was a clear typographical error.

3.   At the hearing before me Ms Imamovic  sought  permission  to  challenge
    the  judge's  decision  on  the  basis  that  his  adverse  credibility
    assessment was legally flawed.  Mr Bates opposed  that  application  on
    the basis that the claimant had not made any Rule 24 response  and  had
    not applied to the First-tier Tribunal for permission  to  appeal.   Ms
    Imamovic said that this failure, albeit regrettable,  should  not  shut
    the claimant out from arguing that the judge's decision was flawed  for
    other reasons than that stated by the SSHD.

4.   I am unable to accept Ms Imamovic's application.  As clarified  by  the
    Upper Tribunal in EG and NG [2013] UKUT 00143 (IAC), a party who wishes
    to challenge a decision of the FtT must seek and obtain  permission  to
    appeal to the Tribunal.  Ms Imamovic has argued that the failure of the
    claimant's solicitors to make such an application or to make a Rule  24
    response was not the fault of the claimant but  she  does  not  dispute
    that both the claimant and his  representatives  received  the  judge's
    decision shortly after it was sent. Given  safe  receipt,  it  was  the
    responsibility of both to respond to it.  Even after the  claimant  and
    solicitors received the SSHD's application for  permission  and  learnt
    that permission had been granted,  they  made  no  response.   In  such
    circumstances, it is not open to the claimant to seek to challenge  the
    judge's decision on grounds other than those on which there has been  a
    grant of permission.

5.   The consequences of the above is that there  is  no  challenge  to  the
    judge's findings of fact.  The only challenge before me is by the  SSHD
    to the rationality of the judge's statement in paragraph  46  that  the
    appeal was allowed on  asylum  grounds.   That  statement  is  in  flat
    contradiction not only to the judge's statement at  paragraph  44  that
    the claimant's appeal is dismissed on asylum grounds, but to the entire
    substance  of  the  judge's   preceding   findings   of   fact,   which
    comprehensively rejected his claim to be a genuine Christian convert.

6.   Whether because of oversight or a typo  or  some  other  cause,  it  is
    inescapable that the  judge's  stated  decision  at  paragraph  46  was
    irrational and the error was of such a material nature that it must  be
    set aside.

7.   As regards the decision that needs to be re-made, there is no  admitted
    challenge to the judge's findings of fact.  On the basis of those clear
    and unequivocal findings, the only outcome is for  me  to  dismiss  the
    claimant's appeal.

8.   To conclude:

     The decision of the FtT is set aside for material error of law.

     The decision I re-make is to dismiss the claimant's appeal.

     No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date: 1 December 2018

             [pic]
Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal



