
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/11121/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On: 27 February 2019                 |On: 14 March 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL CHANA


                                   Between

                                 MUSFIR [A]
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr L Youssefian of Counsel
For the respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Senior Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant a citizen of Somalia appealed against the decision of the
    respondent  refusing  the  appellant's  application  for   asylum   and
    humanitarian protection in  the  United  Kingdom.  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Fitzgibbon QC dismissed the  appellant's  appeal  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 28 December 2018.

 2. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Povey who
    stated that the respondent assessed the appellant date of  birth  as  3
    July 1999 and proceeded in determining his claim on  that  basis.  This
    meant that he was a child when he left Somalia. The  Judge  found  that
    the appellant had given inconsistent information about his age but went
    on to find that he was untruthful in claiming he was  born  on  3  July
    1999 given that this was the date which was not in dispute.  The  Judge
    rejected the appellant's claim that he was  forcibly  recruited  by  Al
    Shabab because background information suggested that they  only  target
    children and the appellant was an adult at the time.

 3. At the hearing it was agreed by both parties  that  there  has  been  a
    material error of law when the Judge found that the  appellant  was  an
    adult based  on  his  date  of  birth  which  was  uncontested  by  the
    respondent that the appellant who was born  on  3  July  1999  and  was
    therefore a child when he left Somalia. It was agreed that  the  appeal
    should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for findings of  fact  to
    be made.

 4. In the circumstances, I direct that the appeal  be  placed  before  any
    First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  apart  from  First-tier   Tribunal   Judge
    Fitzgibbon QC for hearing of the appeal de novo.



                                           Dated this 12th day of March 2019
Signed by

A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
..........................................

Ms S Chana






