
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)        Appeal Number: PA/11759/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 19 December 2019                  |On 29 May 2020                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                                  m - t - t
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms M Butler, Counsel instructed by Wilson & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvyn, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
Interpreter:  Mr Anh Huynh, interpreter to Vietnamese and English languages

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 I continue the order prohibiting the disclosure or publication  of
    any matter likely to  lead  members  of  the  public  to  identify  the
    appellant.  A breach of this order can be punished  as  a  contempt  of
    court.  I make this order because the appellant is  an  asylum  seeker;
    publishing her identity could create a risk for her in the event of her
    return.  Additionally, I am satisfied that she is a vulnerable witness.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Vietnam.  The appellant  claims  to  have
    entered the United Kingdom irregularly in 2009.

 3. She appealed to the First-tier Tribunal unsuccessfully  a  decision  of
    the Secretary of State on 27 October 2017 to refuse her leave to remain
    on human rights grounds and/or protection as a refugee or  humanitarian
    protection.

 4. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal was promulgated on 13 September
    2018 and was found to be wrong in law.  Reasons for finding an error of
    law were promulgated  on  28  February  2019.   The  decision  was  the
    decision of Mr Justice Waksman sitting as a Judge of the Upper Tribunal
    and myself although the misspelling of the word "weak" at  the  end  of
    paragraph 10 is very much my error which will  embarrass  me  for  some
    time.

 5. That decision is appended hereto for convenience.

 6. The First-tier Tribunal erred because, essentially (full  reasons  have
    been given) the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  was  unduly  concerned  by
    inconsistencies and incongruities in the appellant's own account  which
    might have been caused by the appellant having  been  traumatised.  The
    judge should have  set  deficiencies  against  the  background  of  the
    medical evidence and the known behaviour of those the appellant  claims
    to have feared.

 7. In summary outline it is the appellant's case that she is a victim of a
    loan shark, that she was corrupted into prostitution and trafficked  to
    the United Kingdom and has suffered ill-treatment leading  to  physical
    and lasting mental health problems and that she cannot be  returned  to
    Vietnam because she is a member of a particular social group who  would
    risk persecution as a result, or  failing  that,  she  is  entitled  to
    humanitarian protection and/or would risk ill-treatment contrary to her
    rights under Article 3 of the European Convention on  Human  Rights  or
    Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights.

 8. There is an additional and very important dimension to this case.   The
    appellant is a foreign criminal and is subject to deportation.  At  the
    Crown Court sitting at Manchester in  January  2017  she  was  sent  to
    prison for two years after pleading  guilty  to  conspiracy  to  supply
    cannabis.  The sentencing judge described her as part of an "organised,
    sophisticated, well-managed commercial enterprise".

 9. It is also a feature of her case that she had claimed asylum before the
    claim leading to these proceedings.  The application was refused on  31
    July 2012.  It was not the subject  of  an  appeal  and  the  appellant
    remained clandestinely in the United Kingdom until her arrest  for  the
    criminal offence indicated above.  It is the Secretary of State's  case
    that she is not a truthful witness who, in any event, can look  to  the
    authorities in Vietnam for effective protection if she needs it or  she
    can avoid problems by internal relocation.

10. During the course of these proceedings she has satisfied the  competent
    authority that she has been trafficked. It was suggested in a  skeleton
    argument that that decision binds me.  It does  not.   I  do  not  know
    precisely what the  appellant  said  when  she  claimed  to  have  been
    trafficked. I must make up my mind on the evidence that  is  before  me
    although the  fact  that  she  has  been  recognised  as  a  victim  of
    trafficking by the competent authority is something to which  I  should
    and do give weight.

11. The earlier decision of the Secretary of State to  refuse  asylum  does
    not bind me.  There  was  medical  evidence  before  me  that  was  not
    available to the Secretary of State and it is medical evidence that is,
    at the very least, capable of making a considerable difference. In  any
    event, appeals are not reviews. Judges must decide the issues that  are
    before them.

12. Given this background I consider  it  appropriate  to  begin  with  the
    medical evidence rather than the appellant's own account of affairs.

    Medical Evidence

13. There is a Detention Centre Rule 35(3) Report by a Dr A  Mahmood  dated
    31 July 2017 which raised the concern that the appellant may have  been
    a victim of torture

14. More importantly there is a report by Dr Razia Hussain MBBS MSc (Mental
    Health) who describes herself as an "adult psychiatrist" employed as  a
    psychiatrist in the National Health Service.

15. The appellant told Dr Hussain that she tried to escape her creditors by
    removing to Ho Chi Minh City in Vietnam but they found her there  while
    she was working in a restaurant. They kidnapped her and  subjected  her
    to a severe beating and raped her.  The beating left her with  injuries
    to her scalp and also an amputated  small  toe  which,  she  said,  was
    chopped off brutally by the  aggressors  as  a  warning  to  take  them
    seriously.  She was  able  to  get  hospital  treatment  but  was  very
    frightened and found an agent to take her to the United Kingdom but the
    agent abused her.  Dr Hussain recorded the appellant complaining of low
    mood, a feeling of failure and having  a  sense  of  shame,  guilt  and
    humiliation as a consequence of being raped.

16. She was found to  be  rational  in  conversation  and  well-orientated.
    Nevertheless, she had fleeting thoughts of  self-harm  and  Dr  Hussain
    found physical, mental and emotional symptoms  so  that  she  concluded
    that the appellant suffered from Post-Traumatic  Stress  Disorder.   Dr
    Hussain  recommended  an  antidepressant  medication  and   help   from
    Cognitive Behavioural Therapy.  The risk of self-harm was  expected  to
    escalate in the event of return.

17. There is a further "medico-legal report" dated 5 November 2017 prepared
    by Dr Syira Ahsan.  Dr Ahsan's  is  a  well-qualified  general  medical
    practitioner, with a particular interest in obstetrics and  gynaecology
    and, to some  extent,  emergency  medicine.   She  has  a  postgraduate
    qualification described as "MRCPH Part 1" but I do not  recognise  that
    qualification and must apologise for my ignorance.  More  significantly
    she has experience with the  Medical  Foundation  for  the  Victims  of
    Torture.

18. I found Dr Ahsan's summary of the appellant's  case  convenient  and  I
    repeat it below:

         "150 [The appellant] described violence at the hands of her husband
         when she was unable to pay to feed his drug  habit.   She  borrowed
         money from  loan  sharks  and  was  unable  to  keep  up  with  the
         repayments and so left her village.  She was found, beaten and  had
         her left small toe amputated 'as a warning'.  She was  raped.   She
         was offered help to escape Vietnam but was trafficked to Europe and
         sexually exploited for  long  periods;  i.e.  she  was  essentially
         imprisoned to work as a prostitute in brothels in  three  different
         countries."

19. Of particular interest is her finding a group  of  scars  described  as
    "highly consistent with"  the  appellant  having  been  beaten  as  she
    described.  These are supplemented by scars on the arm which the doctor
    found "highly consistent with" adopting a defensive position to protect
    against a beating.

20. The doctor also noted the missing small toe and marks on the foots that
    were "highly consistent with medical attention in a hospital to  repair
    what remained of the toe".  It is the appellant's case that the toe was
    cut off in an attack.  It was impossible to say from the marks  on  the
    body what had caused the toe to be amputated.  There was  nothing  that
    triggered the suggestion that  it  was  the  result  of  some  kind  of
    sporting or vocational injury.  It is the kind of injury that sometimes
    follows a repair to a congenital defect but that  is  no  more  than  a
    possible explanation that was not elevated by other evidence  to  be  a
    probable  explanation.  The  appellant  attributed  it   to   traumatic
    amputation.

21. Dr Ahsan made plain that she was drawing on her experience particularly
    with the Medical Foundation for the  Care  of  Victims  of  Torture  to
    inform  her  opinion.   She  also  explained   that   diagnosing   (not
    necessarily  treating)  common  mental   health   problems,   including
    Posttraumatic Stress Disorder is within the  competence  of  a  general
    medical practitioner.

22. I found paragraph 141 of Dr Ahsan's report particularly pertinent and I
    set it out below:

         "In my opinion [appellant] has symptoms that meet ICD-10 diagnostic
         criteria for post-traumatic stress disorder (Appendix B)  including
         insomnia, nightmares and flashback memories in  which  she  relives
         the beating and the rape in Vietnam (incident  ii).   I  note  that
         [the appellant] disclosed that she had previously  been  beaten  by
         her husband (incident i) which gives rise to the  possibility  that
         her PTSD had arisen at that time.  She also discloses that she  had
         been subjected to forced prostitution in Europe over a  significant
         period (incident iii).  However, she described  no  symptoms  being
         present following (i) prior to (ii).  In addition the  contents  of
         her flashbacks, nightmares, and other intrusive memories all relate
         to incident (ii) and  none  relate  to  incidents  (i)  and  (iii).
         Criterion A requires 'Exposure to a stressful  event  or  situation
         (either short or  long-lasting)  of  exceptionally  threatening  or
         catastrophic nature, which is likely to cause pervasive distress in
         almost anyone.'  Whilst the violence perpetrated upon  her  by  her
         husband may have been frightening, nothing in the history she  gave
         me indicated that it met the threshold for criterion A.  I have  no
         independent corroboration of [the  appellant's]  account;  however,
         her presentation is in keeping with such a history.  I cannot  rule
         out the possibility that her PTSD has been exacerbated by  incident
         (iii), but there are no clinical indications  that  incident  (iii)
         was responsible for her PTSD."

23. Dr Ahsan then outlined techniques for determining the veracity  of  the
    claimant's account and said that:

         "Overall, I found  nothing  to  suggest  that  she  was  trying  to
         exaggerate or feign any psychological distress."

24. Dr Ahsan then expressed her concerns for the appellant's mental  health
    in the event of return to Vietnam.

25. There is  a  medical  report  from  a  clinical  psychologist  Dr  M  F
    Nikopaschos who works  for  the  Central  and  North  West  London  NHS
    Foundation Trust and as a consultant  for  Vivo  International  on  the
    development and provision of  trauma  focused  psychological  care  for
    individuals affected by violence and conflict.

26. The report is dated 16 March 2019  following  examination  on  9  March
    2019.  It was admitted without objection having been  served  in  March
    2019 with reference  to  rule  15  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008. The important thing for my purposes  is  that  Dr
    Nikopaschos confirmed Dr Ahsan's diagnosis that the  appellant  suffers
    from Post-traumatic Stress Disorder.  Dr Nikopaschos put the  appellant
    in the "moderate range".  She explained the reasons  for  her  opinion.
    Dr Nikopaschos referred to the appellant becoming "visibly  emotionally
    distressed  and  physiologically  aroused"  when  talking   about   her
    experience as a victim of trafficking.  The appellant became  "tearful,
    fidgety and tense in her body, taking deeper  and  sharper  intakes  of
    breath and avoiding eye contact."  I  note  that  whereas  fidgety  and
    tense behaviour can  be  acted,  being  literally  tearful  is,  in  my
    judgment, extremely difficult to feign.

27. Dr Nikopaschos expressed her  concern  for  the  appellant  if  she  is
    returned  to  Vietnam  because  return  there  could  be  expected   to
    exasperate her mental health problems.

28. I have  also  read  the  general  reports  provided  dealing  with  the
    difficulties  victims  of  trauma  may  experience  in  relating  their
    experiences.

29. Overall I am satisfied that the medical evidence before me,  which  was
    not challenged, is honest, informed and reliable.

    Home Office Background Material

30. I consider now the background material relied on by  the  Secretary  of
    State.  First is the CPIN Victims of  Trafficking  September  2018,  in
    particular Sections 6 and 8 dealing with trafficking.   Part  6  begins
    with the observation that the Vietnamese government  has  taken  active
    measures to address trafficking problems and police capacity  has  been
    boosted.  Efforts have been made to increase public  awareness  of  the
    dangers of trafficking and the US  State  Department  Report  is  cited
    noting both that the US State Department does not accept the government
    of Vietnam fully meets minimum standards  for  eliminating  trafficking
    but also recognises significant efforts have been made to achieve  that
    end.

31. More importantly for present purposes it is asserted  that  victims  of
    trafficking in Vietnam do not form a particular social group within the
    meaning of  the  1951  Refugee  Convention.   I  find  this  a  strange
    contention.  The Secretary of State's document accept that the  victims
    share an immutable characteristic (having been a victim of trafficking)
     but goes on "in view of their equality under the law and  the  general
    availability of state protection, they are not perceived  as  different
    and do not have a distinct identity in Vietnamese society."  I struggle
    to understand how the availability of protection,  or  indeed  equality
    before the law, prevents a group having a distinct identity.

32. Rather the availability of state protection and equality under the  law
    go to the issue of whether a person needs international protection  and
    not whether a person is a member of a social group at  all.   A  person
    can  be  a  member  of  a  particular  social  group  without   risking
    persecution just as a person can hold religious or  political  opinions
    without risking persecution, but the availability of protection of  the
    absence or  persecution  does  not  stop  them  being  a  member  of  a
    particular social group.

33. I accept that the need to be a distinct group  within  society  is  the
    most difficult thing for an alleged victim of trafficking to  prove  if
    she (in this case) is to show that she is  a  member  of  a  particular
    social group for the purposes of  refugee  protection.   But  there  is
    evidence that they form a distinct group within society.  According  to
    the September 2018 CPIN the Asia Foundation in 2017 noted that  victims
    are often "reluctant  to  seek  help  for  fear  of  further  abuse  by
    traffickers ... or stigma from being labelled as a prostitute."   There
    was also reference to the "social stigma associated with  prostitution"
    at 5.1.8 taken form the USSD TiP Report 2018.  The USSD TiP Report also
    refers  to  "endemic  social   stigma   associated   with   victimhood"
    discouraging many  victims  from  seeking  or  benefiting  from  social
    protection services as are available.  Women on their own are  seen  to
    be vulnerable to re-trafficking.

34. The CPIN Report of December 2018  under  the  heading  general  heading
    "Fear of illegal money lenders" asserts at 2.5.4 that the state appears
    willing and able to offer effective protection.  However,  that  is  of
    little evidential valued because it is an unexplained expression of  an
    opinion.  The same report refers to corruption amongst the police being
    unpunished and confirms the widespread use of money lenders  and  their
    general ruthlessness in collecting  fees  that  in  many  jurisdictions
    would have been regarded as unlawfully exorbitant.

35. As is indicated in other parts of the  papers  the  Hokou  registration
    system is to be replaced in 2020  by  a  computerised  version  managed
    through identification numbers.  The implication is this will  make  it
    harder for misuse but I do not understand why that should be.  This  is
    not to say that it would be easier or harder just that  the  point  has
    not been explained.  In any event there is no evidence before  me  that
    it is yet in force.

36. The report on Home Office Fact-finding Mission to Vietnam has  sections
    on trafficking and money lending.  The report confirms that, typically,
    a victim of the traffickers is tricked into slave labour  and  attached
    to an unmanageable debt.  There are shelters to help people,  run  both
    by government and non-governmental organisations but they seem to  deal
    with only a small number of cases.

37. I have no hesitation accepting these reports as the result of a sincere
    attempt to summarise various strands of evidence  but  their  value  is
    limited by their very general nature and, as in the case of the opinion
    on the availability of protection, they are not always well sourced.

38. I  am  persuaded  that  the  official  statistics  might  significantly
    underestimate the prevalence of trafficking because, according  to  the
    US Depart of State Report some  officials  "conflate  trafficking  with
    smuggling which precluded the identification of victims who voluntarily
    migrated abroad".  In other words, a person who was tricked  would  not
    necessarily be recognised as someone who had been trafficked.  This  is
    interesting but of little relevance to my task in determining the  risk
    facing this person on return.

39. I was referred to the  decision  of  this  Tribunal  in  Nguyen  (Anti-
    Trafficking Convention: Respondent's duties) [2015] UKUT 170 (IAC)  but
    I did not find it helpful. It was reported  because  of  what  is  said
    about the duties of the Secretary of State in a "trafficking" case  and
    they are not in issue before me. It was not country  guidance  and  the
    fact that the Tribunal decided on  the  evidence  before  it  that  the
    appellant in  that  case  could  obtain  effective  protection  is  not
    determinative.

    Expert Country Evidence

40. I turn now to the expert report of Professor Christopher Bluth.

41. Professor Bluth introduces himself  as  a  Professor  in  International
    Studies at the University of Bradford.  He  has  considerable  relevant
    academic experience and holds the degree of a doctor in philosophy from
    King's College London.

42. He was asked to consider if the claimant's account  was  plausible,  to
    assess the risks in the event of her return, to decide if there  was  a
    sufficiency of protection and  if  internal  relocation  was  a  viable
    option.

43. He analysed  political  and  social  conditions  in  Vietnam.   He  was
    particularly critical of the banking system which is  generally  unable
    to provide appropriate funding for people who in many contexts would be
    regarded as good risks.  As a consequence of this is  there  is  a  big
    industry in illegal banking, often working in the shadow of  legitimate
    pawnbroking, so that many people, such as students seeking to pay their
    education fees, borrow irregularly, frequently at high interest  rates.
    He said at paragraph 5.2.9:

         "These criminals are very adept at keeping track of  their  clients
         inside Vietnam who owed them  money,  because  otherwise  they  can
         never collect.  In order to be able to live  in  Vietnam  a  person
         needs household registration.  Consequently, the possibility exists
         that if the loan sharks have bribed the appropriate authorities the
         appellant would come to their attention and they would be  able  to
         find her as they did before, or by using social media."

44. Professor Bluth also said that criminals in Vietnam use bribery to  get
    support from the authorities  to  identify  and  find  those  who  they
    believe owe them money.

45. This is important evidence and I  have  reflected  on  it.  It  is  not
    explained. I am not told how these records are made and  kept  and  who
    can access them. If, as appears to be the case, they  exist  for  every
    adult citizen there must be literally millions  of  them.  I  can  only
    speculate but I can imagine how a corrupt official might, for  example,
    reveal the address of a person whose records were in his care  but  not
    how records could be used  to  keep  tabs  on  a  person  by  something
    analogous to a land charges register requiring an official to notify  a
    criminal if, after a gap of perhaps  years,  a  person's  records  were
    transferred  to  a  different  register.  Quite  simply  too  much   is
    unexplained for me to be able to  evaluate  Professor  Bluth's  opinion
    about the misuse of the registration system.

46. He was aware that there are  often  links  between  money  lenders  and
    trafficking rings so  that  debtors  who  were  vulnerable  were  often
    targeted for corruption into prostitution or  other  labour.   Entering
    the United Kingdom illicitly having travelled via  Russia,  Germany  or
    France was a well-known route.  People are also trafficked from Vietnam
    for the purposes of cannabis farming although Vietnamese  children  are
    the main targets in that particular trade.  He explained how  potential
    victims of trafficking are typically  ill-educated  and  vulnerable  to
    skilled deceivers who offer apparently genuine jobs.

47. He also thought there was a real risk of re-trafficking.  At  paragraph
    5.2.15 he said: "It is known that police has(sic) handed over returnees
    to Vietnam to  the  person  who  originally  trafficked  them  for  re-
    trafficking".  This is a very chilling  observation  but  is  supported
    merely by footnote 23 which says simply "Based on the evidence in other
    asylum cases the author was involved with".

48. It was his view that the appellant "meets all the criteria set down  in
    the Home Office Country Policy and Information Note  (Vietnam:  Victims
    of Trafficking) for a person at  increased  risk  of  being  abused  or
    trafficked".  This is supported with a reference to  footnote  35,  but
    that merely refers to the CPIN at paragraph 2.3.5 but does not identify
    it with a date. I have before me a such a report  marked  "Version  3.0
    September 2018. There is no paragraph 2.3.5 but at paragraph  2.4.5  it
    sets out:

          "Factors that may make the person face an increased risk of  being
         abused or re-trafficked include, but are not limited to:

           . The person having an outstanding debt to the traffickers

           . The absence of a supportive family willing to take the  victim
             back into the family unit

           . The person having no other support network to assist them;  no
             or  little  education  or  vocational  skills;  mental  health
             conditions, which may well have been caused by experiences  of
             abuse  when  originally  trafficked;  material  and  financial
             deprivation such as to  mean  that  they  will  be  living  in
             poverty or conditions of destitution

           . Factors that may lower the risk of being of(sic) abused or re-
             trafficked include, but are not limited to,  the  availability
             of a supportive family willing to take the  person  back  into
             the family unit"

49.  Professor  Bluth  suggested  that  even  if  the  appellant  has  been
    untruthful about her reasons for coming to the United Kingdom she would
    now be in "debt  bondage"  because  that  is  how  immigration  brokers
    operate.   However,  he  found  her  account  of  being  corrupted  and
    exploited for the purposes of prostitution to be very much in line with
    the evidence about criminal activities of exploiters in Vietnam.

50. He then turned to the government efforts  to  prevent  trafficking  and
    protect against loan sharks.  Much  of  this  part  of  the  report  is
    concerned with how people in Vietnam generally might be corrupted  into
    or protected from the activities of exploiters. It is of  only  limited
    value in determining what risk, if  any,  this  appellant  would  face.
    Professor  Bluth  accepted  that  the  Vietnamese  government  has  put
    resources into tackling the problem of exploitation and trafficking but
    he noted  that  "there  is  no  evidence  however  that  such  enforced
    protections have any discernible effect on the  level  of  prostitution
    which remains at an extraordinarily high level."

51. It was his view that although trafficking is certainly against the  law
    and has been identified by various government agencies  as  a  "serious
    problem" there are gaps  in  the  legislation  and  the  scale  of  the
    problems means that it is not being addressed.  For example, those  who
    have identified themselves as victims  but  have  escaped  without  the
    intervention of the authorities are not given support (para 5.3.1).

52. There are reports from many NGOs that traffic related corruption  at  a
    local level is widespread.  At paragraph 5.3.4 he said:

         "Intergovernmental agreements to  receive  victims  of  trafficking
         with Vietnam usually require merely that victims are identified  to
         the Border Guards Command without further assistance to return back
         to home communities where such  communities  exist.   Consequently,
         victims are at risk of being re-trafficked after they return to the
         country, and some victims have even been re-trafficked while  being
         stranded at the border gate.  There are also no mechanisms in place
         to assess the needs of victims after return and provide  assistance
         for them."

53. The above reference to re-trafficking is supported by a footnote at  41
    referring to  the  Child  Exploitation  and  Online  Protection  Centre
    (document entitled "The  trafficking  of  women  and  children  Vietnam
    report Hanoi 2011").

54. Professor Bluth accepted that shelters  exist  but  described  them  as
    "rudimentary, underfunded, and they do not have  appropriately  trained
    staff".  It is reported that victims do not  want  to  stay  at  victim
    support facilities because they fear  the  social  stigma  of  being  a
    trafficked victim.  He said:

         "It is clear that there is a powerful social stigma against victims
         of  trafficking  and  in  particular  against  victims  of   sexual
         exploitation, compelling women to remain silent about the abuse  as
         they would be viewed as belonging to a distinct  group  in  society
         that is discriminated against socially."

55. This claim is referenced at footnote 44 which identifies a  variety  of
    internationally respected sources.

56. He then made the depressing observation that "the government efforts to
    combat these problems have had virtually no effect on the scale of  the
    problems and the ordinary citizens cannot rely on  the  authorities  to
    protect them".

57. He described the steps taken as "woefully inadequate" and suggests that
    that is the reason why  the  US  State  Department  reported  that  the
    "government of Vietnam does not fully comply with the minimum standards
    for the elimination of trafficking".

58. He said that the  Home  Office  CPIN  acknowledged  there  are  only  a
    "miniscule number of such shelters for female victims (compared to  the
    scale of the trafficking) and those that  are  there  are  inadequately
    resourced and staffed".  The shelters are intended for social  problems
    as a whole not distinctly for victims of loan  sharks  or  exploitation
    and are just not enough.  Professor Bluth again refers  to  the  police
    handing over returnees to the  original  traffickers  and  there  is  a
    reference to footnote 47 which shows that the claim is  "based  on  the
    evidence in other asylum cases the author was involved with".

59. Professor Bluth said that the appellant would face a difficult time  if
    she was returned.  Migration brokers, loan sharks and  traffickers  are
    "part of a nexus of criminals who are very adept at  keeping  track  of
    their clients inside Vietnam who owe  them  money"  (5.3.1.)  Professor
    Bluth then referred to the household registration system which requires
    interaction with citizens to purchase a house or land, to marry, to  be
    employed, to register a training a course, to borrow from  a  bank  and
    many other basic  societal  acts  which  means  that  a  person  cannot
    practically  live  in  Vietnam  without  registering.    According   to
    Professor Bluth: "The endemic corruption means that it  is  common  for
    loan sharks, traffickers and other criminals  to  track  their  targets
    using household registration". This is clearly a very significant  part
    of his evidence which, frustratingly, is not  explained  in  detail  or
    supported by any reference.

60. Professor Bluth described the anti-corruption policies as "token".

61. Based on his experience of how such criminals operate, he would  expect
    a person in the appellant's position  to  owe  money  to  the  original
    brokers who helped her to leave Vietnam.  He repeated his claim that he
    has knowledge of cases where individuals have been re-trafficked by the
    police who effectively put the person under the control of the original
    exploiters but said that even if that does not happen to the appellant,
    she is in a class of people who  are  targeted  for  trafficking.   The
    point is that she has little education or legitimate means  of  support
    although I presume that the  appellant  would  now  be  at  least  more
    sceptical if faced with offers of work outside Vietnam.

62. He started to summarise his conclusions at point  6.   Professor  Bluth
    clearly thought it likely that the appellant is in "debt  bondage"  and
    in the event of her return to Vietnam she will  be  at  risk  from  her
    creditors and also  from  other  criminal  trackers  as  she  tries  to
    establish herself.  In his opinion that the  appellant  faced  a  "high
    risk" of being targeted by trafficking gangs and other criminals in the
    event of her return and that there would  be  insufficient  support  to
    protect her.  The efforts made by the government of Vietnam  to  combat
    trafficking were described  as  "token".   There  are  certainly  clear
    examples of the authorities successfully breaking up trafficking  rings
    but not of them making any impact on the scale of activity.

63. Overall he considered her account to be plausible.

    Appellant's Evidence

64. I have read the record of the screening interview dated 3 July 2012 and
    the substantive interview dated 24 July 2012.  The  appellant  outlined
    her claim to fear return to Vietnam because she was  indebted  to  loan
    sharks.

65. According to the record she said that she had a sister, who she  named,
    who was then about 38  years  old.  She  repeated  this  claim  in  her
    substantive interview. She also  talked  about  sending  money  to  her
    sister. She explained that her children did not want her to  return  to
    Vietnam but to continue working the United Kingdom to  send  her  money
    (question 49). In answer to question 108 she said that planned  to  use
    her sister to channel her debt repayment.

66. She described how she lived in London with a "Vietnamese  with  British
    Nationality" (question 168) called "Lily" (she gave Lily's full  name).
    The appellant said that Lily had adopted her as a sister and  supported
    her and that she offered some  childcare  and  housekeeping  skills  in
    return.

67. The appellant gave evidence before me.   Her  solicitors  had  made  it
    plain that they considered her to be vulnerable and I  acceded  to  the
    unusual request that the hearing be conducted in private.

68. Mr Melvyn had considered the skeleton argument. He  accepted  that  the
    appellant had been the victim of trafficking  and  that  she  had  been
    trafficked as she tried to escape from loan sharks.  He  also  accepted
    that she owed money which she had borrowed for her needs or to pay  the
    debts of her husband.

69. He said that the thrust of the  Secretary  of  State's  case  was  that
    appellant could relocate in Vietnam  and  obtain  effective  protection
    from the state. Mr Melvyn almost made plain that he did not accept that
    the appellant had no contacts in Vietnam or that she would be unable to
    have family support there.

70. There are particular difficulties in  this  case  and  although,  in  a
    sense, it was no  more  than  he  ought  to  have  done,  I  record  my
    appreciation of Mr Melvyn acknowledging the  appellant's  vulnerability
    and his willingness  to  make  appropriate  concessions  to  avoid  the
    witness being cross-examined unnecessarily.

71. The appellant adopted statements  in  the  bundle  dated  January  2018
    beginning at page 5 in the   bundle  and  the  supplementary  statement
    dated August 2018 at Tab B page 1 in the bundle.

72. It is not necessary  to  set  out  every  point  made  in  the  witness
    statements, especially as much has been accepted, responsibly,  by  the
    Secretary of State. Nevertheless, I will outline them.

73. In her first statement the appellant accepted that  she  had  not  been
    open and honest with the authorities in the United Kingdom.   She  said
    that she had not learned to trust the authorities anywhere and she  was
    concerned for the safety of her children in Vietnam as  well  as  being
    frightened of the traffickers and the "loan mafia".  She  talked  about
    her childhood.  She was from a region of Vinh City.  She was one of two
    children.  Her sister was killed in a road traffic  accident  when  she
    was about 10 years old and her parents are now dead too.   She  started
    her married life in 1990.  Her husband worked as a  driver's  assistant
    for a long  distance  coach  firm  and  she  took  occasional  work  to
    supplement their income.  They had a daughter born in 1991  and  a  son
    born in 1994.

74. Her husband did not support her properly and  she  realised  after  the
    birth of their second child that he had become a heroin  addict.   This
    led to his losing his  job.   He  then  became  a  drain  on  household
    resources, contributing nothing and constantly  demanding  money.   She
    described how she became acquainted with one "Hung"  or  "Curly  Hair".
    She described him as a "black market money lender in the  same  village
    as me".  She started  to  borrow  from  him  and  initially  paid  back
    interest as required.  However, she could  not  pay  back  the  capital
    without selling land and the funds raised meant she had a  high  credit
    score with Hung.  She took on debts that she could  not  pay  back  and
    lied to avoid, for a while, the need to repay.

75. She corrected an error in the assessment in the  psychologist's  report
    at paragraphs 20 and 21.  It was incorrect to say that  she  discovered
    that the land did not belong to the family.  She  knew  full-well  that
    the land that she was pretending belonged to the family to satisfy  the
    creditors was not hers to sell.

76. She outlined the debt collection methods which included visitors to the
    home wielding knives. She went to the police station to report threats.
     The police offered to help but did nothing  however.  Soon  afterwards
    the gang said that they would kill her  if  she  contacted  the  police
    again.  She had not told them that she had been to the police  and  she
    relied  on  that  conversation  to  show  that  the   police   are   in
    communication with the loan sharks.

77. She knew she could not pay back the money.  She left her home  in  Nghe
    An intending to establish herself in South Vietnam.  She knew she would
    be easy to find if she  remained  in  the  home  area.   She  left  her
    children with a friend.  They  were  in  the  Nghe  An  area  but  some
    distance away from her home.  Her husband was an addict  and  she  left
    him to his fate and later learned that he had died.

78. She paid interest until she left but was confident  that  if  she  were
    reunited with her creditors they would  have  records  and,  even  now,
    would charge interest for the many years in which the son had not  been
    paid.

79. Her new home was two days travel away and she found work easily.

80. She said at paragraph 30:

         "When  I  arrived,  I  had  to  report  to  the  local  police  for
         registration. If you move to a different place in Vietnam, you have
         to register your address with the police; if you  are  absent,  you
         have to report it to them as well. From memory, you have to provide
         your name, date of birth I think, previous address, and new address
         - I have the address of the boss  who  let  me  stay  where  I  was
         working."

81. The appellant registered with the police  as  is  required  and  as  is
    necessary.  Nevertheless, she lived discretely and sent money  for  the
    support of her children.

82. She was in South Vietnam for over a year (witness statement,  paragraph
    33) and then  learned  that  Hung  was  close  to  finding  her.   Soon
    afterwards Hung found her at her place of work.  She had no opportunity
    to hide  so  followed  him  to  his  car.   She  was  driven  into  the
    countryside and then told that she was going to be punished for  daring
    to escape.  Three men present raped her repeatedly.  They hit her  with
    wooden sticks on her head  and  neck  tearing  apart  her  head.   They
    finished the beating by cutting off a toe and said they would kill  her
    if she did not pay.

83. She was left at the roadside where she was eventually found or taken to
    hospital.

84. She lied to the hospital promising to pay.  She left without paying and
    made her way to the friend where her children were staying.

85. Her friend introduced her to a man called "Son" and he told her that he
    would find her a job in another country.  Work would be something  like
    planting vegetables.  She had to promise to pay him for  his  services.
    She was too frightened for her safety to consider another course.   She
    then gave details of her journey and explained how  she  found  herself
    work as a  prostitute.   She  corrected  an  impression  given  by  the
    psychologist that Son had remained with her.  That is not what she  had
    intended to say.  Someone called Lam remained with her.  She spent time
    in Russia and in Poland and then in France.  In France she was  in  the
    company of two other "girls".  Arrangements were made to take  them  to
    the United Kingdom.  She was confident that at least some of the people
    involved in her removal were Vietnamese.

86. She was told that she would have to work off the debt  and  then  could
    find a better job.  She had developed a reputation for being  compliant
    and the controlling regime was less restrictive in the  United  Kingdom
    and she took advantage of some carelessness on the part of her  captors
    to run away.

87. She then explained how she had managed  after  she  had  escaped.   She
    claimed that she met a  Vietnamese  woman  by  chance  and  that  women
    befriended her and they became emotionally close.  She  had  stayed  in
    that women's house and contributed to the household by  doing  domestic
    work.  She had no money with which to pay off  the  debt  and  had  not
    contacted Hung since he had abandoned her at the roadside.

88. She was able to keep in contact with her children  and  she  encouraged
    them to leave Vietnam.  She was afraid they would  be  found  by  Hung.
    She understood that they had  now  left  Vietnam  and  had  established
    themselves somewhere in Laos.

89. When she contacted the children the friend who looked after  them  said
    that money lenders were still searching for her.

90. She said that in 2009 she  went  with  her  benefactor  to  Manchester.
    There was a police check and she was detained  at  the  police  station
    because she did not have any identification documents.  She lied to the
    police by giving a false identity.  She  said  she  was  frightened  of
    being returned to Vietnam.  She came to realise that she  was  required
    to report back to the police but claims not to have known when she  was
    released and she went back with her friend to London.  She said she did
    not claim asylum because she knew nothing about asylum.

91. She said that her friend had advised her to claim  asylum  and  pointed
    out that it could lead to having a legal right  to  be  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  Nevertheless, she did not  feel  able  to  take  that  advice
    because she was too frightened.

92. Nevertheless, she did claim asylum.  She accepts that she made a  claim
    in July 2012. She was not truthful.  She said she  did  not  trust  the
    authorities in the United Kingdom or anyone else.

93. She denied saying that she owed 2 billion Vietnamese Dongs.   She  said
    that could not possibly be right.  That is a great deal more money  and
    she wondered if 200 million, which she speculated was the sum  she  did
    owe, had been written wrongly as 2 billion.

94. She left London  and  got  a  job  in  Liverpool  without  telling  the
    authorities where to forward details of her  asylum  application.   She
    only  discovered  the  application  had  been  refused  when  she   was
    subsequently detained.  She left  the  job  in  Liverpool  because  the
    family had made other arrangements for babysitting and she went to stay
    with a man called Minh and his girlfriend Van.  She lived there  at  no
    cost to herself and obtained work as a casual babysitter.

95. She then went on to describe her relationship with her then partner who
    is identified herein as DM.  The appellant described how she had formed
    a relationship with DM after they met at a party in London in 2014.  He
    explained that he could not go to Vietnam because he was "wanted" there
    and had  been  allowed  to  stay  in  the  United  Kingdom  by  the  UK
    government.  They became close  and  he  arranged  for  her  to  see  a
    solicitor.  At that time he was contemplating seeking  UK  citizenship.
    They started to cohabit  in  part  with  the  deliberate  intention  of
    preparing evidence  to  prove  cohabitation  for  the  purposes  of  an
    application she intended to make.  However, she said that the  evidence
    was  organised  rather  than  contrived.  It   reflected   their   true
    circumstances.

96. She then explained about being arrested in 2016.  She said she had lost
    contact with her children because the police kept  all  her  belongings
    when she was arrested including her mobile 'phone.  She  did  not  know
    her children's telephone number in Laos and she had not  been  able  to
    speak to them since she was arrested.

97.  She then explained how she and DM had a friend, a Chinese woman called
    "AT" and at AT's suggestion she went to the beach  in  Great  Yarmouth.
    Her acquaintance AT was disturbed by a phone call at 5 o'clock  in  the
    morning and  she  was  required  to  help  AT  with  a  suitcase.   She
    understood AT to be involved with importing clothes from China and  she
    assumed that she was required to carry  something  in  connection  with
    that legitimate business.  She did  not  know  that  she  was  carrying
    drugs.  She then went on to say how  she  had  pleaded  guilty  to  the
    offences leading to her imprisonment.  She claimed not to  realise  she
    could go to prison.  The person AT got bail and absconded.

98. The appellant then told the police that her boyfriend and AT  were  "in
    charge".

99. At the time of making her statement DM was  in  Wigan  Prison  and  was
    still proposing marriage to the appellant after they had finished their
    prison sentences.  The appellant now understood he too was  subject  to
    deportation.

100. Paragraph 118 of her statement is interesting if  only  because  of  it
    illustrating her apparent failure to understand what is happening.   It
    says:

         "The Home Office gave me a deport order because they said  I  am  a
         risk of reoffending; however, I  am  not  a  risk  of  reoffending,
         because I did not mean to commit the offences for which I had  been
         imprisoned and given a deport order for.  I did not know  what  was
         happening or that there were drugs in those suitcases.   I  trusted
         AT which I really regret now."

101. As will be appreciated by anyone with even a  modest  understanding  of
    the relevant law, and as was set out clearly in  the  relevant  notice,
    the appellant is subject to deportation by operation of statute because
    she has been sentenced to two years in prison. A propensity to reoffend
    is of little relevance in an appeal and of no relevance to the decision
    that she be deported.

102. She then explained  how  solicitors  helped  her  with  submissions  to
    support an asylum claim while she was in  prison.   The  was  extensive
    correspondence between her and DM but only samples have been  produced.
    Her friend Van supported her asylum claim.  Van is a  close  friend  of
    Long, who has featured in the appellant's  account  and  the  appellant
    knew her from Vietnam although said they were not close but on speaking
    terms.  Van had confirmed that the loan mafia were  still  looking  for
    the appellant.

103. She noted that in her letter Van described the appellant as "my  little
    sister".  She  said  that  the  use  of  the  word  "sister"  reflected
    Vietnamese culture and that she was not related to the writer.

104. She said she had not been frank with  her  solicitors.   In  particular
    she did not want to have to admit the shame of being  trafficked.   She
    was scared of being returned.  She was scared of Son and Lam  and  more
    scared of Hung.  She did not believe there was any effective protection
    from the authorities in Vietnam.  She took issue with the Secretary  of
    State's contention that her debt would have been  forgotten.   He  said
    there is no evidence to support that.

105. She did not believe she could relocate.  She had  tried  that  and  she
    was found in Ho Chi Minh City in South  Vietnam.   She  said  that  the
    obligation to register with the authorities means that people are  easy
    to trace.

106. She said she had no-one in Vietnam.  Her  parents  were  dead  and  her
    children had left. In her supplementary statement she explained she was
    living with a friend called Lyly who was happy to let  her  stay.   She
    said how she found it very difficult to trust people and was haunted by
    her past experiences.

107. She had not had any contact with DM for a  long  time.   She  had  been
    advised by Lyly to have no more to do with him because he involved  her
    in crime.  He was not honest with her.  They were no  longer  partners.
    She explained that her friendship with Lyly began while she was  living
    with Mrs T.

108. She repeated  that  she  had  given  false  information  when  she  was
    arrested in 2009.   She  attributed  this  to  being  scared  to  being
    returned to Vietnam.

109. I noted that when the appellant  gave  her  evidence  she  was  weeping
    slightly.  She repeated her claim to have no known relatives in Vietnam
    and to have lost contact with her children in 2016.

110. She was shown a letter from Van.  She said it was given  to  her  while
    she was in prison.  She was no longer in contact with Van  and  had  no
    contact with her since receiving the letter.  She did not know  how  to
    contact her.

111. The appellant was cross-examined.

112. She repeated her  claim  that  the  description  "younger  sister"  was
    culturally polite and not an indication of  a  biological  relationship
    which she denied.  The letter had  been  forwarded  from  a  friend  in
    Manchester.  Van was not the person who looked after her children.  She
    had no longer any contact with that person  and  had  not  had  contact
    since her children left to go to Laos.  She was vague about the year.

113. She was asked if she could explain why the writer of the  letter  would
    say the children were facing danger in Vietnam if they were in fact  in
    Laos.  She decided it must be a reference to what would happen if  they
    returned.

114. She had not tried to contact Long who  had  featured  in  her  account.
    His was one of the 'phone number she had lost  with  her  'phone.   She
    understood he had a partner in Cambodia.

115. Mr Melvyn asked why she was not  making  more  effort  to  contact  the
    children.  She said she had asked people who were trying to  help  her.
    She was asked to explain why DM  described  her  as  his  wife  in  her
    correspondence if they were not in fact married.  She said that was how
    they thought of each other.  She denied that Mr Long  was  related  and
    said they were just friends.

116. The letter supporting Mr Melvyn's cross-examination  dated  12  October
    2016 from Van does indeed identify the appellant as the writer's sister
    and is signed as coming from the "younger sister".  The writer wondered
    why she had not been able to contact the appellant in recent months and
    then wanted to notify her of a dangerous situation.  According  to  the
    writer, on 10 September 2016 Hung appeared at her house asking for  the
    appellant's whereabouts and explaining that she owed money.  The writer
    concludes, "I tried my best to contact with you but could  not.   I  am
    afraid that your children shall face  danger,  so  I  am  writing  this
    letter to send you.  Please contact me with anything."

117. The appellant denied that letter is contrived to bolster a claim.

118. There was no further oral evidence.

119. Mr Melvyn's case was straightforward and predicable and none the  worse
    for that.  He said the appellant's evidence was entirely unreliable and
    she had not shown there was any risk on  return  from  loan  sharks  or
    traffickers or anyone else.  The Secretary of State did not accept that
    she would be friendless and without family support  in  Vietnam.  There
    was one letter  out  of  the  blue  suggesting  the  contrary  and  its
    provenance had not been established  or  the  reasons  for  writing  it
    explained given its contrived arrival at a convenient time.  It made no
    sense.  The children were not at risk if as the appellant claimed  they
    were in Laos. It made no sense.

120. Neither did he accept that there was any cultural  habit  of  referring
    to each other as brother and sister in Vietnam.

121. The Home Office country evidence showed  there  was  no  risk  and  the
    appeal should be dismissed.  He submitted that there was no  meaningful
    claim on Article 8 grounds on their own.

    Evaluation

122. There are many  difficulties  in  this  case.   I  remind  myself  that
    although the standard of proof is low, the burden is on  the  appellant
    to show that she faces a real risk of ill treatment in the event of her
    return if she is to establish  her  claim  to  be  a  refugee  or  that
    removing her would  contravene  her  rights  under  article  3  of  the
    European Convention on Human Rights.

123. I also remind myself that there is  very  good  medical  evidence  that
    informs me that victims of trauma can often be extremely  reluctant  to
    tell other people about their experiences, in  part  because  "telling"
    involves "reliving" and this is a case where the experiences  might  be
    thought shameful or deeply embarrassing, even though the appellant  is,
    in that sense at least, a victim.

124. Delay in making a claim is always discreditable  in  the  circumstances
    set out in section 8  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration  (Treatment  of
    Claimants, etc) Act 2004 but in a case such as  this  section  8  alone
    would be an inadequate reason to disbelieve  the  appellant.  The  fact
    that something is  discreditable  is  not  determinative  and,  in  the
    context of this case read as a whole, it is of little importance.

125. As I confirm below, I have believed much of  the  appellant's  evidence
    and  do  not  disbelieve  her  because  of  late  disclosure  or   poor
    chronology.

126. Nevertheless I cannot avoid finding that  the  appellant  is  a  deeply
    untruthful witness who, on her own admission, will say what she  thinks
    will bring the result she wants when she is dealing with authorities. I
    have in mind particularly her claim to have given a false identity when
    accosted by the police. Similarly her entirely  plausible  accounts  of
    having one young sister who died in childhood in an accident or who  as
    an adult  wanted  her  to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  (screening
    interview, not the disputed letter) are quite irreconcilable.

127. She was also, on her own account, dishonest with her creditors and  the
    hospital where she was treated. Perhaps the creditors deserve no better
    and I accept that the appellant was desperate for medical treatment but
    being dishonest comes easily to this appellant.

128. I found her  explanation  of  her  criminal  conviction  to  be  highly
    unsatisfactory. I do not believe that she pleaded guilty on  the  basis
    that she did not know what was in the suitcase that she helped to  move
    because I do not see how that can  be  consistent  with  the  necessary
    guilty knowledge. She has not told me the truth about that part of  her
    case. It may be that her present solicitors will want to look into  the
    safety of that conviction, even at this late stage,  as  the  appellant
    has  been  recognised  as  a  victim   of   trafficking   and   special
    consideration must be given to prosecuting such people.

129. I have already  commented  adversely  on  that  appellant's  inaccurate
    explanation of the reasons for her being subject to deportation. It  is
    only  relevant  when  I  make  findings  of  fact  because  it  further
    illustrates the appellant's unreliability.

130. I accept that the appellant has fallen victim to loan  sharks,  largely
    as  a  result  of  her  husband's  drug  addictions  and  consequential
    irresponsibility. I accept too that she has been "trafficked" into  the
    United Kingdom and forced to work as a prostitute.  This  part  of  her
    story  is  inherently  believable  given  the  background  and  medical
    evidence. Even if the rest is invented, she had to finance her trip  to
    the United Kingdom.

131. I accept that the appellant tried to enlist the help of the  police  in
    Vietnam but found that this exacerbated her problems because the report
    prompted a threat from the creditors. At that time she was living close
    to her creditor and  reported  to  the  police  within  that  community
    (paragraph 25 of witness statement). The  alleged  subsequent  reaction
    from the creditor fits with the evidence that there is a high degree of
    corruption in public life in Vietnam.

132. With less confidence, I accept that the  appellant  tried  to  relocate
    within Vietnam. It makes sense to me that she was in  debt  before  she
    tried to leave Vietnam. I only  have  her  (very  unreliable)  word  to
    support her claim to have married a heroin addict who squandered family
    resources but it makes sense to me  that  she  was  prompted  to  leave
    Vietnam and leave behind her children by a  crisis  rather  than  by  a
    general desire  to  improve  herself  and  debt  followed  by  internal
    relocation is plausible.

133. I accept too that she was found in Ho Chi Minh City.  There  is  strong
    evidence that she has been beaten and I accept, mindful  of  the  lower
    standard, that she did suffer the traumatic amputation of her  toe  and
    then a beating that included  her  being  raped.  I  found  Dr  Ahsan's
    comments on this point helpful.

134. I do not know how the  appellant  was  traced  in  Ho  Chi  Minh  City.
    Clearly it was not a chance meeting. I accept that  the  money  lenders
    have a strong interest in keeping in contact with their debtors, for if
    they did not then the incentive to run may well be  stronger  than  the
    incentive to repay.  The  delay  between  registration  and  the  visit
    suggests to me that registration was not the means of contact for if it
    had been then an earlier visit could be expected. The appellant was  in
    touch with her children who lived in the same "village" (I take that to
    mean  a  community  rather  than  a  distinct  settlement  with   clear
    boundaries between houses and the countryside). There  was  opportunity
    for  someone  to  have  spoken  out  of  turn  either   carelessly   or
    maliciously. I cannot know how the information  was  passed  on  but  I
    accept that it was.

135. I accept too that the kidnap, beating, rape  and  mutilation  that  the
    appellant says followed her being accosted in  Ho  Chi  Minh  City  did
    indeed happen then as she claimed. There is  little  reliable  evidence
    for this but I have no doubt that she was ill  treated  and  the  claim
    that she was ill treated then has been made clearly. It  would  explain
    why she changed from being  someone  running  away  from  a  debtor  to
    someone seeking overseas work.

136. It follows that in the event of her return she would be returned  to  a
    country where she has been ill treated by people who have  ill  treated
    her previously. This is  something  that  must  be  given  considerable
    weight in my predictions about what is reasonably likely to  happen  in
    the event of her return. I remind myself that paragraph 339K of HC  395
    provides that that fact that a person has been subject to serious  harm
    "will be regarded as a serious indication of the person's well  founded
    fear of persecution or a serious risk of suffering serious harm, unless
    there are good reasons to consider that  such  persecution  or  serious
    harm will not be repeated" and even if it does not bind me I regard  it
    as useful summary of a well-known principle.

137. Any risk on  return  is  closely  linked  to  how  she  will  establish
    herself. I recognise that an asylum seeker may have  many  reasons  for
    wanting to stay in the United Kingdom that are not indicative of  being
    at risk but merely that the person thinks that she will be  better  off
    in the United Kingdom. However there is no evidence that the  appellant
    is doing particularly well in the United Kingdom.  She  does  not  have
    regular employment and she has been to prison but I am  satisfied  that
    she is fearful for her safety in the event of her return even  if  that
    fear is not justified objectively or is not for the  reasons  that  she
    has advanced.

138. I found many frustrating deficiencies in  Professor  Bluth's  evidence.
    He is an expert and I am entitled to give weight to his opinion but  in
    crucial  evidence  of  the  risk  on  return   I   found   his   report
    unsatisfactory.

139. It is not helpful to know that his conclusion that the appellant  would
    face a risk of re-trafficking because of other cases in  which  he  was
    involved, and particularly not when the  level  of  decision  maker  is
    unclear or what evidence supported the conclusion, assuming that it was
    the conclusion of the judge.

140. The suggestion that traffickers would know of  the  appellant's  return
    or that the authorities would do nothing to help in the  event  of  her
    arrival at an international airport is not persuasive in the absence of
    supporting  evidence.  Whilst  accepting  the  evidence  of   wholesale
    corruption I do not disregard the  evidence  that  the  authorities  in
    Vietnam are making some efforts to address the problem. I cannot accept
    that there is a real  risk  of  the  appellant  being  handed  over  to
    traffickers by, or with the acquiescence of, the authorities on return.

141. I do accept that victims of trafficking may often  present  an  air  of
    vulnerability that will be noticed  by  traffickers  as  they  seek  to
    establish themselves. I accept that evidence that victims have a  sense
    of shame and risk being ostracised because of how they are perceived. I
    have no hesitation in finding that "victims of trafficking"  constitute
    a particular social group in Vietnam within the meaning of  the  phrase
    in the Refugee Convention.

142. However I do not accept that the appellant would be unsupported in  the
    event of her return.

143. It is a feature of this case that the appellant, if she is telling  the
    truth, has found considerable support within the  Vietnamese  community
    in the United Kingdom. It is hard to see why she could not find support
    in the event of her return. She would  surely  be  more  sceptical  now
    about promises of work overseas.

144. Most importantly she has two adult children. She says that they are  on
    Laos and that she has lost contact with them. I do not believe that she
    has lost contact with them. I can accept that she might have lost their
    'phone numbers when her 'phone was confiscated by the police but  I  do
    not accept that the police would be indifferent  to  a  request  to  be
    given information from the 'phone that they hold,  at  least  not  when
    encouraged by representatives acting for the appellant but there is  no
    evidence that any such attempt was made. At the very least  they  would
    explain why they could not, or would not, help.

145. Further I  do  not  believe  that  two  adults  in  Laos  could  become
    uncontactable by their mother if she lost their 'phone numbers.  It  is
    so likely that there are mutual friends somewhere who could help that I
    do not accept the appellant's denials. Even if, extraordinarily,  there
    are no such people it is well-known  that  certain  organisations  (the
    Salvation Army is one example) offer considerable assistance to missing
    persons seeking to trace each other but there is no evidence  that  any
    such attempt was made. I find that inconsistent  with  the  appellant's
    claim to be distressed to have lost contact with her children.

146. It would suit the appellant's case to  have  detailed  statements  from
    her children in Laos to explain how they are settled there.  It is  not
    forthcoming.  Instead there is an unbelievable explanation  for  saying
    that the mother has lost contact.

147. I discount the suggestion that the appellant  has  a  sister.   I  have
    read the letter on which she was cross-examined  and  note  the  writer
    described herself in sisterly  terms.   The  letter  from  the  husband
    described a man not said to be a brother in brotherly terms.  I have no
    expert evidence on  the  point  but  I  have  decided  to  believe  the
    appellant when she said that the phrase is  used  to  reflect  cultural
    respect rather than  a  real  relationship.   One  of  my  reasons  for
    reaching this conclusion is that it is, in my experience, unnatural for
    a sibling to identify himself as such.  The writer would  know  if  the
    letter came from her sister.  There was no need to tell  her.   I  also
    note that it is suggested that the letter was written for the  purposes
    of improving her case and it does not improve the appellant's  case  to
    know she has a sister.  I do not know if the appellant has a sister  in
    Vietnam but for the purpose of my decision I have assumed that she does
    not.

148. I do not know what conditions the appellant would face  on  return  but
    she has not persuaded me that she would be on her own.

149. I do not accept that her creditors would know about her return.  It  is
    not the appellant's case that she is  presently  in  contact  with  her
    creditors either directly or through people she  knows  in  the  United
    Kingdom. This is important.  I  have  reflected  on  Professor  Bluth's
    suggestion that even if the  appellant  has  been  untruthful  in  many
    respects she must still owe money to the traffickers and they will want
    the debt paid. I accept those observations and, as indicated elsewhere,
    I have real concerns about  the  reasons  behind  the  appellant  being
    supported in the United Kingdom  but  it  is  not  her  case  that  the
    traffickers know her present whereabout and will  be  informed  of  her
    return to Vietnam.

150. I am not persuaded that registering in Vietnam would draw attention  to
    her return now. As indicated above, there  is  no  explanation  of  the
    record system before me and the  contention  that  a  person  would  be
    identified and reported to a particular identified loan shark more than
    10 years after she  left  the  country  is  not,  without  explanation,
    believable.

151. I have thought hard on  that  and  given  it  all  proper  weight.  The
    appellant is a damaged woman and I  am  satisfied  that  she  has  been
    damaged by the circumstances associated with her  being  trafficked  to
    the United Kingdom. Making every allowance that I  feel  I  should  and
    mindful of the low standard of proof I do not believe this appellant in
    several material respects.

152. I accept that she has been a victim of trafficking.  I accept that  she
    owes a considerable sum of money and that she  has  been  tricked  into
    working overseas to repay that money and the tricking was of  the  most
    repugnant kind because it required her to work as a  prostitute.   This
    is wholly consistent with  background  evidence  about  what  tends  to
    happen  and  although  advanced  by  the  appellant  in  a  less   than
    satisfactory way it is clearly her case.  It has been accepted and  not
    challenged but I agree that that has been established.

153. I agree too that failure to pay the debt has caused her  to  be  beaten
    badly and indeed to have a toe cut off.  The evidence  of  beating  and
    amputation is compelling.  She has given an explanation for it  and  no
    better one suggests itself.

154. The problem for the appellant is proving that she would need  or  could
    not get effective protection in the event of return.

155. Much is made of the  fear  instilled  by  the  debt  collectors  and  I
    understand that is likely to be justified.   Their  trade  is  illegal.
    They cannot collect debts lawfully.  They need to enforce  their  debts
    else they would not be able  to  trade.   I  have  decided  that  I  am
    persuaded that she was found in Ho Chi Min City.  I  do  not  know  how
    that came about.  It was not a chance meeting.  Hang knew where to  go.
    However, he had  contacts  with  the  place  the  appellant  had  left.
    However careful she thought she had been it is not unbelievable or even
    particularly unlikely that somebody said something that they should not
    have done either carelessly or maliciously.

156. I have not seen evidence that  she  was  traced  through  the  internal
    record keeping system.  Professor Bluth speculates that this  could  be
    used but there is no given example of it being  used  in  that  way  or
    explaining how it would work.  Even allowing for a very  high  standard
    of diligence I do not understand how it can be reasonably  likely  that
    the appellant would draw attention to herself even if she did  register
    using that system.

157. In short she would not be in the position that she  was  in  previously
    because she would not be traced, she has more experience  and  has  two
    adult children who can be expected to help her.

158. I am not persuaded that this appellant  would  face  any  risk  in  the
    event of her return and I am not persuaded there is any reason for  her
    to go to her home area but she could relocate using her willingness  to
    work almost anywhere in that country of 90 million plus people.   I  am
    not persuaded that the need to  register  with  the  authorities  would
    trigger any link.

159. It is important that I am not persuaded she would be on her own.   Lone
    women can have a difficult time. I have not  concluded  that  effective
    protection is generally available in Vietnam for returning  victims  of
    trafficking because I have not had to decide that point.

160. The appellant is not a refugee.  She is not  in  need  of  humanitarian
    protection. Removing her would not be  contrary  to  her  rights  under
    Article 3.  I remember she is subject to a deportation order.  There is
    no reason to allow  the  appeal  on  Article  8  grounds.   This  is  a
    deportation case and Part 5A of the Nationality Immigration and  Asylum
    Act 2002 applies. The worries expressed about her mental health do  not
    reach the kind of level necessary for to be irremovable. She  does  not
    come under any exceptions. She has never had permission to  be  in  the
    United  Kingdom  and  there  is  a  strong  public  interest   in   her
    deportation.

161. There is nothing here that  attracts  any  significant  weight  in  the
    Article 8 balancing exercise.  I see no point in labouring this  point.
    The facts are not there to warrant it.

162. I have endeavoured to give this case all the anxious scrutiny  that  it
    deserves.  This woman has established that she  has  suffered  terribly
    but she has also committed a serious criminal offence and she  had  not
    established  that  she  can  be  returned  safely  to  her  country  of
    nationality.

163. It follows that I dismiss her appeal.

    Notice of Decision

    The appellant's appeal is dismissed on all grounds.



         Jonathan Perkins
|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 27 May 2020                    |





                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA 11759 2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12 February 2019                  |                                     |
|                                     |.....................................|
|                                     |..                                   |

                                   Before

                      THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE WAKSMAN
                 (SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL)
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                                M...T...T...
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Smith, Counsel instructed by Wilson & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 we make an order prohibiting the disclosure or publication of  any
    matter likely to lead members of the public to identify the  appellant.
    Breach of this order can be punished as a contempt of  court.  We  make
    this order because the appellant is an asylum seeker and publication of
    her identity could create a risk for her in the event of her return.

 2. This is an appeal by a citizen of Vietnam against  a  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal on 13 September 2018 dismissing her appeal  against
    a decision of the Secretary of State refusing her leave  to  remain  on
    human rights grounds and/or protection as a refugee.

 3. The appellant was born in January 1972.  She entered the United Kingdom
    without permission sometime around the end of  December  2007  and  has
    remained there.  She has committed a criminal offence.   At  the  Crown
    Court sitting at Manchester in January 2017 the appellant was  sent  to
    prison for two years for conspiracy to supply cannabis.  It was said by
    the sentencing judge that the appellant  was  part  of  an  "organised,
    sophisticated, well managed commercial enterprise".

 4. The appellant has  previously  claimed  asylum.   The  application  was
    refused on 31 July 2012.  Although her application was unsuccessful the
    appellant remained clandestinely in the United Kingdom, next coming  to
    the attention of the authorities when she was arrested for the criminal
    offence considered above.

 5. She claimed asylum for a second time on 26 February  2017  after  being
    served with a decision to deport her.  The application was  refused  on
    27 October 2017 and she appealed.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge  found
    the appellant wholly lacking in credibility and said  so  in  extremely
    clear terms and dismissed the appeal.   Permission  to  appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Keki?.  She said  of
    the appellant that she:

         "was convicted of drugs offences but argues she cannot be  deported
         because she fears loan sharks and traffickers in Vietnam.

         It is arguable that the  judge  erred  in  the  assessment  of  the
         medical  evidence,  disregarded  the  positive  reasonable  grounds
         decision of the respondent in respect of the appellant's  claim  to
         have been trafficked for sexual exploitation, and  failed  to  make
         findings on other material matters as set out in the grounds".

 6. In summary, it was the appellant's case that she was the victim of loan
    sharks in Vietnam and was lured into travelling to the  United  Kingdom
    expecting to evade her creditors but found that she had been  corrupted
    into sex trafficking.  She worked as a prostitute  for  a  time  before
    eventually escaping.

 7. The appellant's grounds have five points.  It is more  helpful  not  to
    deal with them in the order in which they are written.

 8. Ground 5 complains  that  the  judge  made  unfair  criticisms  of  the
    appellant's legal representatives although whether the  target  of  the
    criticism was the present or previous representatives is  not  entirely
    clear.  Whilst we can understand solicitors being anxious  to  preserve
    their reputation, the criticisms are not material to the  decision  and
    we see no merit in engaging with ground 5 any further.

 9. Ground 2 complains that the judge failed to take into account that  the
    "respondent had made a Positive Reasonable Grounds Decision in relation
    to the Appellant's claim to be a Victim of Trafficking for the purposes
    of sexual exploitation on 12 July 2018".

10. There was such a decision but the Competent Authority has  subsequently
    decided that the appellant is not a victim of trafficking and  although
    that decision is itself subject  to  challenge  elsewhere,  it  is  not
    important.  As is well understood, a person claiming to be  the  victim
    of trafficking  faces  a  two  stage  investigation  by  the  Competent
    Authority.  The first step is to decide  if  there  is  a  sufficiently
    cogent case to be worth considering further, which is what happened  in
    this case. If there is then the second step is to decide if the  person
    is a victim.  It is settled law  that  neither  decisions  in  any  way
    determined the findings that the Tribunal must make but  the  reasoning
    and conclusions of the Competent Authority may well be persuasive.   It
    is also recognised that the initial decision that  a  person  may  have
    been the victim of sexual exploitation is no more  than  an  indication
    that there is at least a very weak prima facie case worthy  of  further
    consideration.  It is of  extremely  limited  evidential  value  in  an
    asylum and human rights appeal and failing to consider it expressly  in
    the mix of the evidence here is not materially wrong. It was  one  week
    strand of evidence amongst many.

11. Ground 4 is the one we find the easiest to resolve, and to  resolve  in
    the appellant's favour.  The ground states:

         "Further the judge failed to make any or any adequate finding about
         the indisputable facts supported by the medical evidence  that  the
         Appellant is missing a toe which is compelling  evidence  that  the
         Appellant was tortured by the loan shark as she  claims  and  could
         only be rejected on a reasoned basis.  This  is  not  a  peripheral
         fact but a significant one that is consistent with her  account  of
         ill-treatment and therefore required a clear finding to be made  on
         it."

12. We have no hesitation in agreeing that this is an important  contention
    about which a clear finding should  have  been  made  but  in  fact  no
    finding was made.  It would be wrong to overstate the  significance  of
    the amputated toe.  There has clearly been clinical attention after the
    amputation (or possibly at the time of amputation) so there is  nothing
    about the injury itself which supports the claim  that  the  amputation
    was traumatic and the result of torture.  Nevertheless, the fact of the
    amputation (which is surely not in dispute)  needed  to  be  considered
    carefully  with  the  rest  of  the  evidence  and   particularly   the
    appellant's evidence about how it came  about.   Failure  to  make  any
    findings on this point is,  we  find,  highly  material.   As  will  be
    explained below, this is a case where there are huge inconsistencies in
    the appellant's own account and it was therefore more  than  ordinarily
    important to make clear and thoughtful  findings  about  the  objective
    strands of evidence.

13. We just do not agree with Mr Melvin's written submission  at  paragraph
    11 of his Rule 24 notice, repeated in oral submissions before us,  that
    the missing  toe  is  "one  small  part  of  claimed  evidence  is  not
    sufficient to detract from the numerous adverse credibility aspects  of
    the  appellant's  appeal".   It  is  direct  evidence  supporting   the
    appellant's claim that she was  mutilated  which,  if  true,  could  be
    highly helpful to the appellant's case.  This is a point that needed to
    be considered and determined.  It is an irreparable error.

14. Grounds 1 and 3 can be considered together.  Ground 1 complains at  the
    judge  improperly  disregarded  medical  evidence  that  the  appellant
    suffers from Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder,  and  ground  3  complains
    that the judge has dealt inadequately with the appellant's  explanation
    for delaying her claim to have been trafficked.

15. The common thread in these two grounds (1  and  3)  is  that  there  is
    considerable learning to support the appellant's contention that people
    who have been victims of trafficking,  which  frequently  involves  the
    very worst kind of abuse, might find  it  difficult  to  discuss  their
    experiences, even in a context of trying to ensure their own safety.

16. The grounds criticise the judge for not accepting  that  the  appellant
    suffers from PTSD but it is  not  clear  that  that  was  her  finding.
    However, the judge certainly did not accept that the PTSD prevented the
    appellant from giving a full account of her experiences (paragraph  87)
    and concluded that she was just not  telling  the  truth.   We  do  not
    follow the judge's reasoning on this  point.   There  is  clear  expert
    medical evidence from apparently competent people  that  the  appellant
    suffers from Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder.  The suggestion that  this
    is the result of the appellant's experiences in Vietnam or in Russia on
    her way to the United Kingdom was rejected by the judge who  speculated
    that she was worried about the impending  deportation.   This  is  just
    speculation and is difficult to reconcile with the medical opinion that
    she is suffering from Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder,  that  is  trauma
    caused by something that  has  happened,  rather  than  worrying  about
    something that is likely to happen in the future.   We  do  not  accept
    that  the  judge  has  given  proper  reasons  for   disregarding   the
    possibility that the inconsistencies in the appellant's account are the
    consequences of stress and trauma, rather than  the  consequence  of  a
    dishonest mind.  Given  the  lower  standard  of  proof  applicable  to
    proceedings, it is particularly important that these findings are  made
    properly.

17. For all the reasons we concluded that the decision is unsatisfactory in
    law because key findings have either not been  made  or  not  explained
    adequately.  We therefore set aside  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

18. The appeal will be decided in the  Upper  Tribunal.   The  parties  are
    directed to send any updated material or evidence on which they seek to
    rely no later than fourteen days after the date of  this  decision  (or
    such further time as may be ordered).  The respondent  is  directed  to
    consider if this is a case where the  Tribunal  should  be  considering
    Section 72 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  and  if
    the appellant is precluded from protection  against  refoulement  as  a
    consequence of her criminal conviction.







    Decision

    The First-tier Tribunal erred in law. We set  aside  its  decision  and
    direct that the appeal be heard again in the Upper Tribunal.




|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 28 February 2019               |
|                                     |                                     |
|Signed                               |                                     |
|Mr Justice Waksman                   |                                     |
|Sitting as a Judge of the Upper      |                                     |
|Tribunal                             |                                     |

