
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: pa113582016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Newport                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 31st July, 2017                       |On 03rd August 2017                 |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley

                                   Between

                                    I K R
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Paxton of Counsel, Migrant Legal Project
(Cardiff)
For the Respondent:    Mr Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a national of Iraq born on [ ] 1993.  He  entered  the
    United Kingdom on 7th April 2016 and asked for humanitarian  protection
    on the same day.  His application was refused on 4th October  2016  and
    he appealed that decision on 17th October 2016.  His appeal  was  heard
    by First-tier Tribunal Judge Powell in Newport on 4th January 2017.

2.    Counsel  explained  that  the  appellant   had   sought   humanitarian
    protection pursuant to Article 15(c) of the Qualification Directive and
    made a human rights claim on the basis of his Article 8 private  and/or
    family life with his brother.  The issue before the judge was where the
    appellant originated from.  He claimed that his home was in the Ninevah
    Governorate, a contested area where conditions triggering Article 15(c)
    apply.  The respondent asserted that the appellant's home  was  in  the
    Erbil Governorate which is part of the IKR and as  such  the  appellant
    could be removed directly to Erbil and would  not  be  regarded  as  an
    internally displaced person because he would be returning home.

3.   The judge records in his determination that he accepts the  appellant's
    evidence that he had never been to the city of Erbil and was  uncertain
    whether he lived in Ninevah or Erbil Governance, although it was  clear
    to the judge that he believed he lived between Mekhmor  and  Mosul  and
    most closely associated his home with Mosul, rather  than  Erbil.   The
    judge found that he was satisfied that the judge was telling the truth,
    even if his account was not as he quite believed it to be.

4.   The judge noted that one  of  the  appellant's  sisters  had  the  word
    "almosel" in her passport, the word being indicative of Mosul District.
     However, another sister was recorded in her passport  as  having  been
    born in Makhmor, Erbil in 1985.  The judge heard oral evidence from the
    appellant's brother, who made a witness statement  and  confirmed  that
    Garasor was a small village of no more than a dozen or so families.  It
    appears  that  the  appellant's  brother  was  not  asked  whether  the
    appellant's home was in Ninevah Governorate or not.  The judge had  the
    benefit of a report from Professor Christopher Bluth, but  stated  that
    he preferred the  evidence  of  the  respondent  because,  while  being
    evidence from information from UN OCHA, as Professor  Bluth's  evidence
    was, the expert's evidence was dated December 2010 and the respondent's
    was dated August, 2014.  As a result, the judge found that the  Mekhmor
    District was in the Erbil Governorate which is part of the IKR.

5.   Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede granted leave, believing there to  arguable
    merit in the assertion in the grounds that the judge failed to  address
    all the relevant evidence when  reaching  his  conclusions  as  to  the
    correct governorate  for  the  appellant's  home  area,  including  the
    appellant's sister's passport to which he was referred.

6.   Counsel suggested to me that the key to identifying the judge's  errors
    was to consider the direction of travel of  the  evidence  before  him.
    The appellant's brother had made a  witness  statement  from  which  it
    could be inferred that the appellant's home was in Ninevah Governorate.
     He drew my attention the witness  statement,  but  I  pointed  out  to
    Counsel that having given oral evidence  to  the  First  Tier  Tribunal
    Judge, the brother could have indicated one way or the other where  the
    home was but had not.  I  explained  that  having  read  the  statement
    myself, It is certainly not clear which governorate of the home is  in.
    Counsel referred me to the evidence recorded at  paragraph  30  of  the
    determination, relating to the  appellant's  two  sisters.   K  S,  was
    recorded as having been born in Makhmur-Almosel  in  1988.   The  judge
    found that the word "almosel" was indicative of the Mosul District, but
    I pointed out to him that the  appellant's   other  sister,  W  R,  was
    recorded has having been born in Lakhmor, Erbil in 1985.

7.   Mr Kotas suggested that the judge had correctly appraised the  evidence
    before him and clearly  and  carefully  analysed  it  and  reached  the
    conclusion which was open to him to make.  I reserved my decision.

8.   In a very carefully written determination Judge Powell  identified  the
    need to make a finding as to where the appellant is from.   He  pointed
    out at paragraph 25 of the determination that he was not satisfied that
    the appellant was from  the  village  of  Garasor,  because  there  was
    sufficient evidence before him to find that the appellant  lived  in  a
    similarly named, but much smaller village  between  Mosul  and  Mekhmor
    which is not marked no the maps provided to him.

9.   When at paragraph 29 the judge found that he  was  satisfied  that  the
    appellant was telling the truth, this was clearly  in  respect  of  the
    fact that the appellant had never been to Erbil and  that  he  believed
    that he lived between Mekhmor  and  Mosul  and  that  he  most  closely
    associated his home with Mosul rather than Erbil.  However the evidence
    in the form of the appellant's  sisters'  passports  contradicted  each
    other and  the  evidence  of  the  appellant's  brother  was  far  from
    satisfactory.  He was the one  person  who  would  have  been  able  to
    indicate where the appellant came from, but does  not  appear  to  have
    been asked.  What he says in his witness statement is not at all clear.
     One cannot clearly infer from what he has said  that  the  appellant's
    home is Mosul rather than Erbil.

10.  Professor Bluth based his report on information obtained from  UN  OCHA
    published  in  December,  2010.   It  was  because   the   respondent's
    information was more recent that he says he preferred  it.   I  believe
    that the judge was  entitled  to  prefer  the  report  containing  more
    recently published material.  He clearly examined all the evidence  and
    explains clearly and cogently why he  concluded  as  he  did.   He  was
    entitled to do that and in doing so has not made a  material  error  of
    law in his determination

11.  I find that the judge did not  err  in  reaching  his  decision  and  I
    uphold it.  The appellant's appeal is dismissed.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Richard Chalkley
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.

Richard Chalkley
Upper                Tribunal                 Judge                 Chalkley
        Date 02/08/2017

