
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
PA/11984/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                    |        Decision and Reasons        |
|                                    |Promulgated                         |
|On 18 December 2017                 |        On 03 January 2018          |
|                                    |                                    |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE

                                   Between

                           MOHAMMAD JAVAD BAGHERI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:        G P McGowan, of Quinn Martin & Langan, solicitors

For the Respondent:     Ms M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and  evidence  I
do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  the  decision  of  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Bradshaw promulgated on 18 July  2017,  which  dismissed  the
Appellant's appeal on all grounds.




Background


3. The Appellant was born on 17 October 1986. He is a national of Iran.

4. The appellant arrived in the UK on 10 November 2014.  He  claimed  asylum
that day. On 8 May 2015 the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the  Appellant's
protection claim. The appellant appealed against that decision.  His  appeal
was refused in a decision promulgated on 14 September 2015. He  was  refused
permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal,  and  his  appeal  rights  were
exhausted on 12 November 2015. On 25 April  2016  further  submissions  were
lodged on the appellant's behalf. The respondent  considered  those  further
submissions and refused the appellant's claim on 18 October 2016.


The Judge's Decision

5. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge Bradshaw ("the Judge") dismissed the appeal against  the  Respondent's
decision. Grounds of appeal were lodged and on 9 October 2017  Judge  Mailer
gave permission to appeal stating

      2. The Judge referred to a note from the  appellant  agents,  who  had
      also represented  the  appellant  at  his  earlier  appeal.  The  note
      "specified" that it was only at the end of summer that  the  appellant
      wanted to become a Christian [71].  The  Judge  thus  found  that  his
      failure to raise the issue of wanting to become  a  Christian  at  his
      hearing on 3 September 2015 affected his credibility [78].


      3. It is submitted in the grounds that when the appellant referred  to
      the end of summer he was referring to the end of the  sixth  month  in
      the Iranian solar calendar which ends on  22  September.  His  witness
      statement before the Judge at the 2015  hearing  was  signed  a  month
      before the end of his summer. A copy file  noted  that  the  appellant
      first raised the issue on 13 October 2015.


      4. It is arguable as asserted in the grounds that the Judge might have
      incorrectly made an adverse credibility finding on an incorrect basis.


      5. All grounds are arguable.

The Hearing

6. (a) For the appellant, Mr McGowan moved the grounds of  appeal.  He  told
me that to a large extent this appeal revolves around  the  meaning  of  the
phrase "the end of summer". He told me that the summer ends at the  autumnal
equinox, which falls on  23  September.  The  appellant's  first  claim  for
asylum was  determined  at  a  hearing  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  on  3
September 2015. The appellant's claim then was to fear  persecution  because
of his political opinion. At the hearing on 3 September 2015  the  appellant
said nothing about an interest in Christianity. He told me that the  Judge's
finding at [68] of the decision now under appeal is unsafe. He told me  that
the Judge's credibility findings have their basis in  the  belief  that  the
appellant delayed  in  making  his  claim.  He  told  me  that  the  Judge's
reasoning  is  flawed  because  the  appellant's  decision  to  convert   to
Christianity did not take place until the end of September, weeks after  his
hearing before the First-tier Tribunal in 2015.

(b) Mr McGowan drew a distinction between enquiry into a separate faith  and
converting to that faith. He told me that the Judge's findings between  [74]
and [78] of the decision are based on an error of fact. He told me  that  if
the Judge had understood that  the  appellant's  religious  awakening  post-
dated the hearing before the  First-tier  in  2015,  the  Judge  would  have
reached different conclusions.

(c) Mr McGowan told me that four witnesses gave evidence for the  appellant.
Their evidence is summarised between [28] and [48] of the decision. He  told
me that the Judge ignored  their  evidence.  He  argued  that  there  is  no
meaningful analysis of the evidence of the  four  witnesses,  and  that  the
Judge did not properly balance all of the evidence  placed  before  him.  He
told me that the decision is tainted by material errors of law and urged  me
to set the decision aside.

7. For the respondent Mr O'Brien told me that the decision does not  contain
errors, material or otherwise. She adopted the terms of the rule  24  notice
and told me that the Judge cannot be criticised  for  applying  an  ordinary
meaning to the words employed by the appellant. She urged me to look at  the
matters which were competently before the Judge and to consider  whether  it
is likely that there would be an increase in religious fervour  in  the  few
weeks that passed between  30  September  and  13  October  2015  (when  the
appellant told his solicitor about his interest in Christianity).  She  told
me that the solicitors file note which is relied on supports the Judge.  She
told  me  that  the  Judge  was  perfectly  entitled  to  grapple  with  the
appellant's previous dishonesty as part of  an  overall  assessment  of  the
appellant's claim. Ms O'Brien told me that the absence of  consideration  of
evidence from witnesses is academic because the  Judge  clearly  finds  that
the appellant is neither a credible nor a reliable witness. She urged me  to
dismiss the appeal and allow the decision to stand.

Analysis

8.  At [62] the Judge correctly records that the decision promulgated on  14
September 2015 is only a starting point in terms of Devaseelan. At [65]  the
Judge records the appellant's position is that when his earlier  application
(on entirely separate grounds) was considered, he had started  to  go  to  a
Christian church but did not yet consider himself a Christian. At  [71]  the
Judge focuses on what was meant by becoming  a  Christian  "at  the  end  of
summer 2015". Between [73]  and  [75]  the  Judge  records  the  appellant's
evidence - that by at least June 2015 he had an interest in Christianity.

9. In his witness statement dated 17 May 2017 the  appellant  says  that  at
the time of his appeal hearing in September 2015 he had only been  going  to
the Tron Church for a few months.  Despite that evidence,  it  was  open  to
the Judge to find that the appellant had no  involvement  with  Christianity
in the months prior to his hearing in September 2015.

10. The appellant seeks to draw a distinction between going to  a  Christian
church and working towards baptism.  At  [79]  of  the  decision  the  Judge
accepts that the appellant has been baptised in the Tron Church

11. Between [81] & [85] the Judge finds  that  the  appellant  lied  in  his
first claim for asylum, and that the appellant refuses to  acknowledge  that
he fabricated that claim and so is persisting in a lie. At  [85]  the  Judge
finds that the appellant's refusal to accept the  First-tier's  decision  in
September  2015  mitigates  against  his  claim   to   have   converted   to
Christianity.

12. What the Judge does not do is reconcile his findings  between  [81]  and
[85] with the evidence of the appellant's four witnesses. It is  clear  from
the decision that the Judge accepts that the  appellant  has  been  baptised
and accepts that four members of his congregation of faith spoke in  support
of the appellant. The Judge finds a perceived delay in making a  claim,  and
a refusal to accept a decision from the tribunal  in  an  entirely  separate
claim to be the two factors which are determinative of this appeal.

13. The approach taken by the Judge is not safe. Despite  what  is  said  at
[88] of the decision that is no meaningful analysis of the evidence  of  the
four witnesses for the appellant. It is not  clear  why  the  Judge  rejects
their evidence. It is not clear why  the  Judge  places  no  weight  on  the
accepted fact that the appellant has been baptised a Christian.  The  result
is that there is an inadequacy of fact-finding  and  an  inadequacy  in  the
reasoning in the decision.

14.    In MK (duty to give reasons) Pakistan [2013]  UKUT  00641  (IAC),  it
was held that (i) It was axiomatic that a  determination  disclosed  clearly
the reasons for a  tribunal's  decision.  (ii)  If  a  tribunal  found  oral
evidence to be implausible, incredible or unreliable or  a  document  to  be
worth no weight whatsoever, it was necessary to say so in the  determination
and for such findings to be supported by reasons. A bare  statement  that  a
witness was not believed or that a  document  was  afforded  no  weight  was
unlikely to satisfy the requirement to give reasons.

15. As the decision is tainted by material  error  of  law  I  must  set  it
aside. I consider whether or not I can substitute my own decision, but  find
that I cannot do so because of  the  extent  of  the  further  fact  finding
necessary.



Remittal to First-Tier Tribunal

16. Under Part 3 paragraph 7.2(b) of the Upper Tribunal  Practice  Statement
of the 25th of September 2012 the case may be  remitted  to  the  First-tier
Tribunal if the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that:

   (a) the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before the First-
   tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other  opportunity  for  that  party's
   case to be put to and considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or


   (b) the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding which is  necessary
   in order for the decision in the appeal  to  be  re-made  is  such  that,
   having regard to the overriding objective in rule 2, it is appropriate to
   remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

17. In this case I have determined that the case should be remitted  because
a new fact-finding exercise is required.  None of the findings of  fact  are
to stand and a complete re-hearing is necessary.

18. I remit this case to the First-tier Tribunal sitting at  Glasgow  to  be
heard before any First-tier Judge other than Judge Bradshaw.

Decision

19. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is tainted  by  material  errors
of law.

20. I set aside the Judge's  decision  promulgated  on  18  July  2017.  The
appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be determined of new.


Signed                Paul Doyle
  Date 28 December 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle


