
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11405/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 30 October 2017                            |On 14 November 2017           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN


                                   Between

                                     AI
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr K Gayle, Counsel instructed by Elder Rahimi
Solicitors
     (London)
For the Respondent:    Mr P Singh, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Iran born on [ ] 1999 whose protection
    claim was refused by the respondent. His subsequent appeal to the First-
    tier Tribunal was heard by Judge Robertson.  In a decision promulgated
    on 20 April 2017 the appeal was dismissed.  The appellant is now
    appealing against that decision.

 2. The appellant's claim, in summary, is that he has converted to
    Christianity from Islam and would face a risk on return to Iran as a
    consequence.

 3. Judge Robertson did not find the appellant credible. The judge
    concluded, firstly, that the appellant was unable to establish that he
    had an interest in Christianity before he came to the UK (paragraph
    [27]); and, secondly, that the appellant had not become a genuine
    convert since arriving in the UK (paragraph [28] - [30])

 4. The judge's reason for rejecting the appellant's claim to have been
    considering conversion to Christianity in Iran was that there were a
    number of inconsistencies in the appellant's evidence. In particular,
    the appellant had in his screening interview spoken of wanting to
    convert to Christianity whilst in Iran and having been reported to the
    authorities as a consequence whereas in his subsequent statement he
    only stated that he wanted the freedom to choose his religion.

 5. The appellant's explanation for this discrepancy in oral evidence
    before the First-tier Tribunal was that his solicitors shouted at him
    and made him lose confidence.

 6. The judge placed considerable weight on the inconsistencies in the
    evidence and described the appellant's explanations for these as not
    credible. At paragraph [26 III] the judge stated that he did not accept
    the appellant's solicitors would have shouted at him resulting in him
    being unable to give an accurate or a truthful account.

 7. In considering whether, since arriving in the UK, the appellant had
    become a genuine convert to Christianity, the judge noted that the
    appellant was asked in cross-examination why he had not attended a
    Farsi speaking church and that his response was that he could not
    afford, and social services would not fund, him travelling to London to
    attend services.  The judge noted the absence of evidence from social
    services about the support available to the appellant.

 8. Evidence, both written and oral, in support of the appellant was given
    by Mr Sturdy, a trustee of Sundon Park Baptist Church.  Mr Sturdy
    stated that the appellant had been attending services regularly for
    about three months and had expressed an interest in becoming a
    Christian.  The judge gave this evidence little weight stating at
    paragraph [29]:

         "Whilst Mr Sturdy can give evidence that the Appellant has attended
         Church, he is not able to state that the Appellant is a genuine
         convert, and his evidence is therefore not akin to the evidence of
         a minister who has been able to communicate with the appellant and
         give his opinion that the Appellant is a genuine convert (see
         Dorodian 01/TH/01537)".

 9. The judge observed that the appellant had answered questions about
    Christianity correctly but stated that "the appellant is not
    unintelligent and the study of Christianity is not the same as
    conversion".

10. The appellant was 15 years old when he left Iran and a minor at the
    time of the hearing.  The judge commented on this at paragraph [23]
    where he stated:-

         "I take into account that the Appellant was nearly 16 years of age
         when the events that he claims led to his flight from Iran took
         place; therefore, whilst not an adult at the time, he was also not
         a very young child".

Grounds of appeal

11. The grounds of appeal argue that:

      a) the judge failed to take into account the appellant's age and that
         the discrepancies in his written evidence arose because of his
         vulnerability and the conduct of his solicitors who shouted at him
         and hindered his ability to give an accurate account.

      b) it was perverse to place weight on the absence of evidence from
         social services to explain why the appellant was not provided with
         funds to enable him to travel from Luton to London to attend a
         Farsi speaking church, given the obvious lack of financial funds to
         provide this to the appellant.

      c) the judge erred by making adverse credibility findings against the
         appellant because a minister Sundon Park Baptist Church did not
         give evidence when the church did not have a minister and a senior
         trustee attended, which in the circumstances was the most that
         could possibly be done.

      d) the judge should have taken into consideration that the appellant
         correctly answered all questions he was asked about Christianity.

Submissions

12. Mr Gayle accepted there was a discrepancy between the screening
    interview and Statement of Evidence but maintained that the judge erred
    by failing, when considering this discrepancy, to take into account the
    appellant's age and his account of being intimidated by his previous
    solicitors. He argued that the discrepancies say more about the
    solicitors than the appellant and the judge should have accepted the
    screening interview account.

13. Mr Gayle stated it was common sense and obvious that social services
    would not pay for the appellant to travel to London to attend church
    and there was no reason to expect him to obtain evidence from social
    services to prove this.

14. He also argued that the judge had failed to properly follow the
    guidance given in the case of Dorodian (01/TH/01537), which provides
    that generally a convert should be vouched for by a minister who
    attends the hearing. Mr Gayle argued that Dorodian had been applied to
    the maximum extent possible given the absence of a minister at the
    church the appellant attended and it was unclear what else he could
    have done.

15. Mr Singh argued that the judge was entitled to attach weight to the
    discrepancies in the appellant's evidence and that the judge had
    considered the appellant's age as well as his account of the solicitor
    intimidating him. His position was that the appellant's case amounted
    to no more than a disagreement with the way the judge had weighed the
    evidence. He also noted the absence of a witness statement from either
    the appellant or his former solicitor clarifying the reasons for the
    discrepancies.

 Consideration

16. There is a clear discrepancy between the appellant's screening
    interview and later statement. In his screening interview on 10 May
    2016 the appellant stated that his life was in danger in Iran because
    he wanted to convert to Christianity and his fanatic Islamist cousin
    beat him up and reported him to the authorities because of this.
    However, the appellant's statement dated 22 June 2016 made no mention
    of wanting to convert to Christianity whilst in Iran. Nor did he say in
    his statement that his cousin beat him up and reported him to the
    authorities. Rather, he stated that he did not like Islam and wanted
    the freedom to choose any religion he wants.  And he referred to a
    (different) cousin helping him leave Iran rather than to a cousin
    acting to him in a violent way.

17. Moreover, in his asylum interview on 23 September 2016 the appellant
    stated at paragraph 5 "Since I have arrived in this country I have
    decided to learn about a new religion". This is also inconsistent with
    the appellant's claim in the 10 May 2016 screening interview that
    whilst in Iran he wanted to convert to Christianity and was reported to
    the authorities.

18. The appellant has put forward two explanations for these discrepancies.
    The first is that he was only fifteen at the time he gave the
    statements and the second was that his solicitor acted improperly by
    intimidating and shouting at him.

19. In my view, the judge adequately addressed the issue of the appellant's
    age. He commented, at paragraph [23], that the appellant was under
    sixteen when the relevant events took place and that this was being
    taken into account. Given the nature and scale of the discrepancy, it
    was open to the judge to conclude that it undermined the appellant's
    credibility even though he was under sixteen.

20. The judge also adequately addressed the contention about the former
    solicitors, stating at paragraph [26III] that he did not accept they
    would have shouted at the appellant making him lose confidence and
    unable to give his account. There was no evidence (other than that
    given orally by the appellant) to support this serious allegation
    against the solicitors and it was for the judge, who had the benefit of
    hearing oral evidence from the appellant, to reach a conclusion on this
    point.

21. The difficulty for the appellant is that there is a clear inconsistency
    in his evidence and his only explanation for it is to blame his
    solicitors and highlight his age. I am satisfied that it was open to
    the judge, when weighing the inconsistency against the reasons given to
    explain it, to conclude that it damaged the appellant's credibility
    even though he was under 16 at the time.

22. In assessing whether the appellant genuinely converted, the judge gave
    only little weight to the evidence of Mr Sturdy, a trustee of the
    Sondon Park Baptist Church which the appellant attends, on the basis
    that he was not a minister and was unable to give an opinion, in the
    way a minister could, as to the genuineness of the appellant's faith
    and conversion.

23. Sundown Park Baptist Church did not at the time have a minister (as
    noted by the judge in the decision) and therefore it would clearly have
    been unrealistic to expect the appellant to adduce evidence from a
    minister. In these circumstances, the judge would have been in error if
    he had found the absence of evidence from a minister damaging to the
    appellant's credibility. But no such error has been made. The judge did
    not find the absence of a minister damaged the appellant's credibility.
    Rather, he noted that the weight that he could give to the opinion of a
    minister who would be able to opine on the genuineness of the
    appellant's faith was greater than that which he could give to a
    trustee of a church who could only comment on the regularity of the
    appellant's attendance.  It is unfortunate for the appellant that the
    church he attended lacked a minister but that does not change the fact
    that the burden of proof lies with the appellant to establish he is a
    genuine convert and it is for him to provide evidence of this. The
    evidence adduced by the appellant from the church (comprising of two
    letters in addition to the evidence of Mr Sturdy) did little to
    establish the genuineness of the conversion and therefore it was open
    to the judge to attach little weight to it.

24. The grounds of appeal describe as perverse the judge's finding that the
    appellant should have provided evidence to show why he was not provided
    funds to enable him to travel to London to attend a Farsi speaking
    church. I do not agree. At paragraph [26 VI] the judge commented on
    this stating:-

         "Mr Trevelyan submitted that it was plausible, with the pressures
         on social services, that the Appellant would not be offered the
         funds to travel to London to attend church.  However, there was
         nothing from the social worker to confirm what support was being
         offered to the Appellant.  This is evidence that would reasonably
         have been available to him and should have been provided (...),
         particularly when this would have provided him with the opportunity
         to meet with other Iranians who were also Christians."

25. The appellant has limited English. The evidence of Mr Sturdy was that
    he requires a translator for the services and that he has not attended
    classes to assist him in understanding the basics of the faith because
    of the language barrier. In these circumstances, it was entirely
    appropriate for the judge to explore why the appellant is not making
    the effort, given his professed interest in Christianity, to attend a
    service in a language he understands. It is not obvious social services
    would not provide any support in this regard and the judge was entitled
    to take note of the absence of evidence about the support available to
    the appellant.

26. The grounds highlight that the appellant was able to answer correctly
    questions posed to him about Christianity. The judge has not ignored
    this - the issue is specifically addressed at paragraph [30] where the
    judge notes the appellant is intelligent and capable of studying about
    Christianity. This conclusion must be understood in the context of the
    decision as a whole where the judge has found the appellant to not have
    given a credible account. Another judge may have given greater weight
    to the appellant's knowledge of Christianity but this does not mean
    Judge Robertson made an error of law by finding the appellant's
    knowledge reflected an ability to learn rather than evidence of faith
    and being a genuine convert.

27. In my judgment, the judge has taken into account all of the material
    evidence and, applying the correct standard and burden of proof, has
    reached a conclusion based on that evidence which was open to him.


Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain a material error
of law and stands.


|                                     |                                     |
|Signed                               |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan |                                     |
|                                     |Dated: 10 November 2017              |



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the appellant is
granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
indirectly identify him or any member of his family.  This direction
applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.  Failure to comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

