
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/11488/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 18 November 2019                  |On 28 November 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                     M D
                         (anonymity directioN MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules  2008,
I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper  Tribunal  or  a  Court  directs
otherwise, no report  of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of  publication
thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the Appellant  or  members  of
her family. This direction applies to,  amongst  others,  all  parties.  Any
failure to comply with this direction could give rise to contempt  of  court
proceedings.


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Patyna, Counsel, instructed by Duncan Lewis
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms R Bassi, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Hembrough ("the judge"), promulgated on 9 July 2019,  in
    which he dismissed the  Appellant's  appeal  against  the  Respondent's
    refusal of her protection and human rights claims.

 2. In essence, the Appellant's case was based upon the following  matters.
    She is an Albanian national and is openly  gay.  As  a  result  of  her
    sexual orientation, she had been disowned and  threatened  by  her  own
    family, violently assaulted by the father of her partner, L, and abused
    by a police officer whilst in Albania. She claims  to  be  at  risk  of
    persecution and Article 3 ill-treatment  in  that  country,  could  not
    receive sufficient state protection, could  not  reasonably  internally
    relocate, and would face very significant  obstacles  to  reintegration
    into Albanian society, with reference to paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of the
    Immigration Rules ("the Rules").

 3. In refusing the claims, the Respondent accepted that the Appellant  was
    a lesbian, but did not accept that she had been abused by her partner's
    father or  a  police  officer.  It  was  said  that  she  could  obtain
    protection from the authorities and internally relocate away  from  her
    home in the North of Albania.

The judge's decision

 4. The judge, like the  Respondent,  accepted  that  the  Appellant  is  a
    lesbian. He made the additional findings of primary fact favourable  to
    the Appellant:

          a) she wished to live openly in Albania with her partner;

          b) she had been abused by what is described as a  "rogue"  police
             officer in Tirana;

          c) she had been assaulted by L's father;

          d) she suffers from severe depression and symptoms  of  PTSD  and
             was on appropriate medication which had in fact  increased  in
             the lead up to the hearing;

          e) that she had been fired from a previous job on account of  her
             sexuality.

 5. The judge concluded that the Appellant was at risk in her home area  of
    Kukes, but would not be elsewhere in Albania, could  obtain  sufficient
    state protection, and could reasonably internally  relocate,  including
    going to live with her partner in the town of Durres, some 30km west of
    Tirana. Whilst accepting that there was societal discrimination against
    the LGBT community in Albania, additional problems suffered by lesbians
    were not sufficient to show a risk of persecution. He was of  the  view
    that the Appellant would be able to work and receive  support  from  L,
    who, in the judge's view, had not been living  in  hiding  after  being
    removed to Albania from the Netherlands. At [63], he concluded that:

         "It seems to me that if [L] can thrive and survive  in  Tirana  and
         Durres then there is no obstacle to the Appellant doing the same."

 6. In respect of the Appellant's mental health, the judge found  that  she
    would be able to work at some stage, that her condition  would  improve
    upon being reunited with L, and that there was no significant  risk  of
    suicide or self-harm. Finally, the judge concluded that his findings on
    relevant  protection-based  issues  meant  that  there  were  no  "very
    significant obstacles" to reintegration under  paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)
    of the Rules.

The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

 7. The five grounds of appeal can be summarised as  follows.  First,  that
    the judge erred in his assessment of medical evidence  from  Dr  Juliet
    Cohen,  particularly   in   relation   to   the   Appellant's   overall
    vulnerability, the  reasonableness  of  internal  relocation,  and  the
    suicide issue. Second, that the judge failed to consider the  issue  of
    risk elsewhere in Albania on a correct footing and with regard  to  the
    relevant country information. Third, the judge failed  to  take  proper
    account of the Appellant's vulnerability when assessing  her  evidence.
    Fourth,  the  judge  made  irrational  findings  on  material  matters,
    including those related to the internal relocation  issue.  Fifth,  the
    judge failed  to  give  separate  and  adequate  consideration  to  the
    paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) issue.

 8. Permission to appeal was refused by the First-tier Tribunal but granted
    by Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley on 16 September 2019.

The hearing

 9. The Respondent did not provide a rule 24 response in this case.

10. Ms Patyna relied on the grounds of appeal and  her  skeleton  argument.
    Her oral submissions were in line with the grounds and the matters  set
    out in the skeleton argument. I intend no  disrespect  by  not  setting
    them out in greater detail here.

11. Ms Bassi submitted that there were no material errors overall. However,
    she did acknowledge some difficulties with the judge's treatment of  Dr
    Cohen's evidence as it related to the Appellant's ability to find  work
    and the risk of suicide.

12. At the conclusion of the hearing I announced to the parties my decision
    that the judge had materially erred in law as  regards  the  issues  of
    internal relocation, risk of suicide, and  paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)  of
    the Rules. I reserved my decision in respect of the risk of persecution
    and/or serious  harm  in  Tirana  or  other  locations  away  from  the
    Appellant's home area.

Decision on error of law

The risk issue

13. After further consideration,  I  have  concluded  that  the  judge  did
    materially her in respect of the  question  of  whether  the  Appellant
    would be at risk of persecution or Article 3 ill-treatment in locations
    away from her home area.

14. Whilst the judge was entitled to use BF (Tirana - gay men)  Albania  CG
    [2019] UKUT 00093 (IAC) ("BF") as what may be described as  a  starting
    point for the consideration of risk, the  obvious  distinguishing  fact
    that the Appellant is  a  gay  woman  called  for  additional,  careful
    analysis. Such analysis was required  in  respect  of  not  simply  the
    attitude of the authorities towards lesbians, but also  in  respect  of
    the potential risks from non-state actors.

15. In undertaking his assessment, the  judge  was  entitled  to  make  the
    observations that he did in respect of Dr Young's report, and there  is
    no challenge to this in any event. The judge was also entitled to  take
    into account the information  contained  in  the  respondent's  Country
    Policy and Information Note ("CPIN") on sexual orientation  and  gender
    identity in Albania, version 5.0, published in April 2019. The evidence
    contained therein does indicate that real efforts have been made by the
    Albanian government to better  the  situation  of  the  LGBT  community
    (there being no apparent distinction drawn in the  country  information
    cited in the CPIN between gay men and women).

16.  The  judge's  error  lies  in  his  consideration   of   the   "double
    discrimination" submission made by Ms  Patyna.  It  is  clear  that  he
    refers to the point in [50] of his decision. However, it is the  source
    of country information from which this phrase was taken (and  to  which
    the judge was referred) that is important. Section 4.4  of  the  United
    Nation's Development Programme report on  the  situation  of  the  LGBT
    community  in  Eastern  Europe,  dated  22  November  2017  ("the  UNDP
    report"), includes the following passages on the position  of  lesbians
    in Albania:

         "Lesbian women are less visible than gay men  in  Albania,  because
         they suffer a heightened  level  of  violence  from  close  family.
         Violence against women in Albania  is  a  pervasive  practice,  and
         lesbians are not exempt from  this.  On  the  contrary,  they  face
         double discrimination and violence,  as  a  result  both  of  their
         gender  and  their  minority  sexual   orientation.   This   double
         discrimination means that  lesbians  are  particularly  vulnerable,
         often becoming invisible and/or dependent. Due  to  the  widespread
         incidence  of  domestic  violence,  Albania  has  reinforced  legal
         provisions  and  judicial  procedures  against  the   perpetrators.
         Domestic violence, sexual harassment, injuries caused from domestic
         violence, suicide motivated by violence,  forced  sexual  relations
         and domestic violence on the grounds of SOGI are  all  criminalized
         by the Penal Code. Nevertheless, the prevalence of violence against
         women in Albania continues to be  high  and  is  not  appropriately
         punished. Lesbians are among  the  frontline  victims  of  domestic
         violence and as a consequence they may  often  attempt  suicide  to
         escape their unbearable family circumstances. A  fear  of  violence
         and ostracism keeps them hidden in the closet. In the  2010  report
         on enlargement,  LGBTI  organizations  informed  ILGA  Europe  that
         lesbians have to hide their  sexual  orientation  in  Albania.  The
         situation has not  changed  signi?cantly  and  lesbians  are  still
         invisible within the domestic sphere and public, because of fear of
         violence.  Domestic  violence  remains  an  issue  of  concern  for
         lesbians. In addition to facing  domestic  violence,  lesbians  are
         often isolated at  home  and  prevented  from  having  physical  or
         virtual contact with friends.

         ...

         Violence in public is targeted  against  lesbians  when  they  make
         their sexual orientation visible. They are  insulted,  pushed  away
         and thrown out of bars. They frequently do not report instances  of
         domestic and public violence to the police, because of the fear  of
         being stigmatized and insulted by police of?cers. Because  lesbians
         do not report violence, and because police  of?cers  do  not  react
         swiftly in response to domestic violence, acts of violence  against
         lesbians remain unprosecuted and  unpunished.  Legal  sanctions  on
         domestic violence  are  not  enforced  in  practice.  Consequently,
         violence against lesbian women  is  not  addressed.  Lesbians  face
         prejudice,   discrimination   in   healthcare    and    educational
         institutions as well, because of the low level acceptance of  LGBTI
         people by health and educational service providers."

17. This  evidence  had  to  be  assessed  together  with  the  Appellant's
    particular circumstances, including the fact that  she  would  wish  to
    live openly with her partner, that she had suffered actual harm  and/or
    threats from her own family, the family of her partner,  and  a  police
    officer. With this in mind, the ground of appeal is  made  out  on  the
    basis that the  judge  failed  to  provide  adequate  reasons  for  his
    conclusion that: a) the additional  problems  faced  by  gay  women  in
    Albania did not meet the threshold of persecution (or for  that  matter
    serious harm); and/or b) the Appellant was not at risk of  persecution,
    given the particular facts of her case.

The internal relocation, paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi), and suicide issues

18. The judge accepted Dr Cohen's expertise and  her  diagnosis  of  severe
    depression and symptoms consistent with PTSD. Then, at [67], the  judge
    finds that Dr Cohen's view that the Appellant was, as at  the  time  of
    the report in March 2019, unfit for work, was "somewhat at  odds"  with
    her ability to have travelled across Europe to the United Kingdom,  and
    to have provided her legal representatives  with  "reasonably  coherent
    instructions".  Further,  at  [68],  the  judge   inferred   that   the
    Appellant's mental health condition would improve upon  being  reunited
    with L in Albania and  that  she  would  be  able  to  access  relevant
    medication.

19. The judge has failed  to  provide  an  adequately  reasoned  basis  for
    effectively going behind the clear conclusion  of  Dr  Cohen  that  the
    Appellant was not fit for work (see paragraph 56 at A89 of  bundle  B).
    There  was  no  evidence  from  healthcare   professionals   that   the
    Appellant's mental  health  had  improved  since  March  2019.  It  was
    acknowledged by  the  judge  that  her  medication  had  in  fact  been
    increased in the run-up to the hearing. To the extent that L's presence
    might  have  been  a  factor  ameliorating  the  obstacles  to  finding
    employment, the judge appears to have left out of account the fact that
    Dr Cohen was fully aware of L's existence,  but  nonetheless  concluded
    that the Appellant would be at heightened risk of suicide upon  return.
    Thus, if the risk of suicide would have increased upon  return  despite
    the presence of the partner, a conclusion that the re-unification would
    assist the Appellant in finding work or lead to a material  improvement
    in her overall mental health required specific consideration and  clear
    reasons. Such reasons are, with respect, absent.

20. A further point, acknowledged by Ms  Bassi  as  having  merit,  is  the
    judge's view that any unfitness to work did not represent a  "permanent
    state of affairs". It may of course be  the  case  that  the  Appellant
    would, in some unspecified number of years' time, be in a  position  to
    find employment. However, that is not an appropriate yardstick to adopt
    when  considering  the  issues  of  the  reasonableness   of   internal
    relocation, suicide risk, and "very significant  obstacles"  under  the
    Rules.

21. The judge's reliance upon the Appellant's ability to have travelled  to
    the United Kingdom and then given reasonably coherent  instructions  to
    her legal representatives is not sufficient to "cure" the  errors  made
    in respect of Dr Cohen's evidence. Aside from the first  of  those  two
    considerations being historical in  nature,  the  judge  was  bound  to
    consider the expert evidence and provide  adequate  reasons  for  going
    behind it, if that is what he  intended  to  do.  Here,  this  has  not
    occurred.

22. In respect of the suicide issue, the judge was  wrong  to  have  stated
    that there  had  been  no  suicide  attempts  in  the  past.  Dr  Cohen
    specifically mentions a  "serious"  attempt  in  paragraph  55  of  her
    report. Further, whilst Dr Cohen did recognise  that  the  relationship
    with the partner acted as a "protective factor",  as  mentioned  above,
    she also concluded that the Appellant would be at  heightened  risk  of
    suicide upon  return,  notwithstanding  the  value  attributed  to  the
    relationship.  Finally,  at  [73]  the  judge  places  weight  on   his
    conclusion that the Appellant's fear on return  was  not  well-founded,
    and that this undermined the suicide risk. It  is  the  case  that  the
    absence of a  well-founded  fear  of  persecution  is  not  necessarily
    decisive of a suicide risk, a point made in Y [2009] EWCA  Civ  362,  a
    case cited in the same paragraph.

23. I am satisfied that there was no rational basis upon  which  the  judge
    could have concluded that L was thriving in Tirana and/or  Durres,  and
    that there was no obstacle to the Appellant doing the same.  The  judge
    found that the partner had not been living  in  hiding  throughout  the
    relevant period. Even if he was also entitled to conclude that she  had
    had to go out to shops to buy provisions and suchlike, there were other
    evidential matters which have either been overlooked or, if  they  were
    not, render  the  conclusion  in  question  irrational.  These  matters
    include the following:

          a) there was no evidence to indicate that L was living in  "close
             proximity" to her family;

          b) L had been ostracised by her family;

          c) L's evidence was that her family did not know of her return to
             Albania from the Netherlands;

          d) L is herself of course gay  and  subject  to  what  the  judge
             accepted was societal discrimination;

          e) in contrast to her partner, the Appellant suffers from serious
             mental  health  problems  and  had  suffered   from   specific
             incidents of abuse in the past.

24. The errors set out in paragraphs 18-23, above, are all material to  the
    issues of internal relocation,  the  risk  of  suicide,  and  paragraph
    276ADE(1)(vi) of the Rules. It is not clear to me that the judge has in
    fact undertaken a comprehensive internal relocation assessment at  all.
    However, even on the premise that he has, it has not  been  done  on  a
    correct footing, given the errors  made  relating  to  the  Appellant's
    mental health and other relevant circumstances. In terms of the suicide
    risk, the threshold is very high, but  again  the  assessment  of  this
    issue  has  not  been  undertaken  on  an  adequate  basis.  The  "very
    significant obstacles" issue was essentially rejected on account of the
    findings made under the protection claim. However, as a number of these
    findings  are  flawed,  so  too  is  the  conclusion  under   paragraph
    276ADE(1)(vi).

25. In all the circumstances, I set the judge's decision aside.

Remaking the decision

26. Both representatives were agreed that I should retain  this  matter  in
    the Upper Tribunal and remake the decision.

27. In so doing, I have considered the evidence as a  whole.  Although  the
    Appellant did not attend the hearing to  give  oral  evidence,  I  have
    assessed her written evidence in the context of her being a  vulnerable
    witness at all material times. There has been no specific challenge  to
    Dr Cohen's report by Ms Bassi. I place considerable  weight  upon  this
    evidence.

28. Ms Bassi submitted that there would be no  risk  to  the  Appellant  in
    Tirana. She had nothing to add in respect of  the  internal  relocation
    issue. Ms Patyna relied on her two skeleton arguments,  the  particular
    facts of the Appellant's case, and the country information contained in
    the UNDP report.

Risk in the home area

29. There is no basis upon which to disturb the core findings by the First-
    tier Tribunal that the Appellant is a lesbian, that she would  wish  to
    live openly in Albania with her partner, and that she  is  at  risk  of
    persecution for a Convention reason and Article 3 ill-treatment in  her
    home area of Kukes.

Risk elsewhere in Albania

30. The first contentious issue to be determined is that of risk  in  areas
    away from Kukes;  in  particular,  but  not  confined  to,  Tirana.  In
    addressing this issue, I have had regard to the  oral  submissions,  Ms
    Patyna's two skeleton arguments, and all of the country information  to
    which I have been referred.

31. It is quite clear from the country information  as  a  whole  that  the
    Appellant would be at risk of persecution and serious harm in the  more
    conservative, rural areas of Albania. The respondent has not  suggested
    otherwise.

32. I have specifically taken account of the passages in the CPIN to  which
    Ms Bassi referred me at the hearing, namely paragraphs 4.1.4, 4.3, 4.6,
    4.8, 5.0, 5.6, and 5.8. In summary, the information  contained  therein
    relates to the efforts of  the  Albanian  authorities  to  enhance  the
    rights of the  LGBT  community  as  a  whole,  improvements  in  police
    training, education of the population as a whole, and access to housing
    and employment.

33. I have also taken into account the country  information  cited  in  the
    reasons for refusal letter, some of which is of  essentially  the  same
    effect as that referred to in the preceding paragraph.

34. The country guidance decision  of  BF  avowedly  deals  only  with  the
    position of gay men  in  respect  of  risk,  protection,  and  internal
    relocation in Tirana (see, for example, paragraph 7 of  the  decision).
    Notwithstanding this, it would be wrong to simply  ignore  the  overall
    analysis from the Upper  Tribunal.  Much  of  the  evidence  considered
    related, at least on its face,  to  the  LGBT  community  as  a  whole,
    seemingly without distinction between gay men and women.  The  specific
    country guidance issued by the Upper Tribunal reads as follows:

         "(i)     Particular care must be exercised when assessing the  risk
         of violence and the lack of sufficiency of  protection  for  openly
         gay men whose home area is outside Tirana, given  the  evidence  of
         openly gay men from  outside  Tirana  encountering  violence  as  a
         result of their sexuality. Such cases will turn on  the  particular
         evidence presented.

         (ii)     Turning to the position in Tirana, in general,  an  openly
         gay  man,  by  virtue  of  that  fact  alone,  would  not  have  an
         objectively well-founded fear of serious  harm  or  persecution  on
         return to Tirana.

         (iii)    There is only very limited  evidence  that  an  individual
         would be traced to Tirana by operation of either  the  registration
         system or criminal checks at the airport. However, it is  plausible
         that a person might be traced via family or other connections being
         made on enquiry in Tirana. Whether  an  openly  gay  man  might  be
         traced to Tirana by family members or others  who  would  wish  him
         harm is a question for determination on the evidence in  each  case
         depending on the motivation of the family and  the  extent  of  its
         hostility.

         (iv)     There exists in Tirana a  generally  effective  system  of
         protection should an openly gay man face a risk  of  harm  in  that
         city or from elsewhere in Albania.

         (v)      An openly gay  man  may  face  discrimination  in  Tirana,
         particularly in the areas of employment  and  healthcare.  However,
         whether considered individually or  cumulatively,  in  general  the
         level of such discrimination is not sufficiently serious to  amount
         to persecution. Discrimination on grounds of sexual orientation  is
         unlawful in Albania and there are avenues to seek redress. Same-sex
         relationships are not legally recognised in Albania. However, there
         is no evidence that this  causes  serious  legal  difficulties  for
         relationships between openly gay men.

         (vi)     In general, it will not be unduly harsh for an openly  gay
         man to relocate to Tirana, but each case must be  assessed  on  its
         own  facts,  taking  into  account   an   individual's   particular
         circumstances, including  education,  health  and  the  reason  why
         relocation is being addressed."

35. The Upper Tribunal's decision has recently been upheld by the Court  of
    Appeal (see BF (Albania) [2019] EWCA Civ 1781).

36. Having had regard to the country information as a whole, including that
    considered by the Upper Tribunal in BF, I conclude that  the  Appellant
    does not face a real risk of  persecution  or  serious  harm  from  the
    authorities. I take full account of the societal attitudes towards  gay
    women in particular (a matter to which I will return, below),  together
    with the fact that members of the  police  are  of  course  drawn  from
    society. Having said  that,  the  weight  of  the  country  information
    indicates that there has been genuine  progress  on  the  part  of  the
    authorities, not simply at an overarching governmental level, but  also
    in  terms  of  police  training  and  avenues  of  redress  insofar  as
    misbehaviour by particular officers is concerned.

37. I reach a  different  conclusion  in  respect  of  the  risk  from  the
    population at large.

38. The first point to make here is that I  regard  it  as  appropriate  to
    depart from the country guidance issued by what was then the Asylum and
    Immigration Tribunal in MK (lesbians) Albania CG [2009] UKAIT 00036.  I
    do so  for  two  reasons.  First,  there  is  current,  cogent  country
    information on the position of lesbians in Albania  which  is  markedly
    different from that considered in MK. Second, the relevant  conclusions
    in MK were based in large part on the issue of  discretion  as  regards
    how a gay woman might reasonably be expected to  live  her  life.  That
    concept was of course disapproved by HJ (Iran) [2011] 1 AC 596.

39. The core item of country information dealing directly with the  current
    situation of gay women  in  Albania  is  the  UNDP  report,  quoted  in
    paragraph 16, above.  Without  replicating  it  here,  its  content  is
    striking and, I conclude, compelling. Gay women face what is  described
    as  "double  discrimination",  arising  from  both  their  gender   and
    sexuality. They  are  described  as  "particularly  vulnerable",  being
    subject to the risk of violence from non-state actors, particularly  if
    their sexual orientation is made visible.

40.  The  particular  vulnerability  of  lesbians  highlighted  in  country
    information is an important backdrop to the Appellant's  circumstances.
    She would wish to live openly as a gay woman,  thereby  attracting  the
    adverse attention of the population in which she would be  living.  She
    cannot be expected to reside in some sort of an artificial "bubble"  in
    which she can only go to certain places at certain times.  It  is  also
    the case that she has in fact been the victim of a violent assault by a
    non-state actor, namely her partner's father. Whilst his  actions  were
    targeted,  what  he  did  is  entirely  consistent  with  the   country
    information on societal attitudes towards gay women.

41. I take into account the Appellant's particular vulnerability by  virtue
    of her very poor mental health. This goes, in my view, to the threshold
    of when violence, threats, and/or discrimination crosses  the  line  of
    persecution and/or serious harm.

42. By living openly, I conclude that there is a serious possibility of her
    being the  victim  of  violent  actions  and/or  very  significant  and
    pervasive discrimination. The consequences of  the  risk  materialising
    would  constitute  persecution  and/or  serious  harm.  Thus,  the  two
    elements of "risk" referred  to  by  Hickinbottam  LJ  in  [27]  of  BF
    (Albania) are made out.

43. If the Appellant chose not to live openly, it is abundantly clear  that
    this would be motivated entirely by a wish to avoid persecution  and/or
    serious harm.

44. The question then arises as to whether there would be a sufficiently of
    protection for this particular Appellant. Having regard  simply  to  BF
    and the general country information, I take  as  a  starting  point  an
    ability and willingness on the part  of  the  Albanian  authorities  to
    provide appropriate protection to members of the LGBT  community.  What
    is important though, is that the generalised position (which, in  light
    of BF and the country information in  general,  does  not  specifically
    deal with the situation of lesbians) must be assessed in light  of  the
    Appellant's particular circumstances.

45. First and foremost, she is a gay woman who would wish to  live  openly.
    In that sense, she is precisely the sort of person who would be exposed
    to the  risk  of  violence  on  a  regular  basis  due  to  her  sexual
    orientation being "visible". The UNDP  report  referred  to  previously
    states that:

         "They [lesbians] frequently do not report instances of domestic and
         public violence to  the  police,  because  of  the  fear  of  being
         stigmatized and insulted by police of?cers. Because lesbians do not
         report violence, and because police of?cers do not react swiftly in
         response to domestic violence, acts of  violence  against  lesbians
         remain unprosecuted and unpunished.  Legal  sanctions  on  domestic
         violence are not enforced in practice."

46. Second, whilst it is true that  the  Appellant  had  not  reported  the
    assault on her by the police officer to other authorities, it remains a
    fact that she had been abused  by  an  officer  representing  the  very
    authorities to which she would be expected to approach if/when acts  of
    violence  were  committed  against  her  by   non-state   actors.   Her
    willingness and/or ability to do so must be seen in this context.

47. Third, the Appellant's extremely poor mental health is also relevant to
    the issue of protection. Her ability and/or willingness to approach the
    authorities would, I conclude, be materially reduced as  a  consequence
    of her conditions.

48. Fourth, the Appellant's  case  involves  not  simply  the  question  of
    protection from the population as a whole, but also in respect  of  her
    partner's family,  in  particular  the  father  (who,  of  course,  has
    previously located and attacked the  Appellant).  Whether  or  not  the
    father is well-connected to the police force in or around Tirana, it is
    a fact that he and his family live in the general area. The father  has
    indicated his outright antipathy towards the Appellant and there is  no
    reason whatsoever to suggest that this would somehow dissipate over the
    course of time.

49. Taking all relevant circumstances into account, I conclude that on  the
    particular facts of this case, there would not be sufficient protection
    for the Appellant against the risks from non-state actors.

50. On this basis, the Appellant is a refugee and a  person  whose  removal
    would violate Article 3, and she succeeds in her appeal.

Internal relocation

51. If I am wrong in respect of the risk in areas away from Kukes, I go  on
    and address the question of internal relocation. In so doing, I  direct
    myself to the useful summary of guiding principles set out by the Court
    of Appeal in AS (Afghanistan) [2019] 1 WLR 5345, at [61]. The essential
    question is:

         "...whether  in  such  a  case  "taking  account  of  all  relevant
         circumstances pertaining to the claimant and his country of origin,
         ... it is reasonable to expect the claimant to relocate or  whether
         it would be unduly harsh to expect him to do so."

52. Such circumstances include a person's gender, health, life experiences,
    skills and education, familial ties, and the  societal  environment  in
    which they would find themselves.

53. I now set out the factors which I regard as relevant to the  assessment
    of the reasonableness of relocating to Tirana  or  another  urban  area
    within Albania.

54. First, the Appellant is a lesbian who would wish to  live  openly  with
    her partner in Albania. Even if the  difficulties  faced  by  doing  so
    would not constitute persecution or Article 3 ill-treatment, they would
    nonetheless be significant. It is not simply  a  question  of  societal
    discrimination against members of the LGBT community in general: on the
    basis of the  country  information  there  is  "double  discrimination"
    against lesbians.

55. On any view, the UNDP report quoted at paragraph 16,  above,  paints  a
    bleak picture for the position of lesbians. Given  that  the  Appellant
    would wish to live openly, it is quite clear to me that  she  would  be
    met with serious discrimination from members of the public and, in  all
    likelihood, various agencies  of  the  state  as  well,  including  law
    enforcement. If she to live openly as a gay woman, it is equally  clear
    that this would only be because of the consequences of  not  doing  so.
    Either way, a core  aspect  of  her  identity  would  be  significantly
    compromised. This is a highly relevant factor in the overall assessment
    of reasonableness.

56. Second, even if there was sufficient state protection  insofar  as  the
    issue of risk is concerned, it does not  follow  that  the  authorities
    would  be  able  and/or  willing  to  prevent  the  type   of   "double
    discrimination" discussed in the country information quoted  above  (on
    the premise that such discrimination does not amount to persecution  or
    serious harm. Further, it is of relevance that the Appellant  has  been
    abused by the police in the past, and this,  combined  with  all  other
    relevant matters, would make it extremely unlikely that she would  wish
    to approach the authorities in the future.

57. Third, the Appellant suffers from serious mental  health  problems,  in
    particular severe depression. Whilst there has been no formal diagnosis
    of PTSD, Dr Cohen makes it very clear that she presents with  a  number
    of symptoms consistent with that condition. I find that her poor mental
    health has persisted over time, and is certainly no better now than  it
    was in March 2019. In addition, I note  the  evidence  at  A102-105  of
    bundle B. This comes from a CBT Therapist and is dated 4 October  2018.
    It contains scores used in self-evaluation  of  mental  health  at  the
    beginning and the end of 17 sessions of CBT. What is striking about the
    scores is that rather than reducing after the course of therapy, one of
    them remain the same and the other actually increased. Further, I  find
    that the Appellant's medication was increased in the  lead  up  to  the
    hearing before the First-tier Tribunal.

58. The consequences flowing from  the  very  poor  mental  health  are  as
    follows. It is abundantly clear that the Appellant is not fit for  work
    at present,  and  it  is  highly  unlikely  that  she  will  be  for  a
    considerable period of time. The possibility of her obtaining  relevant
    medication in Albania does not in any meaningful  sense  go  to  either
    reduce the seriousness of her current state  of  health  or  indeed  to
    mitigate the likely adverse  consequences  flowing  from  the  fact  of
    removal to Albania, the country in which she has experienced  traumatic
    events in the past. Although I accept that her partner's presence would
    act  as  a  protective  factor  of  sorts,  it  would  not  prevent   a
    deterioration in mental health, including the risk  of  suicide  and/or
    self-harm. This is consistent with Dr Cohen's  evidence.  Even  if  the
    risk of suicide and/or self-harm were not sufficiently high to meet the
    Article 3 threshold, it would nonetheless represent a  highly  relevant
    factor in terms of the reasonableness of relocation.

59. Fourth,  the  previous  two  factors  are  of  course  related  to  the
    Appellant's past experiences. When last in Albania she  was  threatened
    by her own family and violently assaulted by her partner's father and a
    police officer. From a purely  subjective  perspective,  the  Appellant
    would be fearful of residing there and attempting to  function  at  any
    relatively reasonable level within society.

60. Fifth, the Appellant is well-educated and no doubt has relevant skills.
    Whilst these are  in  principle  factors  weighing  in  favour  of  the
    reasonableness of relocation, in the present case they  are  more  than
    counterbalanced  by  the  inability  to  work  and  other   significant
    restrictions imposed by her mental  health.  Indeed,  I  bear  in  mind
    accepted fact that the Appellant had previously being fired from a  job
    as a direct result of her sexuality. This amounts to a clear indication
    of the type of significant obstacles in her path, even  if  her  mental
    health problems permitted her to seek employment.

61. Sixth, on the evidence before me, the Appellant's partner is  certainly
    not thriving in Albania: at most, she is surviving. I find that she has
    been entirely ostracised by her own family and in fact lives in fear of
    being discovered by them. She does not live  in  "close  proximity"  to
    them. I accept that she has been staying with a friend  in  a  flat  in
    Durres, and that she has been working part-time in the evenings. I  see
    nothing implausible in the claim that she is not being going out  on  a
    regular basis to the shops or for any other reason. The fact  that  she
    lives with a friend gives rise to the distinct possibility that  it  is
    this person who undertakes such tasks. In any event,  the  partner,  as
    with the Appellant, is lesbian and would wish to live openly in her gay
    relationship. The couple would  both  be  living  under  the  cloud  of
    significant discrimination in their day-to-day  lives.  Therefore,  the
    presence  of  the  partner,  whilst  of  emotional  importance  to  the
    Appellant, does not represent a significant factor  in  favour  of  the
    reasonableness of relocation.

62. Seventh, it is quite obvious from  what  has  been  said  already  that
    neither the Appellant nor her partner would have any form  of  familial
    support in Albania. Further, in light of the country information I have
    referred to relating to the position of lesbians, it is  unlikely  that
    there  would  be  meaningful  and  effective  support  from  any   LBGT
    organisations.

63. Bringing all of the above together, I have no hesitation in  concluding
    that it would be unreasonable, or to put it another way, unduly  harsh,
    for the Appellant to internally relocate anywhere in Albania.

64. As the Appellant would face a real risk of persecution for a Convention
    reason in her home area, and that it would be unreasonable for  her  to
    internally relocate, she is a refugee and a person whose removal  would
    violate Article 3, and her appeal succeeds on that basis.





Paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of the Rules

65. On the basis of essentially  the  same  factors  considered  under  the
    heading of internal relocation, I also find that the Appellant,  as  at
    the date of her protection and human rights claims  in  December  2016,
    would have faced "very significant  obstacles"  to  reintegration  into
    Albanian society. I am satisfied that the  situation  for  lesbians  in
    Albania was no better then than  it  is  now.  In  addition,  there  is
    evidence before me to show that the Appellant was suffering from mental
    health problems in early 2017 (see  for  example  the  Rule  35  report
    contained in annex J1 of the Respondent's appeal bundle). Even  if  the
    mental health conditions were not as severe as they currently are,  the
    combination  of  factors  would  nonetheless  have  met  the  stringent
    threshold  required  by  paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)  of  the  Rules,   in
    conjunction with the broad evaluative  assessment  required  by  Kamara
    [2016] 4 WLR 152.

66. The Appellant also succeeds on Article 8  grounds,  with  reference  to
    paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi).

67. In all  the  circumstances,  it  is  unnecessary  for  me  to  reach  a
    conclusion on the suicide issue.

Anonymity

68. I continue the anonymity direction made by the First-tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

I re-make the decision by allowing the Appellant's  appeal  on  the  grounds
that the Respondent's refusal of her protection claim is in  breach  of  the
United Kingdom's obligations under the  Refugee  Convention,  and  that  the
Respondent's refusal of her human rights claim is unlawful under  section  6
of the Human Rights Act 1998, with particular reference to Articles 3 and  8
ECHR.

Signed      [pic]            Date: 25 November 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

If a fee has been paid or is payable, I have considered making a  fee  award
and decided to make a full fee award of �140.00.


Signed      [pic]            Date:  25 November 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor
