
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11458/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons promulgated       |
|On 8 April 2019                      |On 11 April 2019                     |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                            SYED KEYVAN ESBALANI
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr G Brown instructed by Parker Rhodes Hickmotts
Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mrs R Pettersen Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer.


                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS

    1. The appellant  appeals  with  permission  a  decision  of  First-Tier
       Tribunal Judge Holt promulgated on 1 November 2018 in which the Judge
       dismissed the appellant's  appeal  on  protection  and  human  rights
       grounds.

Background


    2. The appellant is a citizen  of  Iran  born  on  21  March  1972.  The
       appellant claims he will be at risk on return to Iran as a result  of
       his conversion to Christianity.

    3. The Judge had the benefit of both seeing and  hearing  oral  evidence
       given as well as being able  to  consider  the  documentary  evidence
       filed in accordance with directions. The appellant had the benefit of
       supportive evidence given by the Rev Benson Kimaru as  noted  in  the
       decision.

    4. The Judge sets out the core finding at [17] of the  decision  in  the
       following terms:

           "I have considered the credibility of the appellant's claim most
           carefully applying the lower standard of proof. Having done so I
           conclude that the claim was not credible."

    5. The Judge makes six core findings in support of  that  conclusion  as
       follows:

             i. The Judge  was  not  satisfied  that  the  appellant  was  a
                Christian in Iran or attended a house church there  for  the
                reasons set  out  at  [20  (i-vi)]  of  the  decision  under
                challenge.

            ii. The Judge was not satisfied regarding the claim there was  a
                raid on the house church as the account of the  raid  lacked
                detail and the "a ring of truth" for the reasons set out  at
                [21 (i-iv)] of the decision.

           iii. The Judge was not satisfied about  the  appellant's  alleged
                conversion [22] for which the Judge notes the appellant  has
                given two occasions namely December 2017/January  2018  and,
                alternative, when he was baptised in  the  UK  although  the
                Judge noted the baptism certificate is dated 2 May 2018  and
                that, crucially, he had not given any explanation as to  why
                he had given  two  dates.  The  Judge  also  found  it  very
                surprising that the appellant was allowed to be baptised  by
                the church authorities at Wakefield Cathedral on 2 May  2018
                because he had only arrived in the UK on 28 March 2018 about
                5 weeks earlier which brings into  question  how  well  they
                knew the  appellant  and  whether  there  was  any  critical
                assessment of his motivation and  keenness  to  undergo  the
                baptism ceremony.

            iv. The Judge found the claim the  appellant's  and  his  family
                members house was raided again to be lacking in detail [23].

             v. It was found wholly unsatisfactory that  the  appellant  did
                not know that he had been in  Austria  despite  having  been
                conducted to the  UK  via  agents  and  despite  having  the
                Austrian hotels business cards in  his  possession  when  he
                claimed asylum. The Judge found this unconvincing  behaviour
                further compounded by the appellant's claim he did not  know
                he had been in a hotel in  Austria  which,  given  that  the
                appellant is a man educated to diploma level  having  worked
                for  an  international  business,  the  Judge  found  deeply
                unconvincing which  was  found  to  damage  the  appellant's
                credibility pursuant to section  8  Asylum  and  Immigration
                (Treatment of Claimants, etc)  Act  2004  as  the  appellant
                failed to claim asylum in Austria.

            vi. In relation to the evidence of the appellant's links to  the
                church in the UK and his church attendance on  the  evidence
                of  Rev  Kimaru,  the  Judge  did  not  find  this  evidence
                supported the appellant's claim to be  a  genuine  Christian
                convert for the reasons set out at [25 - 32] of the decision
                under challenge (see below).

    6. At [33] the Judge concludes that as the appellant was not found to be
       credible the Judge was not satisfied  he  left  Iran  illegally.  The
       Judge finds the appellant made up large chunks of his  narrative  and
       that he will  be  able  to  answer  questions  upon  return  to  Iran
       necessary to explain his absence that will not create a real risk for
       him at the airport or otherwise.

    7. The appellant sought permission  to  appeal  like  relying  on  three
       grounds, being a failure to give adequate reasons for  rejecting  the
       evidence of Rev Kimaru, that the  Judge  failed  to  properly  assess
       whether the appellant will be at risk of harm upon return as a failed
       asylum seeker who had gone through an actual Christian conversion and
       exited Iran illegally, and placing impermissible weight on  what  was
       recorded in  the  screening  interview  to  justify  her  credibility
       findings and adopted  an  impermissible  approach  to  the  screening
       interview affecting the overall conclusions.

    8. Permission to appeal was granted by another judge of  the  First-tier
       Tribunal who stated it was arguable that in assessing the evidence of
       the church minister the Judge failed to have regard to  the  guidance
       in TF (Iran) [2018] CSIH 58 and failed to  consider  and  assess  the
       same as expert evidence. The grounds state  that  given  the  Judge's
       finding in this regard  was  material  to  the  conclusion  that  the
       appellant's conversion was not genuine, and he would not be  at  risk
       on return to Iran, it constituted an arguable error of law.

Error of law


    9. As can be seen from the  summary,  the  Judge's  adverse  credibility
       conclusions do not turn solely upon the assessment of the evidence of
       the Rev Kamari as there are a number of other  concerns  recorded  by
       the Judge in relation to the appellants claim  which  have  not  been
       shown to be findings outside the range of those reasonably  available
       to the Judge on the evidence.

   10. In relation to Ground 1,  the  appellant  asserts  the  Judge  simply
       failed to properly consider the important oral evidence which the Rev
       Kimaru gave in which he explained why he came to the  view  that  the
       appellant is a Christian. The grounds claim the Judge appears to have
       ignored what was said about the interaction shown  by  the  appellant
       during Bible classes which the witness led and that the structure and
       setting of the Bible study classes would provide an adequate platform
       on which the witness could form a view.

   11. There is in TF (Iran) v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department
       [2018] CSIH 58 an extensive discussion of how to approach  the  fact-
       finding  exercise  in  cases  where  the  appellant  claims  to  have
       converted to Christianity.   So far as Dorodian was concerned, it was
       said that while it would no doubt be desirable  that  the  individual
       concerned be vouched for by  someone  in  a  position  of  leadership
       within the relevant church, it is more important that the evidence be
       given by someone who has knowledge of the individual whose commitment
       is  in  question.   What  mattered  was  that  they  have  sufficient
       knowledge of the practices of the church of which they are a  member;
       sufficient experience of observing and interacting with those seeking
       to become members of the church; sufficient knowledge and  experience
       of others who have gone through similar processes  of  engagement  in
       church activities with a view to becoming members of the church; and,
       in cases such as  these,  sufficient  knowledge  of  the  individuals
       concerned and of the manner in which they have thrown themselves into
       church activities.

   12. The Judge notes the appellant produced a number of letters on the day
       including a letter from the Rev Kimaru in the following terms:

           "25/10/18

           Rev'd Benson Kimaru

           Minister of Religion - PTO

           St George's Church Barnsley




           To whom it may concern




           Ref; Keyvan Esbelani




           Dear M/s

           I write  to  confirm  I  have  known  Keyvan  Esbelani  born  on
           21/03/1972, of 63 Spencer Street, S70  1QX,  Barnsley  since  he
           joined St. George's church on 30  May  2018  having  arrived  in
           Barnsley on 23 May 2018. I left St. George's on 7 October  2018.
           Keyvan has been active in the life of the church in a number  of
           ways including:-

             i)  Attends  Farsi/English  church  that  takes   place   every
                Wednesday evening 7.30 - 9.00 pm and he is always  punctual.
                He understands quite a bit of English which gives  him  some
                advantage compared with his Iranian colleagues when it comes
                to participating in the discussions during my teachings. The
                teaching  usually  takes  about  an  hour  divided   between
                teaching and question time. All talks are  interpreted  from
                English  to  Farsi  and  Keyvan  is  sometimes  involved  in
                interpreting. So far I have taught on Bible characters like,
                Abraham, Modecai, Esther, Luke and Zacharias. Other times we
                have covered topics on Jesus' character as  well  as  prayer
                tips etc,.

            ii) Attends our main church service every Sunday at 10:45 AM and
                Thursday Holy Communion service at 10 AM

           iii) He helps at the tea and coffee rota

            iv) He attends men's Bible study monthly

           He is cooperative and has ability to make friends easily and  he
           is a good and dependable team player. I highly recommend him.




           Yours sincerely"

   13. The appellant's assertion the Judge's findings regarding  the  weight
       to be given to the evidence from Rev Kamaru is infected  by  arguable
       legal error requires detailed examination of the actual findings made
       by the Judge in relation to this material. These are set out at  [31-
       32] in the following terms:

           "31.    Obviously,  I  find  that  the  appellant  secured   the
                attendance of Rev Benson Kimaru who had  previously  written
                letters of  support  for  the  appellant.  I  listened  very
                carefully to his testimony and found him to be a sincere, if
                rather uncritical witness. I am also firmly of the view that
                I had a lot  more  evidence  about  the  appellant  and  his
                background than Rev Kimaru does and confidently assert  that
                my assessment of the appellant, the truth about  his  claims
                and his likely motivation are based on a much wider and more
                detailed base of information than  Rev  Kimaru.  Whilst  Rev
                Kimaru's belief that the appellant was a  genuine  Christian
                is a strong point in the appellant's favour, it is  not  the
                end of the matter.  I  cannot  delegate  assessment  of  the
                appellant's faith to him or any other "Dorodian" witness.  I
                am not satisfied that the appellant is a  genuine  Christian
                for the following reasons (in no particular order):

                 i) I  do  not  find  it  onerous  for  someone  to  in  the
                    appellant's situation to join a church like Rev Kimaru's
                    and spend a significant amount of time  there.  This  is
                    particularly because at the churches he attended he  met
                    other  people  from  his  country  and  who  spoke   his
                    language. People were undoubtedly kind and friendly. The
                    churches were undoubtedly welcoming. This last point was
                    corroborated by the "telling"  evidence  of  Rev  Kimaru
                    who, when asked if he had ever turned  anyone  away  who
                    wanted to worship, responded "No. Indeed I keep  wanting
                    more to come." He also  said  immediately  before  that:
                    "... Our work as a Christian church is to welcome people
                    and help people to grow to Christian maturity as long as
                    they are open to join the church and to learn about  the
                    Christian religion." The tenor of his evidence was  that
                    it was part of the Christian "duty" to be  open  to  new
                    recruits,  if  not  very  keen.   I   find   that   this
                    unquestioning attitude is likely  to  have  blinded  Rev
                    Kimaru to considering  alternative  motivations  on  the
                    part of the appellant. There was  no  evidence  that  it
                    ever crossed his mind why joining the church might be an
                    attractive option for the appellant  for  other  reasons
                    connected to gaining status in the UK  i.e.  other  than
                    his claims to be genuinely interested  in  Christianity.
                    In short, Rev Kimaru took the appellant uncritically  at
                    "face value". In contrast, I do not so assess him;

                ii)  To  a  significant  extent,  Rev  Kimaru  assessed  the
                    appellant's Christianity  on  his  Christian  behaviour.
                    However, when this was examined it  did  not  amount  to
                    more than him being polite, courteous,  keen  to  engage
                    with church activities including asking questions at the
                    bible  study,  being  available  to  help  with   church
                    refreshments and help out in the  garden.  I  find  that
                    such behaviour is nothing more than normal courteous  or
                    civilised behaviour and there is nothing about it  which
                    is particularly Christian about it. As an  educated  man
                    used to working in an international business in Iran,  I
                    would not really expect any other type of behaviour;

               iii)  There  was  no  reliable  explanation  as  to  why  the
                    appellant had been allowed to be baptised as quickly  as
                    he had.  Rev  Kimaru  could  not  provide  any  detailed
                    explanation on the process at Wakefield Cathedral, other
                    than  having  unquestioning  respect  for  his  clerical
                    colleagues there;

                iv) I noted that  the  appellant  said  that  he  had  never
                    discussed his faith "one-to-one"  with  Rev  Kimaru.  He
                    also claimed that they had talked about  "other  things"
                    but in "broken English" and  with  "hand  signals".  The
                    appellant described the  conversations  between  himself
                    and Rev Kimaru as "primitive. Greetings and  asking  how
                    we are ... [With] broken English and hand signals as  we
                    pass the message on."

                 v) Against  the  evidence  from  the  appellant  about  his
                    limited  conversations  with  Rev   Kimaru,   the   most
                    significant deficiency in  the  evidence  regarding  Rev
                    Kimaru's assessment of the appellant's faith  was  that,
                    when he was cross-examined by Mr Richardson, it  quickly
                    became apparent that the oral communication between  Rev
                    Kimaru and  the  appellant  was  very  superficial.  Rev
                    Kimaru claimed to have had an in-depth conversation with
                    the appellant but conceded that it was at  "his  level",
                    that Rev  Kimaru  had  to  speak  slowly  and  accept  a
                    "limited way of speaking":

                vi) Further, Rev Kimaru  did  not  claim  to  know  why  the
                    appellant left Iran. His  assessment  of  the  appellant
                    seemed largely based on assumptions. Rev Kimaru referred
                    vaguely to general "political problems in Iran" and gave
                    this as the explanation as to why the Church of  England
                    "had received so many  people  from  Iran".  At  another
                    point he  talked  about  Iranians  in  his  congregation
                    "testifying" (notably, not the appellant) which led  Rev
                    Kimaru to state that he "assumed" that the majority  had
                    the same sorts of problems "going on" as they were  from
                    the same country. What  was  clear  from  this  was  Rev
                    Kimaru's deep concern about the political  situation  of
                    people in Iran and no doubt his in the  church's  desire
                    to support and care for Iranians who have left Iran:

           32.    In short, Rev Kimaru's assessment of the appellant  seems
                to have been on the basis that he was a pleasant,  friendly,
                courteous  individual  (which  I  also  found  him  to  be).
                However,  these  factors  do  not  mean  that  Rev  Kimaru's
                assessment of the appellant corroborates his claim and I  am
                not satisfied that the appellant is a genuine Christian  who
                would be at risk of persecution  or  worse  upon  return  to
                Iran.  For  completeness,  I  record   that   Rev   Kimaru's
                assessment of the appellant is not altered by the letter  in
                support from Gabriela Ingram dated 19 October 2018  who  did
                not attend the hearing but who also  knew  him  through  St.
                George's church in Barnsley."

   14. The Judge clearly took a great deal of care in ensuring that  a  fair
       and balanced assessment of the evidence of Rev Kimaru was  undertaken
       and how the same was factored into  the  Judge's  conclusions.  There
       appears to be a clear contradiction  between  the  statement  in  the
       letter of 25th October 2018 that the appellant  understands  quite  a
       bit of English and  the  evidence  given  to  the  Judge  that  their
       communication was at the level of broken English with  hand  signals.
       The Judge clearly took into account all the written and oral evidence
       and the assertion the Judge's assessment had been made solely on  the
       basis of the appellant being friendly and courteous has  no  arguable
       merit. The Judge clearly assessed all the  relevant  evidence  before
       coming to the conclusions set out above which were open to the  Judge
       on the evidence.

   15. Ground 1 has no arguable merit in that it fails to establish material
       legal error in the Judge's decision.

   16. Ground 2 appears to ignore a fundamental finding by the Judge at [33]
       that the Judge  was  not  satisfied  that  the  appellant  left  Iran
       illegally. The Judge clearly considered risk on return. The assertion
       the contention the appellant did not  leave  the  Iran  illegally  is
       inadequate reasoned and/or irrational  has  no  arguable  merit.  The
       appellant claimed he left Iran illegally and that is the only  source
       of such a claim by a person who was found to lack credibility by  the
       Judge. The appellant asserts a real risk on return  but  the  Judge's
       conclusion that no risk arises on return is within the range of those
       reasonably open to the Judge on the evidence and in  accordance  with
       the country guidance case law considered by the Judge and referred to
       in the grounds. It was not made out the appellant  has  come  to  the
       adverse attention of the authorities in Iran  or  would  do  for  any
       reason sufficient to give rise to a real risk on return.

   17. In relation to Ground 3, the  appellant  contends  the  Judge  placed
       impermissible weight on what was recorded in the screening  interview
       to justify  the  credibility  findings  at  [18]  and  [20v]  of  the
       determination.  At  [18]  the  Judge  writes  "from   the   screening
       interview, I note that the appellant worked  for  Samsung  [1.14]  in
       Iran in sales and management, that he has a diploma in economics  and
       that he claimed that he was  a  "Catholic  Christian"  [4.1].  It  is
       difficult to see how any arguable legal error is made out in such  an
       assessment in which the Judge merely refers to answers given  by  the
       appellant in the screening interview.

   18. At 20 (v) in which the Judge sets out one of the findings justify the
       conclusion the appellant was not a Christian in Iran who  attended  a
       house church there, the Judge notes that the  appellant  claimed  the
       house church was not affiliated in or with any particular  branch  of
       Christianity and that there was no ordained priest which was found to
       be in stark contracts his claim in the screening  interview  that  he
       was a catholic. This has not been shown to be an arguably  irrational
       finding. Even though there are limitations  upon  the  weight  to  be
       placed on a screening interview in circumstances where an  individual
       may have had a long and tiring journey and which, by its  nature,  is
       it is not intended to enable an appellant to set out the full details
       of their claim a person being interviewed for  the  purposes  of  the
       screening interview is still required to tell the truth.  It  is  not
       made out the Judge applied undue weight to the  screening  interview.
       There is, in any event, little reference to the  screening  interview
       when compared to  the  substantial  weight  of  evidence  from  other
       sources supporting the Judge's adverse credibility findings.

   19. This is a carefully considered and written determination. The grounds
       disagree with the Judge's conclusion  and  attempt  to  assert  legal
       error on  the  basis  of  the  matters  pleaded  and  in  Mr  Brown's
       submissions. Having considered everything very carefully  I  conclude
       that the appellant fails to establish arguable legal error sufficient
       to warrant the Upper Tribunal interfering any further in this matter.
       The findings made are adequately reasoned. The weight to be given  to
       the evidence was a matter for the Judge. No  arguable  perversity  or
       unfairness is made out in the Judge's approach or findings made.  The
       fact the appellant may not like the overall  conclusion  and  clearly
       wishes to remain in the United Kingdom does not mean the  Judge  only
       arrived at those conclusions by making legal error. The determination
       shall stand.



Decision

   20. There is  no  material  error  of  law  in  the  Immigration  Judge's
       decision. The determination shall stand.



  Anonymity.

   21. The First-tier Tribunal did  not  make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
       45(4)(i) of the Asylum and  Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
       2005.

       I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
       (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.


Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson
Dated the 9 April 2019
