
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11731/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 23rd April 2019                    |On 14th May 2019                      |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                                    [N I]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Burrett of Counsel, instructed by Wick & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Sudan born  on  1st  January  1973.   The
    issue upon which the Upper Tribunal is seized is an appeal against  the
    decision of Immigration Judge Steer made at a Case Management Review at
    Hatton Cross on 24th January 2019.  The issue that was before the judge
    was whether or not there was an appealable decision for the purpose  of
    Section 82 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.   Judge
    Steer found that there was no valid appeal and that the appeal must  be
    dismissed.

 2. Grounds of Appeal were lodged to the Upper Tribunal  on  15th  February
    2019.  On 22nd March 2019  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Grant-Hutchison
    granted permission to appeal.  Judge  Grant-Hutchison  considered  that
    the judge  might  have  misdirected  herself  in  connection  with  the
    following matters:

      i) The Appellant had made an application in compliance  with  Rule  34
         which was rejected by the Respondent.  Even though  the  Respondent
         states that the Appellant did not qualify for ILR he is  silent  on
         the human rights submissions and that  it  was  arguable  that  the
         Appellant was fully entitled to lodge an appeal in order to protect
         her immigration status and that of her dependants.  In  any  event,
         Judge Grant-Hutchison noted that it was submitted  that  the  judge
         did  not  serve  on  the  Appellant's  notice  of   invalidity   as
         procedurally that had been served in accordance with Appendix SN of
         the Immigration Rules.

     ii) That the decision to dismiss the appeal did not take  into  account
         the children's best interests in that  the  Appellant  was  already
         living outside her country of origin prior to arrival in the UK due
         to being at  risk  there  as  a  result  of  her  husband  who  was
         recognised as a refugee in the UK.

    iii) That to refuse to vary a person's leave to enter or remain  in  the
         UK if the result of the refusal is that the person has no leave  to
         enter or remain is arguably an immigration decision  under  Section
         82 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

     iv) That the Appellant's  appeal  was  listed  for  a  Case  Management
         hearing.  As recognised by the judge there was no agreement  as  to
         disposal and it was arguably unfair to dispose of  the  hearing  in
         the manner set out in the decision without giving  adequate  notice
         to  the  parties  particularly  in  terms  of  Rule  25(2)  of  the
         Procedural Rules.

      v) It was arguable that the reliance on the  2012  Practice  Note  was
         erroneous  and  not  in  accordance  with  the  current  Tribunal's
         obligations under the Rules in coming to her decision.

 3. On 16th April 2019 the Secretary of State responded to the  Grounds  of
    Appeal under Rule 24, submitting that the letter of 29th November  2018
    set out clearly the position in relation  to  the  Appellant's  earlier
    rejected application not being an  appealable  decision  and  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal was entitled to consider the written submissions by
    both parties before concluding that there  was  no  appeal  before  the
    Tribunal.

 4. It is on that basis that  the  appeal  comes  before  me  to  determine
    whether or not there is a material error of law in the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.  The Appellant  appears  by  her  instructed
    Counsel, Mr Burrett.   Mr  Burrett  is  extremely  familiar  with  this
    matter.  He appeared before the Tribunal at the CMR  and  is  also  the
    author of the Grounds of Appeal.  The Secretary of State appears by her
    Home Office Presenting Officer, Mr Avery.

The Relevant Procedural Rule

 5. The relevant Procedural Rule here is to be found in Rule 25(1) and  (2)
    of the Tribunal Procedure Rules 2014.

         "Rule 25 states:

         (1)  The Tribunal must hold a  hearing  before  making  a  decision
             which disposes of proceedings except where -

             (a)-(f)

             (g)  subject to paragraph (2), the Tribunal considers that  it
                  can justly determine the matter without a hearing.

         (2)  Where paragraph (1)(g) applies, the Tribunal must not make the
             decision without a hearing without first  giving  the  parties
             notice of its intention to do so, and an opportunity  to  make
             written representations  as  to  whether  there  should  be  a
             hearing".

Submission/Discussion

 6. Mr Burrett reminds me in his submissions  of  the  background  of  this
    matter.  The Appellant travelled to the UK on 17th  September  2014  on
    the grounds of family reunion with her three children.  Her husband, Mr
    Bakhiet Bargo, was a recognised refugee in the UK and the Appellant and
    their three children joined him in the UK and were granted five  years'
    residence.  The Appellant is now a widow as her husband  died  on  29th
    March 2016.

 7. Prior to her leave expiring the Appellant had made an  application  for
    leave to remain  on  13th  October  2017  which  was  refused  on  19th
    September  2018.   The  Secretary  of  State  had  submitted  that  the
    Appellant could no longer apply for indefinite leave to remain  in  the
    UK under the settlement route as she did not have refugee status.   The
    Appellant in her application for settlement had maintained  a  risk  of
    persecution and sought protection  and  also  maintained  a  breach  of
    Article 8.  Mr Burrett submits that the Respondent failed  to  consider
    this and rejected the application, and that the Appellant maintains she
    had a right of  appeal  under  Section  82(1)(c)  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  (as  amended  by  Section  15  of  the
    Immigration Act 2014).

 8. It is pointed out to me that a Duty Judge of the First-tier Tribunal in
    considering the Notice of Appeal considered there was a right of appeal
    and listed the appeal for full hearing on 6th November  2018  and  this
    had been endorsed by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Sweet  at  the  appeal
    hearing.  That hearing was, I am advised, due to proceed  but  did  not
    because the Home Office Presenting Officer indicated  that  the  matter
    would now be reconsidered and  a  fully  reasoned  appealable  decision
    referring to the protection aspects would be served on the Appellant in
    the absence of a grant of leave.  However, on 29th  November  2018  the
    Respondent wrote to the Tribunal stating that  there  is  no  right  of
    appeal and that the matter should be struck out.

 9. The matter was listed for a further CMR  on  24th  January  2019  where
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Steer on considering the opposing submissions
    accepted that there was a right of appeal  and  the  matter  would  now
    proceed to a full hearing.  However, in  the  determination  served  on
    14th February 2019 Judge Steer made a conclusion that the Appellant  in
    fact did not have a right of appeal and the application  had  not  been
    submitted  in  the  correct  form,  as  required  by  Rule  34  of  the
    Immigration Rules.  Furthermore, she found that the decision was not  a
    refusal of an asylum claim as the Appellant had not applied for  asylum
    in person.

10. It is the submission of Mr Burrett that the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    had erred in law by determining the appeal, in failing to recognise the
    appeal was brought against a decision that left the Appellants with  no
    leave to remain, and that the judge  had  erred  in  disposing  of  the
    appeal contrary to the First-tier Tribunal Rules.  Mr  Burrett  further
    contends there was no legal basis properly set out  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge as to how she was able  to  dispose  of  the  appeal  in
    accordance with the Rules.  He goes on to further  emphasise  that  had
    the Appellant's husband been  alive,  the  Appellant  would  have  been
    entitled to settlement but that the claim extant before me was a  human
    rights claim.  He points out that the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  had
    looked at the Appellant's Notice of Appeal and had set the matter  down
    for hearing and that Judge Sweet had no concerns about  it.   The  only
    reason, he points out, that it was adjourned was so  the  Secretary  of
    State could give further consideration  as  to  whether  to  grant  the
    Appellant's application.   It  is  his  submission  that  the  reviewed
    decision is erroneous and that there having already been found to be  a
    valid appeal the judge's approach was wrong.  Further, he submits it is
    wrong procedurally.

11. In response, Mr Avery submits that the question is whether or  not  the
    Appellant has an appeal and he submits that she does not and  therefore
    the question to be considered  is  whether  or  not  the  Tribunal  has
    jurisdiction to deal with it.  He submits that this has been  addressed
    in paragraphs 15 to 16 of Judge Steer's decision and that there  is  no
    valid application extant and that the decision is not appealable  under
    Section 82.  He submits there is no jurisdiction and that the judge has
    already come to a decision.

The Law

12.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

13. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings on Error of Law

14. This is a procedural appeal.  No substantive hearing on the Appellant's
    application has ever been made and I accept that the Appellant is in an
    extremely difficult position for had her husband not  sadly  died  then
    she would have been entitled to follow the settlement route.  I further
    accept that any decision here  affects  not  only  her  but  her  minor
    children.

15. There is an inherent responsibility on the Tribunal Service to impose a
    situation  of  fairness.   Both  parties  argue  procedurally  and  the
    question arises as to whether or not  Judge  Steer  was  right  in  her
    assessment in indicating that there is no right of appeal  despite  the
    fact that previous judges had indicated  that  there  was.   I  am  not
    required, nor asked, to make that decision today.  What seems to me  to
    be of the utmost importance is that the Procedural Rules  are  followed
    and that the matter is dealt with properly and fairly.  The  Procedural
    Rule in question is the one set  out  above,  namely  Rule  25  of  the
    Tribunal Procedural Rules 2014.  There has been no notice of  intention
    given to the parties pursuant to Rule 25(2) as to whether or not  there
    should be a hearing.  The judge has merely made  the  decision  at  the
    CMC.

16. In such circumstances I am satisfied that the Procedural Rules have not
    been properly followed and that by  doing  so  there  is  a  procedural
    unfairness to the Appellant.  I emphasise that that is not to say  that
    ultimately the finding made by Immigration Judge Steer is not the right
    one.  There seems to be a total inconsistency in the analysis  made  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judges on this point bearing  in  mind  that  Judge
    Steer's decision differs from that of Judge Sweet.

17. In such circumstances I consider that the correct approach  is  to  set
    aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge and  to  remit  the
    matter back to be dealt with at a further CMR by  way  of  written  and
    oral representations.  The hearing of this matter will  take  place  at
    Hatton Cross.  Bearing in mind the seeming conflicting views  of  Judge
    Steer and Judge Sweet, it seems appropriate that  the  matter  be  best
    dealt with afresh by way of  hearing  before  a  full-time  Immigration
    Judge other than those judges and I give directions accordingly.

Decision and Directions

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge contains a material  error  of
law insofar that Rule 25(2) of the Tribunal Procedural Rules  2014  has  not
been followed.  I set aside the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
and give directions for the rehearing of this matter.

 1) That the matter is remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  sitting  at
    Hatton Cross for a further CMR with an ELH of one hour.

 2) The issue to be considered is whether or not the Appellant has  or  has
    not a valid appeal extant.

 3) That the CMR be listed before a  full-time  judge  of  the  Immigration
    Tribunal other than Immigration Judge Steer or Immigration Judge Sweet.



 4) That there be leave to either party  to  submit  and  exchange  written
    representations on the issue at least seven days prior to the  restored
    CMR.

 5) That the parties' legal representatives also do attend the CMR to  make
    oral representations.

No application was made for an anonymity direction and none is now made.


Signed                              Date 10 May 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.


Signed                              Date 10 May 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris
