


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
PA/11598/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Columbus House, Newport      |           Decision & Reasons        |
|                                      |Promulgated                          |
|On 23 October 2017                    |           On 21 November 2017       |
|                                      |                                     |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE L MURRAY

                                   Between

                                   N A N S
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Caseley, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. The Appellant is  a  national  of  Eritrea  whose  protection  claim  was
   refused by the Secretary of State  on  7  October  2016  and  his  appeal
   against this decision was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Whitcombe in a
   decision  promulgated  on  14  February  2017  on  asylum,   humanitarian
   protection and human rights grounds. Permission to appeal  to  the  Upper
   Tribunal against that decision was granted by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
   Gillespie in a decision dated 1 September 2017.

2. The Appellant relies on two grounds of  appeal.  Firstly,  it  is  argued
   that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  erred  in   refusing   the   Appellant's
   adjournment application and secondly in failing  to  follow  the  Country
   Guidance case  of  ST  (Ethnic-Eritrean-nationality-return)  Ethiopia  CG
   [2011] UKUT 00252.


3. Permission was granted on the grounds that it was  fairly  arguable  that
   the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  erred  in   law,   through   procedural
   unfairness, in failing to grant the adjournment prayed. Having refused to
   permit the adjournment of the purposes of obtaining an expert's report as
   to the law of Ethiopia the Judge made  findings  as  to  the  effect  and
   practical application of that law, through his own interpretation of  the
   foreign law, and without  the  benefit  of  expert  evidence  as  to  its
   content, the  very  evidence  which  it  had  been  the  purpose  of  the
   adjournment request to obtain.


4. At the hearing Ms Caseley said  that  she  was  only  really  relying  on
   ground 1. An oral application was made at the hearing for the purpose  of
   obtaining an expert's report and the expert had been instructed  but  had
   not produced the report by the agreed date. Legal aid funding had been in
   place  and  there  was  no  fault  on  the  part   of   the   Appellant's
   representatives for the delay. The Judge had failed to making  a  finding
   on whether the hearing would be fair in the absence of the expert  report
   requested contrary to Nwaigwe (adjournment: fairness) [2014]  UKUT  0418.
   The report was material to the issue of de jure and de facto nationality.
   It was an issue that the Judge interpreted Ethiopian law.


5. Mr Diwnycz conceded that there was an error of law due to the failure  to
   consider fairness as the criteria and the fact that this  led  the  Judge
   then to interpret Ethiopian law which was the remit of an expert.

Discussion

6. The First-tier Tribunal found that  the  Appellant  would  have  a  well-
   founded fear of persecution in Eritrea. He found at paragraph 59 that the
   Appellant was entitled in law to Ethiopian citizenship and had  not  made
   reasonable efforts to acquire that citizenship. He found  that  he  could
   acquire Ethiopian citizenship and return there. It  was  the  Appellant's
   case that  he  could  not  acquire  Ethiopian  nationality  from  outside
   Ethiopia and that up to date evidence in the form of an  expert's  report
   from Mr Schroeder would have been capable of establishing that  he  would
   not be able to acquire Ethiopian citizenship without complying  with  the
   requirements of Article 5 of the Proclamation  on  Ethiopian  nationality
   which required him to live for 4 years in Ethiopia  before  applying  for
   citizenship.


7. The Appellant  applied  for  an  adjournment  at  the  beginning  of  the
   hearing. The Judge set out the  reasons  given  for  the  application  at
   paragraph 17 and concluded at paragraph 17 (ix):


   "While the priority is always to ensure that  the  appeal  is  determined
   fairly, that does not amount to an unfettered right to an adjournment  or
   postponement wherever it can be shown to be necessary in order to  obtain
   potentially relevant evidence. Other  countervailing  considerations  are
   the cost, disruption and delay caused by the postponement (including cost
   and delay caused to other appellants in the tribunal's lists), whether in
   all the circumstances the party applying for the postponement has enjoyed
   a reasonable opportunity to obtain the evidence in question, and  whether
   the application for  a  postponement  was  made  as  soon  as  reasonably
   practicable."

8. He concluded that the Appellant had  had  ample  time  to  obtain  expert
   evidence and the application for an adjournment  should  have  been  made
   earlier. In the circumstances he  found  that  the  interest  of  justice
   weighed against the postponement of the hearing.


9. It cannot be said that the Judge failed to  apply  a  test  of  fairness,
   because he specifically refers to it as a consideration. Nor  can  it  be
   said that the factors that he took into account were  not  relevant  ones
   because they were enshrined in the overriding objective in rule 2 of  the
   Tribunal Procedure Rules 2014. However, the proposed expert, Mr Schroeder
   was the country expert in the relevant country guidance  case  of  ST  in
   which the practices and procedures of the Ethiopian  Embassy's  grant  of
   citizenship was analysed and his evidence was given significant weight by
   the Tribunal. In MA (Disputed Nationality) Ethiopia [2008] UKAIT 00032 it
   was held that  expert  evidence  could  legitimately  form  part  of  the
   assessment of whether a person fulfilled the nationality requirements. At
   paragraph 51 of the decision, the Judge acknowledged that the case of  ST
   was 5-6  years  old  and  there  was  no  up  to  date  evidence  of  the
   requirements of Article 5 of the Proclamation  on  Ethiopian  Nationality
   which provided that 4 years domicile in Ethiopia was required  before  an
   application for citizenship could be made. The Judge at paragraphs 49  to
   52 made his own interpretation of how Ethiopian nationality law would  be
   applied.


10. I find that Mr Diwnycz was correct to concede that the  Judge  proceeded
   in a procedurally unfair manner in failing to grant  an  adjournment  for
   the purposes of obtaining expert evidence for which funding  was  already
   in place and had through no fault of the solicitors not been delivered by
   the hearing date in circumstances where that evidence was key to the core
   issue of nationality in the appeal. This was clearly an  issue  on  which
   expert evidence could have been material to the  outcome  of  the  appeal
   because, as acknowledged by the Judge, there was no up to  date  evidence
   leading  the  Judge  to  stray  into  the  territory  of  an  expert   in
   interpreting foreign nationality law.


11. The parties agreed that the findings in relation  to  the  risk  to  the
   Appellant on return to Eritrea at paragraph 43 of the decision should  be
   reserved. I remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal as  the  effect  of
   the error has been to deprive the Appellant of a fair hearing  (Part  7.2
   (a) Senior President's Practice Statements).


Conclusions:

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision.

I remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal for re-hearing.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made an order and I continue  that  order  (pursuant
to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules  2008).  Unless
and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  Appellant  is  granted
anonymity.  No report of these  proceedings  shall  directly  or  indirectly
identify him or any member of his family.  This direction  applies  both  to
the Appellant and to the Respondent.  Failure to comply with this  direction
could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed                                             Date

[pic]


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge L J Murray


