
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: pa/11855/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 20 January 2020                           |On 26 February 2020           |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BLUM


                                   Between

                                     IK
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Nnumani, Counsel, instructed by Montague
Solicitors LLP
For the Respondent:    Ms R Bassi, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. This is a remade decision following the identification of  material
         legal errors in the decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  K
         R Moore, promulgated on 5 November 2018, dismissing the appellant's
         appeal against the refusal of a human rights claim dated 30 October
         2017, which in turn followed a decision to make a deportation order
         against the appellant.

Background

      2. The appellant is a national of Turkey, born in 1982. He entered the
         United Kingdom clandestinely in January 2002  and  claimed  asylum.
         His asylum claim was refused and an appeal was dismissed  in  March
         2002.  The judge found  the  appellant's  protection  claim  to  be
         incredible and rejected his claimed political  activities  and  his
         claim that he would be at risk on return to Turkey.


      3. The  appellant  thereafter  remained  in  the  United  Kingdom  and
         commenced a relationship with RR, a British  citizen.  They  had  a
         daughter, J, born in May 2006.  The appellant made  an  application
         for leave to remain under the so-called  legacy  programme  and  in
         October 2008 he was granted Indefinite Leave to Remain (ILR)  based
         on his relationship with RR and J.

      4. The relationship between the  appellant  and  RR  soured  and  they
         separated. The appellant married DG, who is also a British citizen,
         on 19 May 2016 and they have a son, DK, born in September 2016. The
         appellant is now estranged from DG and  currently  has  no  contact
         with DK.

      5. In June 2015 the appellant was convicted of burglary  and  criminal
         damage and sentenced to one year and seven months' imprisonment  in
         respect of the burglary offence. A deportation order was signed  in
         October 2015. The appellant had previous convictions in the  United
         Kingdom. In September 2006 he was convicted  of  motoring  offences
         including driving with  no  insurance.  In  December  2008  he  was
         sentenced to two months' imprisonment for committing  an  act  with
         intent to pervert the course of justice. A  deportation  order  was
         made in respect of the appellant on 5 October 2016. The  effect  of
         the deportation order was to cancel the appellant's ILR.

      6.  In her Reasons for Refusal Letter,  dated  30  October  2017,  the
         respondent did not accept that the  appellant  had  a  genuine  and
         subsisting  relationship  with  J.  Alternatively,   although   the
         respondent accepted that it would be unduly harsh for J to relocate
         to Turkey (as she did not form part of the appellant's family  unit
         and lived with her mother, from whom the appellant  was  separated)
         she considered it would not be unduly harsh for J to remain in  the
         UK with her mother, who was her primary care provider.

      7.  The  respondent  also  referred  to  an  assessment  by   Haringey
         Children's Social Services that had been concluded  on  6  February
         2017 and which  indicated  that  DK  and  the  appellant's  teenage
         stepson would be better supported under a  child  protection  claim
         due to incidents of domestic violence by the appellant against  DG.
         The  respondent  accepted  there  was  a  genuine  and   subsisting
         relationship between  the  appellant  and  DK,  although  this  was
         because the appellant, at that time, resided  at  the  family  home
         with DK and DG. The respondent did not accept it  would  be  unduly
         harsh for DK to remain in the UK without the appellant as DG  would
         be able to continue to provide for and support DK.


      8. The respondent additionally considered the  appellant's  length  of
         residence in the UK, noting that he had not been lawfully  resident
         in the UK for most of his life (the appellant entered the  UK  when
         he was approximately 20 years old and was  not  granted  ILR  until
         2008), and  rejected  his  claim  to  be  socially  and  culturally
         integrated in the  UK.  There  was  nothing  to  suggest  that  the
         appellant would encounter any difficulties  in  reintegrating  into
         Turkish society, he still had family in Turkey, and would  be  able
         to maintain his relationships but with those in the UK  via  remote
         forms of communication. The respondent was not satisfied there were
         very compelling  circumstances  such  that  his  deportation  would
         result in a disproportionate breach of Article 8 ECHR.

      9. The appellant appealed the respondent's decision pursuant  to  s.82
         of the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  on  both
         protection and Article 8 grounds. His appeal was dismissed  on  all
         grounds by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Moore. In the 'error of
         law' decision promulgated on 22 March 2019 the Upper Tribunal found
         that Judge  Moore  misidentified  the  mother  of  the  appellant's
         daughter  and  that  this  undermined  the  sustainability  of  his
         assessment of the relationship between him and his daughter, J. The
         Upper Tribunal noted that there was relatively limited evidence  of
         the impact on the appellant's daughter should he be  deported,  and
         the limited nature of the evidence in respect  of  the  appellant's
         relationship with  his  young  son,  DK.  The  Upper  Tribunal  was
         nevertheless  satisfied  that   the   'unduly   harsh'   assessment
         (contained  in  paragraph  339(a)  of  the  immigration  rules  and
         s.117C(5) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002)  had
         been undertaken on a  significantly  erroneous  factual  basis  and
         without lawful regard to the evidence supporting the  relationships
         and that, had the judge properly  considered  the  evidence  before
         him, the decision may have been different.


     10.  Judge  Moore  dismissed  the  appellant's  protection  claim   and
         permission to appeal that aspect of the decision was  refused.  The
         appellant did not seek to amend the grounds of appeal to raise  the
         refusal of the protection claim and there was no arguable basis for
         impugning this aspect of Judge Moore's decision. The central  issue
         before me is  whether  the  appellant's  deportation  would  breach
         Article 8 ECHR.

The hearing

     11. The appeal was  initially  listed  for  a  resumed  hearing  on  19
         September 2019. The Tribunal was informed that  the  appellant  had
         been unable to obtain disclosure of information  pertaining  to  J.
         The hearing was adjourned and directions issued  pursuant  to  rule
         5(3)(d) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 to RR
         to obtain the required information which was held by 3rd parties. A
         further hearing listed for 4 December 2019 had to be  adjourned  as
         the relevant information had still not been obtained.


     12. The appellant's representatives prepared a main consolidated bundle
         of documents running  to  88  pages.  This  included,  inter  alia,
         witness  statements  from  the  appellant  dated  9  May  2019,  18
         September 2019, and 9 December 2019, medical records relating to J,
         documentary evidence of telephone calls and  messages  between  the
         appellant and J, photographs of the appellant and J, photographs of
         the  appellant  and  DK,  copies  of  bank  statements   indicating
         transfers of money from the appellant  to   RR,  and  some  medical
         records  relating  to  DK.  A  supplementary  bundle  of  documents
         included a statement from the appellant dated 4 October 2018, and a
         manuscript letter from RR. The appellant additionally relied  on  a
         further bundle of  documents  that  included  a  letter  from  Nova
         Solicitors dated 15 July 2019, further photographs of the appellant
         with DK, a letter from the Speech and Language  Therapy  Department
         at the Lordship Lane Health Centre dated 15 January  2019,  and  an
         undated manuscript letter from the  appellant's  sister.  Ms  Bassi
         served a copy of the appellant's  Police  National  Computer  (PNC)
         criminal history and several legal authorities. Ms Nnumani served a
         skeleton argument. I have read  and  taken  account  of  all  these
         documents.


     13. I summarise  the  material  elements  of  the  appellant's  written
         evidence. He has a strong and subsisting relationship  with  J.  He
         tries to participate and engage with her upbringing  and  discusses
         problems she may have. He regularly visits her  in  Nottinghamshire
         where she lives with her mother, and she sometimes stays  with  him
         in London. They speak or text each other on an almost daily  basis.
         In his May 2019 statement the appellant claimed to be on good terms
         with RR and that they agreed that whenever J wanted to  spend  time
         with the appellant and his  family  she  was  allowed  to  come  to
         London. In his September 2019 statement the  appellant  claimed  RR
         was now refusing to take his calls because he would not pay for new
         furniture. Two of the appellant's brothers and one sister  live  in
         the UK and J was close to her paternal cousins and liked  to  spend
         time with them. The appellant described how, when he visited J,  he
         would take her shopping and to restaurants, and that he would  give
         her pocket money. J  would  be  devastated  if  the  appellant  was
         deported. RR would not be happy to allow J to travel to  Turkey  to
         visit him. The appellant worried that his deportation would have  a
         "massive detrimental effect on her." Modern forms of  communication
         would not substitute for the physical contact a  child  needs  with
         her parents.

     14. The split between the appellant and  DG  was  acrimonious.  In  his
         October 2018 statement the appellant said that DG was not  allowing
         him to have any contact with DK. In  his  May  2019  statement  the
         appellant said he last saw DK in February  2018.  The  letter  from
         Nova Solicitors, whom the appellant had instructed to deal with his
         family matters, indicated that, following  an  application  to  the
         Family Court, DK had started to allow  the  appellant  to  see  his
         child based  on  an  informal  agreement.  In  his  September  2019
         statement the appellant said he attended a Family Court Hearing  on
         3 September 2019 in relation to visitation rights to DK. He claimed
         DG did not attend this hearing and that it had been adjourned to 29
         October 2019. He made no reference to  seeing  DK  on  an  informal
         basis or otherwise. In his December 2019  statement  the  appellant
         said he was taking "all the appropriate steps to have half  custody
         rights for my son". He indicated that a hearing was to  take  place
         on 20 December 2019.

     15. In examination-in-chief the appellant said he last saw J after  the
         Christmas celebrations. He collected her and she  stayed  with  him
         and visited his family in London over a period of 3 days.  He  said
         he would see her once every 2 weeks, 3 weeks or a month.  He  would
         buy clothes and shoes for her and they went to  the  park  together
         and swimming together. He described how J overheard a  conversation
         between the appellant and RR concerning  his  possible  deportation
         that caused her to cry. The appellant reiterated his belief that  J
         was unlikely to be able to  visit  him  in  Turkey.  The  appellant
         referred to a Family Court hearing on 20 December 2019 and  claimed
         that, as a result of DG's failure to carry out a 'test', the matter
         was adjourned until a further hearing on 4 March 2020.  He  claimed
         to have last seen DK 3 or 4 months ago. The appellant made  serious
         allegations relating to DG's physical treatment of DK. He  said  he
         had reported his concerns to Social Services and  a  GP,  and  that
         Social Services had carried out an investigation. At this  stage  I
         informed Ms Nnumani of  my  concern  that  the  privacy  directions
         generally issued in contentious Family Court proceedings may  cover
         the subject matter of this aspect of the appellant's evidence.  The
         appellant claimed that DK needed him "quite a lot" because  he  has
         autism. The appellant confirmed that he would see his sister's  son
         once a week. They would go swimming, go to the park, ride  bicycles
         together and read books together.


     16. In cross-examination the appellant said he had been to see J  about
         7 or 8 times in the last 6 months, and that J  had  stayed  at  his
         house on 3 occasions  in  the  same  period.  The  appellant  would
         sometimes take J to school when he stayed with relatives who  lived
         in the same  city.  The  appellant  claimed  he  went  to  hospital
         together with J when she took an overdose  in  September  2019.  He
         told her not to do it again as it upset him  and  her  mother.  She
         promised she would not do it again. The  appellant  confirmed  that
         there was no documentary or photographic evidence of his attendance
         at the hospital. The appellant claimed he spoke to J every  day  on
         the phone after she left for school in the morning. He also claimed
         they messaged each other every day. When asked about an absence  of
         any telephone calls or messages  between  27  August  2019  and  27
         September 2019 the appellant claimed J's phone had been stolen.  It
         was pointed out to the appellant that there were also no  telephone
         calls or messages between 16 May 2019 and 22 June 2019, a period of
         about 5 weeks. The appellant claimed he worked in a kebab shop  for
         14 years in the city where J lives and is known in  that  area.  He
         was not currently working and received benefits  from  a  jobcentre
         but would be able to work if he was allowed to remain in the UK. He
         received money from his brothers and his brother in law.


     17. The appellant accepted that RR was J's primary carer. He claimed to
         be on good terms with her. Sometimes when J did something wrong  RR
         would ask the appellant to speak to J. RR did not  have  any  money
         and wouldn't send J Turkey. RR was now married and her husband  was
         jealous and would not allow J to go to Turkey.  The  appellant  did
         not currently have any contact with DK. The appellant repeated  his
         allegations concerning DG and claimed she wanted to  cause  trouble
         for him. The appellant's brothers and sister  did  not  attend  the
         hearing because they worked  and  because  the  appellant  did  not
         inform them about the appeal hearing. The appellant's siblings  had
         returned to Turkey since they entered the  UK.  The  appellant  had
         returned once to Turkey since  entering  the  UK.  He  claimed  the
         police had come looking for him as he had not  undertaken  military
         service. In re-examination the appellant said he lived with DK  for
         approximately one year after his birth.


     18. Both representatives made submissions which are a matter of  record
         and which I have taken into consideration.

Legal Framework

     19. The appellant appeals under s.82 of  the  Nationality,  Immigration
         and Asylum  Act  2002  (the  2002  Act)  against  the  respondent's
         decision to refuse his  human  rights  claim.  He  appeals  on  the
         grounds that his removal  from  the  UK  would  be  unlawful  under
         section 6 of the Human Rights Act  1998  (s.84(1)(c)  of  the  2002
         Act).


     20. The burden of proof rests  on  the  appellant  to  prove  that  his
         removal would breach Article  8.  The  standard  of  proof  is  the
         balance of probabilities. In determining the  appeal  I  must  have
         regard to the best  interests  of  the  appellant's  two  children,
         pursuant to s.55 of the Borders, Citizenship  and  Immigration  Act
         2009.


     21. Section 117A of the 2002 Act requires a Tribunal, when  considering
         the public interest question, to have regard, in particular, to the
         factors listed in  section  117B,  and,  in  cases  concerning  the
         deportation of foreign criminals, to the considerations  listed  in
         section 117C.


     22. Section 117B reads,

             117B Article 8: public interest considerations  applicable  in
             all cases


             (1) The maintenance of effective immigration  controls  is  in
             the public interest.


             (2) It is in the public interest, and  in  particular  in  the
             interests of the economic well-being of  the  United  Kingdom,
             that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
             are able to speak  English,  because  persons  who  can  speak
             English-
             (a) are less of a burden on taxpayers, and
             (b) are better able to integrate into society.


             (3) It is in the public interest, and  in  particular  in  the
             interests of the economic well-being of  the  United  Kingdom,
             that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
             are financially independent, because such persons-
             (a) are not a burden on taxpayers, and
             (b) are better able to integrate into society.


             (4) Little weight should be given to-
             (a) a private life, or
             (b) a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,  that  is
             established by a person at a time when the person  is  in  the
             United Kingdom unlawfully.


             (5)  Little  weight  should  be  given  to  a   private   life
             established  by  a  person  at  a  time  when   the   person's
             immigration status is precarious.


             (6) In the case of a person who is not liable to  deportation,
             the public interest does  not  require  the  person's  removal
             where-
             (a)  the  person  has  a  genuine  and   subsisting   parental
             relationship with a qualifying child, and
             (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the  child  to  leave
             the United Kingdom.

     23. Section 117C lists additional  public  interest  considerations  in
         cases involving foreign criminals.


             (1) The deportation of  foreign  criminals  is  in  the  public
        interest.


             (2) The  more  serious  the  offence  committed  by  a  foreign
             criminal, the greater is the public interest in deportation  of
             the criminal.


             (3) In the case of a foreign criminal ("C") who  has  not  been
             sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four  years  or  more,
             the public interest requires C's deportation unless Exception 1
             or Exception 2 applies.


             (4) Exception 1 applies where-
             (a)C has been lawfully resident in the United Kingdom for  most
             of C's life,
             (b)C is  socially  and  culturally  integrated  in  the  United
             Kingdom, and
             (c)there would be very significant obstacles to C's integration
             into the country to which C is proposed to be deported.


             (5) Exception 2 applies where C has a  genuine  and  subsisting
             relationship with  a  qualifying  partner,  or  a  genuine  and
             subsisting parental relationship with a qualifying  child,  and
             the effect of C's deportation on the partner or child would  be
             unduly harsh.


             (6) In the case of a foreign criminal who has been sentenced to
             a period of imprisonment of at least  four  years,  the  public
             interest requires deportation unless there are very  compelling
             circumstances, over and above those described in  Exceptions  1
             and 2.


             (7) The considerations in subsections (1)  to  (6)  are  to  be
             taken into account where a court or tribunal is  considering  a
             decision to deport a foreign criminal only to the  extent  that
             the reason for the decision was the  offence  or  offences  for
             which the criminal has been convicted.

    24. Although s.117C(3) does not make any provision for medium offenders
        who fall outside Exceptions 1 and 2  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  NA
        (Pakistan) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2016] EWCA
        Civ 662 confirmed that Parliament intended medium offenders to have
        the same fall back protection as serious offenders.

Findings of fact and reasoning


     25. I will first consider the appellant's relationship  with  J.  I  am
         satisfied, having regard to the documentary evidence  of  telephone
         calls and text messages, and the  appellant's  statement  and  oral
         evidence, in addition to the evidence of money transferred  to  RR,
         that  the  appellant  has  a  genuine   and   subsisting   parental
         relationship with J. The text messages indicate that the  appellant
         does send money to J and  that  they  have  an  active  and  loving
         relationship. I find that the appellant has visited J and that,  on
         occasion, J has stayed with the  appellant  in  London.  I  am  not
         however persuaded that the appellant has the intensity  of  contact
         with J that he claims. The documentary evidence of telephone  calls
         and messages does not support the appellant's claim to  communicate
         with J everyday, and there are two periods between 27  August  2019
         and 27 September 2019 and between 16 May 2019 and 22 June 2019 when
         there was no evidence of contact between the  appellant  and  J.  I
         take account of the appellant's claim that J lost her mobile  phone
         in respect of the first period of time, but there was  no  evidence
         in support of this other than the  appellant's  own  assertion.  No
         explanation was provided in respect of the 2nd period of time.  Nor
         am I satisfied that the appellant attended the hospital with J when
         she overdosed, as he claimed in her oral  evidence.  There  was  no
         evidence from J or her  mother  that  the  appellant  attended  the
         hospital, nor was there any independent evidence of the same in any
         of the medical notes and reports.


     26. I have carefully considered the medical evidence relating to J. The
         medical records that have been provided to me date back to 7  March
         2018. They note that on 3 October  2018  J  was  feeling  stressed,
         lonely and sad as she had to leave  her  old  school  and  her  new
         friends had decided to 'unfriend' her.  J  denied  there  were  any
         problems at home and had superficial cuts from a  shaver.  She  was
         referred for counselling and the crisis team were advised, and  she
         was later referred to a child and adolescent psychiatrist. A letter
         from a counsellor dated 23 January 2019 indicated that  J  and  her
         mother had decided that she would prefer to  have  her  counselling
         sessions within her school. The self-harm does not appear  to  have
         been occasioned by J's concern that the appellant may be deported.

     27. On 10 September 2019 J attended A&E as a result of a drug overdose.
         This was identified as deliberate self-harm and J was seen  in  the
         mental health clinic. The  medical  notes  indicate  "No  treatment
         required." A note  dated  16  September  2019  suggested  that  the
         overdoes was the result of "emotional immaturity". J and her mother
         were made aware of how to contact mental health services in case of
         crisis and there was not considered to be a need for any follow up.
         A discharge letter dated 10 September 2019  indicated  that  J  was
         diagnosed with "Anxiety Disorder", although no further details were
         provided. The discharge letter indicated that J  took  an  overdose
         following an argument with her father regarding a mobile  phone.  A
         letter from a doctor at the Bassetlaw Mental Health  Liaison  Team,
         dated 11 September 2019, indicated that the  overdose  (of  steroid
         and contraceptive tablets)  was  occasioned  because  J  broke  her
         mobile phone during a "strop" because her  father  bought  her  the
         wrong  model.  There  is  no  indication  that  the  overdose   was
         occasioned by J's concern that her father would  be  deported.  The
         letter stated that J had capacity  to  make  decisions  around  all
         aspects of her care and that she confirmed that she did not want to
         end her life by taking the tablets. Reference was made to J's  cuts
         previously caused by a shaver, which was said to be due  to  issues
         with her boyfriend or rejection by friends. There were  no  current
         risks identified and no current risks that would  indicate  further
         overdose of self-harm and J was safely discharged. In the  'Summary
         and Care Plan' the  doctor  stated,  "I  can  see  no  evidence  to
         indicate that the overdose  was  the  result  of  an  acute  mental
         illness, and was in fact the result of what I feel to be  emotional
         immaturity. I therefore feel that [J] does not require any  further
         follow up from CAMHS."

     28. Given that J has a genuine  and  subsisting  parental  relationship
         with her father, and that she lives with her  mother,  who  is  her
         primary carer, and in light  of  her  previous  self-harm  and  her
         overdose,  indicating  that   she   is   a   child   with   certain
         vulnerabilities, I am satisfied that it is in  her  best  interests
         for her father to remain in the UK so that they can continue  their
         relationship by face-to-face contact.

     29. J's best interests are the primary consideration, but they are  not
         the paramount consideration. Having found that it is  in  J's  best
         interests for the appellant  to  remain  in  the  UK,  I  must  now
         consider whether his deportation would have an unduly harsh  impact
         on her.

     30. The meaning of  "unduly  harsh"  has  been  considered  in  several
         authorities. In MK Sierra Leone [2015]  UKUT  00223  (IAC)  it  was
         noted at paragraph 46 that "unduly  harsh"  does  not  equate  with
         uncomfortable, inconvenient or merely difficult ... "harsh" in this
         context, denotes something severe, or bleak ... the addition of the
         adverb "unduly" raises an already elevated  standard  higher.  This
         was approved in KO (Nigeria) [2018] UKSC 53. At  paragraph  23  the
         Supreme Court observed  that  one  is  looking  for  "a  degree  of
         harshness going beyond what would necessarily be involved  for  any
         child faced with  the  deportation  of  a  parent"  (see  also  the
         decision in RA (s.117C: "unduly harsh"; offence: seriousness)  Iraq
         [2019] UKUT 00123 (IAC), at  [8]  and  [17],  confirming  the  high
         threshold for the 'unduly harsh' test).

     31. The evidence before me indicates  that  J  will  clearly  miss  the
         appellant if he is deported. In a text message  sent  on  9  August
         2019 J states she is devastated that the appellant may be deported.
         It is clear that she may feel great distress as a result  and  that
         her life may be made more difficult. Those however are  the  likely
         consequences of the deportation of any foreign criminal who  has  a
         genuine and subsisting relationship with a child  in  this  country
         (SSHD v PG (Jamaica) [2019] EWCA Civ 1213).  Although  there  is  a
         diagnosis of 'anxiety disorder' relating to  J,  and  she  recently
         took an overdose, the medical evidence suggests that this  occurred
         as a result of 'emotional immaturity' rather  than  any  underlying
         mental health issue. I note the absence of any follow up from CAMHS
         following the overdose and that J has in the past had  the  support
         of counsellors at her school. J lives with her mother  who  is  her
         primary carer and who will  continue  to  ensure  her  welfare  and
         security. Whilst I am prepared to find that J is, at least to  some
         degree, a  vulnerable  child,  the  evidence  before  me  does  not
         indicate that her safety, mental and emotional  health  or  welfare
         will be jeopardised to an appreciable degree if the  appellant  was
         deported.  Although  they  will  be  unable   to   continue   their
         relationship in its current form, the appellant  will  be  able  to
         continue communicating with J on  the  telephone  and  through  the
         Internet. Communication will not therefore be severed. I note  from
         the photographs and the statements that J has a  good  relationship
         with her paternal cousins and I take into account  the  possibility
         that the appellant's absence may prevent J from continuing to visit
         her cousins, but  there  was  no  suggestion  that  she  could  not
         continue to contact  her  cousins  through  more  remote  forms  of
         communication or that they would be unable  to  visit  her.  Having
         holistic regard to the evidence relating to the impact on J of  the
         appellant's deportation, I find the impact  on  her  would  not  be
         unduly harsh.

     32. I now consider the appellant's 's relationship with DK.  Until  the
         application made by the appellant to the Family Court  he  had  not
         seen DK since February 2018. I accept, having regard to the  letter
         from Nova Solicitors, that the appellant began  to  see  DK  weekly
         based on an informal agreement sometime in mid-2019.  This  however
         stopped shortly afterwards. The appellant alleged that DK's mother,
         DG, had been ill-treating DK and that,  as  a  result  of  concerns
         expressed by him, the Social Services carried out an investigation.
         The appellant did not however make any application  for  the  Upper
         Tribunal to obtain any of the relevant materials  from  the  Family
         Court through the  mechanism  of  the  Protocol  on  Communications
         between the judges of the Family Courts and Immigration and  Asylum
         Chambers of the First tier Tribunal  and  Upper  Tribunal,  despite
         having ample opportunity to do so. Nor was there any evidence  that
         the appellant  sought  permission  to  obtain  disclosure  of  such
         material from the  Family  Court  itself.  The  appellant  has  had
         substantial opportunity to obtain such material since  lodging  his
         application with the Family Court. There was no evidence before  me
         of any interim order the Family Court may have issued  relating  to
         direct or indirect contact between the appellant and his son. There
         was no application at the hearing before me to  adjourn  so  as  to
         facilitate the disclosure  of  any  relevant  materials.  In  these
         circumstances, whilst I  accept  that  the  appellant  has  ongoing
         Family Court proceedings (despite the absence  of  any  independent
         evidence that a hearing occurred on 20 December 2019   and  that  a
         further hearing will occur  on  4  March  2020),  there  is  little
         evidence before me that the appellant currently has a  genuine  and
         subsisting parental relationship with DK.


     33. I accept that the appellant previously had a genuine parental  with
         DK when he lived with him and DG, and that the respondent  accepted
         as much in her Reasons for Refusal Letter. The factual  matrix  has
         however materially changed since then. Whilst I acknowledge,  as  a
         relevant factor, the possibility of such a relationship  developing
         in  the  future  (Makhlouf  v  SSHD  [2016]  UKSC  59),  there   is
         insufficient evidence before me, for the purposes of  this  appeal,
         that such a relationship currently exists.

     34. Even if I am wrong, and the appellant does, or  is  likely  in  the
         foreseeable future, to establish a genuine and subsisting  parental
         relationship, I am not persuaded that  the  impact  on  DK  of  the
         appellant's deportation would be unduly  harsh.  In  reaching  this
         conclusion I proceed on the basis that it is in DK's best interests
         that the appellant remain in the UK,  although  there  is  actually
         little clear evidence in support of this proposition. There  is  no
         reliable evidence before he that DG has been ill-treating  DK.  The
         medical records for DK indicate that DG receives  frequent  support
         from Health Visitors and suggest that DG cares for DK by taking him
         to the GP surgery when he is unwell. There was some concern that DK
         may be on the autistic spectrum. An initial report on DK, dated  15
         January 2019 and issued by the Speech and Language Therapy Dept  of
         the Lordship Lane Health Centre, indicated that DK  presented  with
         delayed  attention,  listening  and  play   skills,   and   delayed
         understanding of language and use  of  expressive  language.  There
         were with difficulties with his social interaction skills.  DG  was
         given advice on action to take with DK and he and his  mother  were
         invited to a Social Communication Group. In 2017 DK  had  been  the
         subject of a Child In Need and Child Protection plan as a result of
         allegations of domestic violence between the appellant and DG,  but
         the limited evidence before me suggests that DK currently  has  the
         support from his NHS Trust and is properly supported and cared  for
         by his mother, with whom he lives. There is little evidence of  the
         likely impact on DK  should  the  appellant  be  deported.  In  the
         absence of such evidence, and given that  DK  is  currently  living
         with his mother, who is his primary carer, I am not persuaded  that
         the high threshold of undue harshness has been met.


     35. I now consider whether the  appellant  meets  the  requirements  of
         paragraph 399A, mirrored in Exception 1 in s.117C(4)  of  the  2002
         Act. It is not in dispute that the appellant has not been  lawfully
         resident in the UK for most of his life. This alone  is  sufficient
         to dispose of his appeal so far as it relates to paragraph 399A and
         Exception 1 in s.117C(4). I am prepared to find that the  appellant
         is socially and culturally integrated in  the  UK.  I  so  doing  I
         acknowledge  that  the  appellant's  criminal  convictions  do  not
         exclude him from integrating into society (CI (Nigeria) [2019] EWCA
         Civ 2027), and that he has, in the past, worked in the UK, that  he
         passed the Life in the UK test in 2014, and that  he  has  siblings
         and nieces and  nephews,  one  of  whom  is  said  to  be  autistic
         (although I have not seen an independent evidence of  this).  I  do
         not  find  that  there  are  very  significant  obstacles  to   his
         integration in Turkey. He has no fear of  ill-treatment  in  Turkey
         and lived in the country for more than half his life, including his
         formative years. He is familiar with the language and the  culture.
         He is fit and is capable of finding employment given his employment
         experience in the UK. There is no reliable evidence suggesting that
         his siblings in the UK would not provide him with support, at least
         in the short  term,  as  he  said  his  brothers  were  giving  him
         financial  support  in  the  UK.  Having  regard   the   principles
         established in SSHD v Kamara [2016] EWCA Civ  813  and  AS  v  SSHD
         [2017] EWCA Civ 1284, which considered the concept of "integration"
         in  s.117C(4)(c)  of  the  2002  Act  and  paragraph  399A  of  the
         immigration rules, and  applying a  broad  evaluative  judgment,  I
         find that the appellant will be be enough of an insider in terms of
         his understanding of how life in Turkish society is carried on  and
         that he has a capacity to participate  in  it,  so  as  to  have  a
         reasonable opportunity to be accepted there, to be able to  operate
         on a day-to-day basis in Turkey and to build up within a reasonable
         time a variety of human relationships  to  give  substance  to  his
         private or family life.


     36. I now consider whether there are very compelling circumstances over
         and above those in Exception 1  and  2  rendering  his  deportation
         disproportionate under Article 8. When determining the existence of
         'very compelling circumstances' the appellant is entitled  to  rely
         on matters identified in Exception 1 and 2 in s.117C, but he  needs
         to point to features of his case of a kind mentioned in  Exceptions
         1 and 2, or features falling outside the circumstances described in
         those  Exceptions  which  makes  his  claim  based  on  Article   8
         especially strong (NA (Pakistan), at  [25]  to  [29];  RA  (s.117C:
         "unduly harsh"; offence: seriousness) Iraq [2019] UKUT 00123 (IAC),
         at [20]).


     37. In the Court of Appeal decision in Rhuppiah [2016]  EWCA  Civ  803,
         Sales  LJ  referred  to  the  "appropriately  high   threshold   of
         application" for the 'very compelling circumstances' test (a  point
         undisturbed on appeal to the Supreme Court). This chimes with  what
         was said in  Hesham  Ali  [2016]  UKSC  60  (at  [38])  that  'very
         compelling circumstances' means "a very strong claim indeed." In NA
         (Pakistan) Jackson LJ held, at [33] and [34]

             Although  there  is  no   'exceptionality'   requirement,   it
             inexorably follows from the statutory scheme that the cases in
             which circumstances are sufficiently  compelling  to  outweigh
             the high public interest in  deportation  will  be  rare.  The
             commonplace incidents of family life, such as  ageing  parents
             in poor  health  or  the  natural  love  between  parents  and
             children, will not be sufficient.

             The best interests of children certainly carry  great  weight,
             as identified by Lord Kerr in HH v Deputy  Prosecutor  of  the
             Italian Republic [2013] 1 AC 338 at [145]. Nevertheless, it is
             a consequence  of  criminal  conduct  that  offenders  may  be
             separated from their children for many years, contrary to  the
             best interests of those children. The desirability of children
             being with both parents is a commonplace of family life.  That
             is not  usually  a  sufficiently  compelling  circumstance  to
             outweigh  the  high  public  interest  in  deporting   foreign
             criminals.

     38. In  RA  (Iraq)  the  test  in  s.117C(6)  was  described  as  "very
         demanding."


             ... The fact that, at this point, a tribunal  is  required  to
             engage in a wide-ranging proportionality  exercise,  balancing
             the weight that appropriately falls to be given to factors  on
             the proposed deportee's side of the balance against the weight
             of the public interest, does  not  in  any  sense  permit  the
             tribunal to engage in the  sort  of  exercise  that  would  be
             appropriate in the case of someone who is not within the ambit
             of section 117C. Not only must regard be had  to  the  factors
             set out in section 117B, such as giving  little  weight  to  a
             relationship  formed  with  a  qualifying  partner   that   is
             established when the  proposed  deportee  was  in  the  United
             Kingdom unlawfully, the public interest in the deportation  of
             a foreign criminal is high;  and  even  higher  for  a  person
             sentenced to imprisonment of at least four years.


     39. In RA (Iraq) and MS (s.117C(6):  "very  compelling  circumstances")
         Philippines [2019] UKUT 00122 (IAC),  both  of  which  analysed  KO
         (Nigeria), it was held that, in determining whether there are  very
         compelling  circumstances  over  and  above  those   described   in
         Exceptions 1 and 2, a Tribunal will need  to  have  regard  to  the
         seriousness of the offence and will  need  to  engage  in  a  wide-
         ranging evaluative exercise.


     40. On 15 June 2015 the appellant received a sentence of 19 months,  on
         a guilty plea, for burglary and theft of a dwelling. The sentencing
         judge stated,  "This  was  a  very  bad  offence  of  its  type.  A
         considerable amount of damage, gratuitous damage, was done  to  the
         property." The sentencing judge was unable to  say  precisely  what
         value of property was lost, "but it  was  clearly  significant."  I
         note the appellant's other,  earlier  convictions  as  set  out  in
         paragraph 5 above, and that he has not committed any offence  since
         the index offence in 2014 and I weight this in  his  favour.  Given
         the length of  sentence  and  the  Sentencing  Judge's  remarks,  I
         consider the offence to be serious. There is limited evidence  that
         the appellant is at risk of re-offending and I accept that  he  has
         expressed regret for his offending. Given the consequences  of  the
         appellant's criminality on his lawful residence in the UK  and  his
         relationship with his children, I am satisfied that his remorse  is
         genuine. I take this into account when assessing the  existence  of
         very compelling circumstances.

     41. In assessing the weight of the  public  interest  I  take  addition
         account of the principle of general deterrence (see MS  (s.117C(6):
         "very compelling  circumstances")  Philippines  [2019]  UKUT  00122
         (IAC), at [49] to [52]). I do not hold against  the  appellant  the
         public interest factors in s.117B(2) & (3). In the appellant's case
         these are neutral factors. Although the appellant gave evidence via
         the Turkish interpreter it was apparent that he  had  a  reasonably
         good grasp of English (unsurprising given his length  of  residence
         in the UK),  although  he  mentioned  receiving  benefits  he  also
         indicated that he was financially supported  by  his  brothers  and
         brother-in-law and that he would be capable of work if  allowed  to
         remain in the UK. I also attach weight to the  public  interest  in
         the maintenance of immigration control,  noting  however  that  the
         appellant had ILR from 2008 until the making of a deportation order
         in 2016. I must attach little weight  to  the  appellant's  private
         life established when he was in the UK unlawfully, but I take  full
         account that he had ILR between 2008 and  2016.  I  note  that  the
         appellant is currently in another relationship. Little evidence was
         however adduced in support of this  relationship  and  his  current
         partner did not prepared a  witness  statement  and  did  not  give
         evidence.


     42. I take into account, in my holistic assessment of  the  appellant's
         claim,  his  relationships  with  both  his   children,   and   his
         relationship with his siblings and his nieces and nephews.  I  note
         the  letter  from  the  appellant's  sister  which  refers  to  the
         relationship between him and her son, who is said to have  learning
         difficulties. I am prepared to accept that the appellant does  have
         a good relationship with his nephew,  but  I  reject  Ms  Nnumani's
         submission that the appellant has a  'parental'  relationship  with
         his  nephew;  the  child  has  his  own  parents  and   there   was
         insufficient evidence to suggest that the child's parents  did  not
         discharge their  parental  responsibilities.  I  have  additionally
         considered the appellant's private life established in the 18 years
         that he has resided in the UK, including  his  employment  and  the
         degree of his integration, and the  difficulties  he  may  face  in
         reintegrating in Turkey after his long absence. Having cumulatively
         considered  all  these  factors,  and  balanced  them  against  the
         identified public interests, I am not persuaded that there are very
         compelling circumstances such that  his  deportation  would  breach
         Article 8.



Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


D.Blum                              18 February 2020

Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Blum
