
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  PA/11250/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11 July 2019                      |On 18 July 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                              UT JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     R R
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr Diwyncz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Chaudry, of Latta & Co, Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. Parties are as above, but the rest of this decision refers to  them  as
    they were in the FtT.

 2.  The  SSHD  appeals  against  the  decision  of  FtT  Judge   Farrelly,
    promulgated on 25 March 2019, on the grounds set out in the application
    filed with the FtT on 8 April 2019.

 3. The grounds are misleading in suggesting that  in  the  FtT  there  was
    "little in the way of any fresh evidence and no  cross  examination  of
    the appellant".  The responsibility does not  lie  personally  with  Mr
    Diwyncz, who had access to the case file only late on  the  day  before
    the hearing in the UT, and who very properly advised that evidence  had
    been taken from witnesses, including  the  appellant,  who  was  cross-
    examined, and that the relevant notes kept by his colleague in the  FtT
    ran to 20 pages.   This  corresponds  with  the  records  kept  by  the
    appellant's representative and by the judge.

 4. Mr Diwyncz said that  in  accordance  with  the  SSHD's  usual  working
    procedures, the grounds would have been  prepared  with  sight  of  the
    decision, but not with sight of the full file or record of proceedings.

 5. Inadvertence may excuse the official who drew the grounds, but not  the
    respondent.  There is no reason for systems not to be in place,  within
    relevant time constraints, to ensure that authors of grounds are  fully
    informed of the case which was before the FtT.

 6. The grounds overstate  the  significance  which  the  FtT  should  have
    attached to a previous decision in the case of the appellant's brother.
     They understate the extent of other evidence  before  the  FtT.   They
    misrepresent the FtT's approach to the previous decision.  It  was  not
    given "no weight", as the  grounds  assert  at  paragraph  3.   It  was
    correctly described at paragraph 11, under reference to case law, as "a
    starting point to be departed from dependent on the evidence".

 7. The appellant's rule 24 response to the grant  of  permission  is  well
    taken.

 8. The grounds, on excision of their errors, do not rise above  insistence
    that the FtT should have  taken  the  failure  of  the  appeal  of  the
    appellant's brother as determinative, which it was not.

 9. The grounds fail to show that the decision of the  FtT  should  be  set
    aside for error on any point of law.

10. The appeal to the UT is dismissed.   The  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal stands.

11. The FtT made an anonymity direction, which is preserved herein.


      [pic]

      11 July 2019
      UT Judge Macleman




