
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11148/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|No hearing                                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|29 November 2018                              |On 10 December 2018           |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT


                                   Between

                                 PRUDENCE [N]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. On 29 October 2018 I wrote to the parties as follows:

         "I have reviewed the file in this case.


         Permission to appeal was granted for the following reasons:


                "The grounds allege that the Judge referred  to  the  public
                interest factors in s117B of the 2002 NIA Act in the context
                of an asylum claim, which was an arguable error of law.  The
                Judge referred to the appellant needing to "prove" that  the
                agent took her passport (at para 17) which was  arguably  in
                error. The wording  of  para  17  is  difficult  to  follow.
                Although the Judge referred to the  rules  (paras  339L  and
                339N) they do  not  appear  to  have  been  applied  in  the
                credibility  assessment.  Regarding  delay,  the   appellant
                arrived in Belfast on 1 January 2016 and claimed  asylum  on
                arrival. The Judge refers to  a  lack  of  corroboration  of
                events which occurred in Zimbabwe (e.g. at paras 20-21)  but
                the circumstances of the appellant's claim were such that it
                was not reasonable to expect her  to  provide  corroborative
                evidence.
                I have carefully considered the decision. The  reference  to
                s117B has no place in  an  asylum  appeal  and  the  Judge's
                reference to this is arguably in error. The decision records
                that the appellant arrived in Belfast on 4 January 2016 (not
                1 January 2016 as alleged in the grounds) but she appears to
                have applied on arrival so that any reference  to  delay  in
                applying after arrival in the UK was arguably in error.  The
                grounds state that it  was  not  reasonable  to  expect  the
                appellant to provide corroborative evidence  which  may  the
                case. However, the Judge makes no reference to the  relevant
                standard of proof  before  para  34  in  which  there  is  a
                reference  to  the  "lower  standard"  in  respect   of   an
                assessment of internal flight. There is arguably an error in
                the Judge's approach  in  terms  of  the  burden  of  proof,
                including the requirement for corroborative evidence.  There
                is an arguable error of law in the decision.  Permission  to
                appeal is granted."

             I propose without more ado to allow the appeal, set aside  the
             determination of the First-tier Tribunal and  direct  a  fresh
             hearing before that Tribunal.  Any submissions to the contrary
             will be considered if received within 14 days of the  date  of
             this letter."

 2. No response has been received.

 3. I now allow the appeal to this Tribunal, set aside the  decision  under
    appeal on the ground of error of law.  I remit the appeal to the First-
    tier Tribunal and direct that it be determined afresh.




                                                           C. M. G. OCKELTON
                                        VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                     Date: 29 November 2018.
