


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)           Appeal Number: PA/11884/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 21 November 2017             |On 23 November 2017             |
|Prepared on 22 November 2017    |                                |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JM HOLMES

                                   Between

                                    F. A.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Boyle, Halliday Reeves Law Firm
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

        1. The Appellant claimed asylum having entered the UK unlawfully on
           19 April 2016. That application was refused on 16 October 2016.
        2. The Appellant's appeal to the Tribunal against that refusal  was
           heard on 23 March 2017, and it was allowed on asylum and Article
           3  grounds  by  decision  of  First  tier  Tribunal  Judge  Ruth
           promulgated on 7 April 2017.
        3. The Respondent was granted permission to appeal by  decision  of
           First tier Tribunal Judge Ransley on 17 August 2017. That  grant
           fails to analyse the grounds, and merely states  that  they  are
           arguable.
        4. The Appellant filed no Rule 24 notice.  Thus  the  matter  comes
           before me.


      Error of Law?


        5. Mr Diwnycz accepted that he was in some difficulty in  advancing
           the grounds, which on any view are not well drafted.
        6. The first ground complains that the Judge has made  inconsistent
           findings; although an examination of the test  of  the  decision
           discloses (as Mr  Diwnycz  accepted)  that  she  did  not.  What
           appears to have led the draftsman to this challenge is  the  way
           in which the decision is phrased, but the grounds do not suggest
           that the wrong  burden  or  standard  of  proof  were  employed.
           Although the Judge's approach could perhaps be clearer, she  was
           seeking to employ the assessment of credibility  discussed  most
           recently in KS  (benefit  of  the  doubt)  [2014]  UKUT  552  in
           distinguishing between that which was plausible albeit unlikely,
           and that which was incredible and thus untrue.
        7. Grounds two, three and four are complaints about the  evaluation
           of the sufficiency of state protection, internal relocation, and
           the feasibility of  return.  These  complaints  do  not  however
           properly engage with the current country guidance, or, with  the
           evidence from NGO reports that was before the Judge. It was open
           to her to conclude as she did that there was no  sufficiency  of
           state protection, and that the risk of harm (which she  accepted
           existed) in the home area could not  reasonably  be  avoided  by
           internal relocation to Baghdad. What the grounds do not suggest,
           and which I infer was not argued before the Judge, was that  the
           risk in the home area could be avoided by relocation to  another
           city or province within the KRG.
        8. Both parties were agreed that the Judge's approach in  paragraph
           41 of the decision was wrong, both  in  terms  of  the  evidence
           before her, and the current country guidance. The Appellant  had
           accepted that he had been  lawfully  issued  with  a  legitimate
           passport when in Iraq. His was therefore a replacement  passport
           situation,  using  the  centrally  available  passport  records,
           rather than the situation of one who  needed  to  be  documented
           from  the  "family  book"  in  circumstances  where  he   denied
           knowledge of the details that would allow it to  be  identified.
           Return was therefore feasible, but nothing turns on that,  since
           the appeal did not fall to be decided on humanitarian protection
           grounds.
        9. In the circumstances I am  satisfied  that  notwithstanding  the
           grant of permission the grounds identify  no  arguable  material
           error of law. The Judge's decision to dismiss  the  appeal  must
           therefore stand.





   DECISION






      The Decision of the First Tier Tribunal which  was  promulgated  on  7
      April 2017 did not involve the making  of  an  error  of  law  in  the
      decision to dismiss the appeal that requires that decision to  be  set
      aside and remade. That decision is accordingly confirmed.






Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes

Dated 22 November 2017



Direction regarding anonymity - Rule 14 Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008
      Unless and until the Tribunal  directs  otherwise  the  Appellant  is
        granted anonymity throughout these proceedings. No report of  these
        proceedings  shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  him.   This
        direction applies both to the  Appellant  and  to  the  Respondent.
        Failure to comply with this direction  could  lead  to  proceedings
        being brought for contempt of court.




Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes

Dated 22 November 2017
