
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11327/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|Oral decision given following hearing |                                      |
|On 28 April 2017                      |On 13 June 2017                       |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG

                                   Between

                                     km
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms F Allen, Counsel instructed by Wimbledon
Solicitors
     (Balham High Road)
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The  appellant  in  this  case  is  a  vulnerable  young  man.   It  is
    accordingly appropriate to make an anonymity direction  and  I  do  so.
    Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  appellant
    is granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
    indirectly identify him or any member of his  family.   This  direction
    applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.  Failure to comply
    with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

 2. This appeal has a confusing history which it is not  necessary  to  set
    out in any detail.  There have been  earlier  applications  for  asylum
    which have been refused but recently,  on  8  February  2016,  he  made
    another application which was refused on  23  September  2016.   It  is
    right to record that in the  latest  refusal  there  were  some  issues
    raised which were or could reasonably be said to be new  ones.   It  is
    right to recall that the respondent accepted that the fresh submissions
    which had been made did amount to a fresh claim and  did  not  seek  to
    reject them as not amounting to a fresh claim as she  could  have  done
    pursuant to paragraph 353 of the Immigration Rules.

 3. Following the dismissal  of  his  most  recent  claim  for  asylum  the
    appellant appealed and his appeal came before First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Maxwell sitting at Harmondsworth on 15 November 2016.   In  a  Decision
    and Reasons promulgated on 5 December 2016 the  appeal  was  dismissed.
    The appellant now appeals against that decision permission having  been
    granted by Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam on 3 March  2017.   There  is
    one ground of appeal and that is that the judge made a procedural error
    in not granting an adjournment to the appellant to allow his solicitors
    to obtain further evidence and in particular  psychiatric  evidence  in
    support of his claim that he would be at risk on return.

 4. As a preliminary issue, Mr Wilding properly sought to  raise  a  matter
    which he said had been overlooked  by  Judge  McWilliam  when  she  had
    granted permission to  appeal.   The  application  made  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal for permission to appeal against the decision  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal had been made two weeks out of time  in  accordance  with
    the time limits set out within the  Rules.   An  explanation  had  been
    given for the delay which had been before Judge McWilliam but  she  did
    not, when granting permission to appeal,  deal  specifically  with  the
    time point and so time was never extended.  Mr Wilding  submitted  that
    in those circumstances, unless I myself granted an extension  of  time,
    the appeal should not be admitted.  Having considered his submissions I
    extend time to allow proper consideration of the appeal.  The reasons I
    do so can be set out succinctly.   I  of  course  have  regard  to  the
    guidance given by the Court of Appeal in the well-known cases of  Hysaj
    and also the more recent case of SS (Congo).  The delay was  relatively
    slight and in my judgment there has been no prejudice to the respondent
    caused by this delay.  Further, this is a case which as it appears from
    what I say below  is  one  where  the  merits  are  in  favour  of  the
    appellant.  This is a protection claim and  the  consequences  for  the
    appellant of being returned if  ultimately  his  case  is  well-founded
    could be severe and in the circumstances of this case I  consider  that
    it is very clearly in the interests of justice for time to be  extended
    to allow his claim to be properly put.

 5. There are a number of issues raised on behalf of the  appellant  but  I
    need only deal with one.  At paragraph 9 of  his  determination,  Judge
    Maxwell wrote as follows:



         "Application to Adjourn the Hearing

         9.   The appellant, through his representative, applied to  adjourn
             the hearing  of  his  appeal.   The  principal  basis  of  the
             application is set out in a  letter  from  his  representative
             dated 9 November 2016, a copy of  which  is  enclosed  in  the
             appellant's bundle.  In essence, the basis of the  application
             was:

             ...

             (ii)  In  addition,  it  was  suggested  that  it   might   be
                  appropriate to obtain further medical evidence relating to
                  the appellant's mental state; reference being made to  the
                  medical report and  letter  enclosed  in  the  appellant's
                  bundle."

 6. In his original submissions, Mr Wilding  stated  that  if  that  was  a
    correct summary of the way in which the appellant's case had been  put,
    it would have been perfectly reasonable for the  judge  to  refuse  the
    application, because the appellant would  have  had  ample  opportunity
    beforehand to obtain evidence and the  possibility  that  the  evidence
    might help was entirely speculative.  He noted that it was  not  stated
    within the decision that the appellant's representative had  said  what
    evidence it was that they were seeking, which expert they were  seeking
    to instruct, how long it would take and so on.

 7. However, I have been shown the letter of 9 November, from which  it  is
    apparent that what is said at paragraph 9(ii) of the decision does  not
    accurately set out what was contained within that letter.  The relevant
    part of this letter, regarding the medical evidence it was hoped  might
    be adduced, says as follows, at paragraph 2:

         "The  appellant  lived  with  his  guardian  uncle  and  aunt   who
         physically and mentally abused him.  Currently  the  appellant  has
         been taken  over  [to]  the  YMCA.   The  social  worker  Ms  Rabia
         evidenced that the appellant suffers from mental health problem and
         he has been referred to counselling sections at  present.   However
         he has not seen a psychiatrist or a clinical  psychologist  in  the
         recent years.  Therefore we have currently applied for extension of
         disbursements to instruct an independent psychiatrist in  order  to
         provide a detailed report  with  diagnosis.   Physical  and  mental
         health has been deteriorated since he was beaten by his  uncle...".



 8. It is certainly not the case that it was said in this  letter  that  it
    "might" [my emphasis] be appropriate to obtain further medical evidence
    relating to the appellant's mental state; what is said is that  because
    of what has happened to him  since  his  earlier  applications  it  was
    necessary to obtain such evidence.

 9. As the judge later, at paragraph 12, referred to the lack  of  evidence
    of his mental health problems as being a  factor  which  "significantly
    undermines the claim", it is hard to see how this  evidence  cannot  be
    said to be relevant.

10. I have in mind, of course, what was said by the Court of Appeal in  the
    judgment of Moses LJ in the well-known case of SH (Afghanistan)  [2011]
    EWCA Civ 1284 at paragraph 8, as follows:

         "The principle applicable to the  request  for  an  adjournment  to
         adduce evidence on behalf of the appellant was not in  dispute.  It
         is fundamental that the parties should be allowed to answer adverse
         material by evidence as well as  argument  (see,  e.g.,  In  Re.  D
         [1996] AC 593 at 603) and all the more so where the subject matter,
         such as a claim  for  asylum,  demands  the  highest  standards  of
         fairness.".

11. The consequences to the appellant if returned to Sri Lanka, if his case
    is accepted, is obviously life threatening, and  clearly  consideration
    of his claim must demand "the highest  standards  of  fairness".   That
    required the judge to understand fully the way in which his application
    for an adjournment was being put, which it does not appear from what is
    set out at paragraph 9(ii) had  been  the  case.   As  Judge  McWilliam
    stated when giving her reasons for granting permission to appeal:

         "It is arguable that  the  judge  did  not  consider  all  material
         matters when deciding whether or not to grant an adjournment for  a
         full psychiatric assessment e.g. the appellant's age,  difficulties
         he had encountered whilst in foster care and the  referral  by  his
         social worker for counselling."

     Judge McWilliam also noted that:

         "Whilst he took into account the medical evidence that  was  before
         him, the judge accepted the evidence was woefully out of date."

    Judge McWilliam noted also that:

         "The judge concluded  that  there  was  no  purpose  in  adjourning
         because the appellant was not relying on Article 3 in  the  context
         [of] mental health which is arguably an erroneous  approach,  [and]
         the  appellant's  mental  health  is  arguably  material   to   the
         appellant's appeal on asylum and Article 8 grounds."

12. Accordingly, having considered very carefully the decision in light  of
    the material which was in fact before Judge Maxwell, I find that at the
    very least Judge Maxwell failed to give adequate reasons  for  refusing
    the adjournment and this was a procedural error sufficiently serious to
    amount to a material error of law.

13. It follows that his decision must be set aside and it  is  accepted  on
    behalf of both parties that the consequence is that the  appeal  should
    be remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal for reconsideration by  any
    judge other than Judge Maxwell and that none of the findings  made  can
    properly be retained.  I accordingly order as follows:

Notice of Decision

The  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Maxwell  is  set  aside   as
containing a material error of law.  The appeal  will  be  remitted  to  the
First-tier Tribunal, sitting at Hatton Cross,  to  be  heard  by  any  judge
other than Judge Maxwell.


Signed:

                 [pic]
Upper                 Tribunal                  Judge                  Craig
                    Dated:  9 June 2017

