
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11231/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Cardiff Civil Justice Centre|Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 29th May 2019                     |On 13th June 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                                     LWC
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms R Kotak of Counsel, instructed by Milestone
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Howells, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant appeals against a decision of Judge Sangha (the judge) of
    the First-tier Tribunal (the FtT) promulgated on 10th January 2019.

 2. The Appellant is a Malaysian citizen born 5th December 1967 who on 13th
    February 2018 applied for international protection on the basis of  her
    sexuality.  She claims to be a lesbian.

 3. The application was refused on 6th September 2018, the  Respondent  not
    accepting the Appellant's claim to be a lesbian.  The appeal was  heard
    on 23rd November 2018.

 4. The judge heard evidence from the Appellant  and  two  witnesses,  Eddy
    Chin, and Hussain Ashfaq.  The judge did  not  accept  the  Appellant's
    claim to be a lesbian.  The appeal was dismissed on all  grounds.   The
    judge found at paragraph 36;

         "36. I had the benefit of hearing oral evidence from the  Appellant
             and two witnesses on her behalf.  I did not find the Appellant
             to be a credible and plausible witness and I  also  found  the
             other witnesses to be lacking in credibility, reliability  and
             plausibility."

The Application for Permission to Appeal

 5. Five grounds were relied upon, contending that the judge had materially
    erred in law.

    1.   The judge's assessment of the Appellant's credibility was  wrongly
         predicated on stereotypical assumptions and/or he  failed  to  have
         regard for material guidance on the assessment  of  credibility  in
         asylum claims.  That guidance was said to be the  UNHCR  guidelines
         on claims to refugee status based on sexual orientation and  gender
         identity, the Home  Office  Asylum  Policy  Instruction  on  sexual
         orientation in asylum claims,  and  the  Judicial  Equal  Treatment
         Bench Book.

    2.   The judge had  failed  to  give  proper  reasons  as  to  why  the
         Appellant's relationship with her husband and family  are  said  to
         undermine her claim to be a lesbian.

    3.   The judge failed to  have  regard  to  material  evidence  of  the
         Appellant's witnesses, two of whom attended the  oral  hearing  and
         gave evidence confirming their  belief  that  the  Appellant  is  a
         lesbian.

    4.   The judge erred in his approach and reliance  on  the  Appellant's
         immigration history and section  8  of  the  Asylum  (Treatment  of
         Claimants, etc.) Act 2004.

    5.   The judge erred by failing to consider the Appellant's evidence in
         the round.

The Grant of Permission to Appeal

 6. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge  Keane  of  the  FtT  in  the
    following terms;

         "For the reasons mentioned in  the  detailed  grounds  the  grounds
         disclosed arguable errors of law but for which the outcome  of  the
         appeal might have been different.  In particular the judge arguably
         took into account irrelevant considerations at the  outset  of  the
         judge's assessment of the appellant's credibility at  paragraph  38
         of the decision in according weight to the absence of evidence that
         the appellant entered into a lesbian relationship in  Malaysia  and
         to the  appellant's  omission  publicly  or  outwardly  to  display
         lesbian  tendencies.   The  judge  arguably   took   into   account
         stereotypical assumptions as to how a lesbian should  manifest  her
         sexual orientation.  The application for permission is granted."

 7. Following the grant of permission, the  Respondent  lodged  a  response
    pursuant to rule 24 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008, in which it was contended that the judge had not materially erred
    in law and had directed himself appropriately.

 8. Directions were given that there should be an oral hearing  before  the
    Upper Tribunal to ascertain whether the FtT decision contained an error
    of law such that it must be set aside.

My Analysis and Conclusions

 9. At the oral hearing Ms Kotak relied and expanded upon the grounds  upon
    which permission to appeal had been granted.  Mr  Howells  relied  upon
    the rule 24 response.  It was accepted that the judge had erred in  law
    as contended in ground 3, by  failing  to  give  adequate  reasons  for
    rejecting the evidence of Mr Ashfaq.  It was however argued  that  this
    error was not material  as  the  judge  had  given  other,  sustainable
    reasons for not accepting the credibility of the Appellant's  claim  to
    be a lesbian.

10. In considering whether the judge provided adequate reasons for findings
    I follow the guidance in Budhathoki (reasons for decisions) [2014] UKUT
    00341 (IAC) and set out below the headnote to that decision;

         "It is generally unnecessary and unhelpful for First-tier  Tribunal
         judgments to rehearse every detail or issue raised in a case.  This
         leads to judgments becoming overly long and confused and is  not  a
         proportionate  approach  to  deciding  cases.   It   is,   however,
         necessary for judges to identify and resolve key conflicts  in  the
         evidence and explain in clear and brief  terms  their  reasons,  so
         that the parties can understand why they have won or lost."

11. The judge considered the evidence in relation to the Appellant's  claim
    to be a lesbian, and made findings, at paragraphs 38-50.

12. It was rightly conceded that the judge had erred  by  failing  to  give
    adequate reasons for rejecting the evidence of Mr Ashfaq.  In  my  view
    this is a material error of law for the following reasons.

13. The judge at paragraph 36 described both witnesses  to  be  lacking  in
    credibility, reliability and plausibility. It is essential  to  provide
    adequate reasons for reaching such a finding.

14. At paragraph 49 the judge noted that Mr Ashfaq had submitted a  witness
    statement, but noted that no  letter  or  witness  statement  had  been
    provided by Mr Ashfaq prior to the hearing.   The  judge  recorded  "It
    leads me to wonder why he would take out the time, trouble  and  effort
    to  give  a  statement  in  support   of   the   Appellant   in   these
    circumstances".  The answer to that question may be that Mr Ashfaq  had
    been asked to attend the Tribunal hearing to confirm  his  belief  that
    the Appellant is a lesbian.

15. The judge found Mr Ashfaq's statement to be self-serving,  bearing  the
    hallmarks of being written to order.

16. I  do  not  find  that  adequate  reasons  have  been  given  for  this
    conclusion, nor have adequate reasons been given for finding Mr  Ashfaq
    to be lacking in credibility, reliability and plausibility.

17. The evidence given by Mr Ashfaq was that he is a British  citizen,  who
    had known the Appellant for over four years.  She had  been  a  regular
    customer at his restaurant.  Mr Ashfaq confirmed his  belief  that  the
    Appellant is a lesbian.   He  stated  in  his  witness  statement,  and
    evidence at the hearing, that he had met both of her previous  same-sex
    partners.  He described the first of those partners as being a  regular
    customer at his restaurant.   He  also  described  being  told  by  the
    Appellant  and  her  first  partner,  that  they  were  in  a  same-sex
    relationship.  Mr Ashfaq also described meeting the Appellant's  second
    same-sex partner, who came  to  his  restaurant  and  to  whom  he  was
    introduced.

18. The weight to be attached to witness  evidence  is  for  the  judge  to
    decide.  However if a judge decides not to accept what  appears  to  be
    material evidence, then in accordance with the guidance  in  Budhathoki
    the judge must give reasons so that the losing party can understand why
    the evidence has been rejected.

19. It is not clear from reading  the  judge's  decision  why  Mr  Ashfaq's
    evidence was roundly rejected.  It does not appear that Mr  Ashfaq  was
    asked why he had not made a witness statement prior to the date of  the
    hearing.  If this was to be held against him he should have been  asked
    to explain the circumstances.

20. The judge also rejected the evidence of Mr Chin who provided a  witness
    statement and gave oral evidence.  Mr Chin's evidence may  be  regarded
    as not being as material as that of Mr Ashfaq, in that Mr Chin  in  his
    witness statement does not state that he met the two same-sex  partners
    of the Appellant, but was told about them by  the  Appellant,  and  was
    told by the  Appellant  that  she  is  a  lesbian.   The  evidence  may
    nevertheless be material, in that Mr Chin stated that he learned of the
    Appellant being in a same-sex relationship three or four years prior to
    making his witness statement in November 2018.

21. The judge notes that Mr Chin  had  previously  submitted  a  letter  in
    support of the Appellant, and this letter can be found  at  F1  of  the
    Respondent's bundle and is dated 22nd August.  Presumably that will  be
    22nd  August  2018.   This  letter  supports  the  Appellant   in   her
    application for asylum and refers to the Appellant  helping  Mr  Chin's
    wife who was terminally ill.  The judge rejects Mr Chin's evidence that
    the Appellant is a lesbian because this was not mentioned in his letter
    of support.  There is no indication that Mr Chin was asked why  he  had
    not mentioned in his letter of support that the Appellant is a lesbian.
     If this was to be held against him and an adverse credibility  finding
    made, Mr Chin should have been given  the  opportunity  to  provide  an
    explanation.  In my view this also amounts to a material error of  law.



22. The grounds upon which  permission  to  appeal  has  been  granted  are
    lengthy, but I do not find it  necessary  to  consider  each  of  those
    grounds.  This is because, in my view, the material  error  of  law  in
    relation to the rejection of the evidence given by two witnesses at the
    hearing, infects the other credibility findings made by the  judge.   I
    therefore conclude that the credibility findings are unsafe  and  I  am
    afraid, must be set aside.  It is clear to me that  this  decision  has
    been prepared with care but must be set aside as being  unsafe  in  the
    circumstances.

23. The decision must be remade.  There are no findings of fact  preserved.
    At the hearing, both representatives were in agreement, that  if  there
    was an error of law, the appeal should be remitted back to the  FtT  to
    be heard afresh.  Having considered  the  Senior  President's  Practice
    Statements at paragraph 7.2, I find that the appropriate  course  is  a
    remittal back to the FtT to be heard afresh.  This is  because,  it  is
    more appropriate for the substantial judicial  fact-findings  required,
    to be carried out by the FtT rather than the Upper Tribunal.

24. The appeal will therefore be heard again by the  FtT  and  the  parties
    will be advised of the venue, time and date in due course.  The  appeal
    is to  be  heard  by  an  FtT  Judge  other  than  Judge  Sangha.   The
    Appellant's solicitors are put on notice that  the  Appellant's  bundle
    that was before the FtT is not on the Tribunal  file.   The  bundle  is
    missing pages 14-119.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the FtT involved the making of an error of law such that  it
is set aside.  The appeal is allowed to the extent that it  is  remitted  to
the FtT with no findings of fact preserved.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 7th June 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I make no fee award.  The issue of any fee award will need to be  considered
by the FtT.


Signed                              Date 7th June 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall
