
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11076/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5 August 2019                     |On 20 August 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

               DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SUTHERLAND WILLIAMS


                                   Between

                                     MMK
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms K Pall, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    The appellant in person


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. This is an appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
         Chana ('the judge'), dismissing the appellant's appeal against  the
         respondent's decision to refuse his asylum, humanitarian protection
         and human rights applications.

      2. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan.  On  29  October  2017,  he
         appealed against the decision  of  the  respondent  to  refuse  him
         asylum on the grounds that the authorities in Pakistan had  made  a
         baseless, but  serious,  accusation  of  murder  against  him.  The
         appellant maintained that his life had been threatened and that his
         family had cut ties with him for their own  safety.  The  appellant
         further submitted that the respondent had  misunderstood  his  case
         and had not correctly considered it.

      3. The judge refused the appeal on all grounds following a hearing  on
         29 November 2017. The judge's decision and reasons were promulgated
         on 10 January 2018.

      4. In granting permission to appeal from that decision, Upper Tribunal
         Judge Rintoul extended time for submitting the appeal and indicated
         that it was arguable that there was an appearance of  bias  on  the
         part of the First-tier Tribunal, giving rise to a procedural  error
         capable of amounting to an error of law.

      5. It is against this background that the appeal is listed before me.

      6. The appellant represented himself. He  was  courteous  and  helpful
         throughout. He confirmed that he spoke good English and was content
         to proceed without a solicitor/representation. Having reviewed  the
         papers in advance, I was content to  proceed  on  that  basis.  The
         appellant appeared to have a good grasp of the factual elements  of
         his case and had good recall for the history  of  the  proceedings,
         having reduced much of his appeal into writing himself.

      7. The central matter that I need to  address  is  the  allegation  of
         bias. It is on that basis that permission to  appeal  was  granted.
         The suggestion made by the appellant is that 'the judge was not  in
         a good mood' at the time of the hearing:

             'She was not listening to me very well; I told  her  something
             and she put something else in her decision. Sorry to  say  but
             she was ignoring me and at my hearing I felt like  she  wanted
             to kick [me] out from this country. She said  to  me  8  or  9
             times you can go back to your country, nothing gonna happen to
             you'.

      8. An allegation of bias is a serious matter.  It  suggests  that  the
         judge, who is independent, had an inclination or prejudice  for  or
         against one party in the  proceedings,  in  a  way  that  would  be
         considered unfair.

      9. While I have considered with care the  appellant's  submissions  in
         this regard, I am simply not persuaded that the high threshold that
         would be required for such an assertion to be made out  is  met  in
         this matter. Having heard from the appellant, it  is  plain  to  me
         that his disagreement in part lies with the way in which  the  Home
         Office have handled his case and in part with the judge's decision,
         with which he obviously disagrees.

     10. In my  view,  the  appellant's  real  complaint  comes  down  to  a
         disagreement with the judge's findings. Indeed, during  the  course
         of the hearing the appellant focussed largely on his  side  of  the
         story, rather than any allegation of bias against the judge.

     11. The appellant's case was that he was wanted  in  Pakistan  for  the
         killing of a women he had once been promised in marriage to. He had
         not wanted to go through with the marriage. He maintained that  the
         woman in question had committed suicide at a time he was in the UK,
         but her father, who had been a major in the army, had  reported  it
         to the authorities as a murder by the appellant. He stated  he  was
         now wanted by the police and could not safely return to Pakistan as
         a result.

     12. His complaint was that a Home  Office  verification  report,  which
         suggested that the arrest warrant he had produced  was  false,  had
         only been provided to him 'very late in the day'. He therefore  had
         had no time before the first hearing to address the report or prove
         the warrant was real. The appellant  maintained  that  a  telephone
         number provided with the verification report was incorrect, it  was
         not for the police station in question,  but  a  mobile;  and  that
         those providing the report were not even based in  the  area  where
         the warrant had been issued.

     13. The problem with his account, in my view, was that his argument was
         also that he would not have been able to address the allegation  of
         falsification in any event: 'the crime happened in Lahore - how can
         I get evidence? I don't have contact there'. Even if the  appellant
         had applied for an adjournment on the day of the first hearing,  it
         would not have assisted, as he appeared to be maintaining he  could
         not improve on the evidence. Indeed, although he has now  had  many
         months to get further information, he has not done so: 'I have done
         nothing in terms of contacting them (the police). I was scared'.

     14. As a result, in the 18 months that  have  passed  since  the  first
         hearing, the appellant had made no contact with the police  in  the
         UK or in Pakistan,  notwithstanding  him  maintaining  that  he  is
         wanted for a very serious charge of murder about which he  protests
         his innocence.

     15. Further, the appellant has, on his account, had no contact with his
         family or with the family of the lady who died. He has  not  sought
         to explain that he was in the UK  at  the  time  to  them.  He  was
         unaware if there was an international arrest warrant  for  him.  He
         was unaware what status the investigation was at. He produced  some
         newspaper reports to show that the lady's father had  taken  out  a
         personal advert to say the appellant was wanted, but that had  been
         some time ago.

     16. A friend who had been his source of information was now  in  Dubai.
         When asked about any other  friends  in  Pakistan  who  could  have
         helped ascertain the position, he had either not contacted them  or
         was not in contact with them.

     17. Essentially, he repeated the same  account  he  had  given  to  the
         judge. The judge deals with  all  of  this  in  her  determination.
         Notwithstanding the appellant's assertion that the  judge  was  not
         listening, it is plain to me that she had in mind  the  appellant's
         account in reaching her determination. She considered the merits of
         his case, the documents provided and the evidence in the  round.  I
         can find nothing perverse about her findings. The judge  found  the
         account did not hold together. That was a decision she was entitled
         to reach for the reasons she gives.

     18. It is not evidence of bias for an appellant to merely  assert  that
         the judge was in a bad mood. It is difficult to objectively measure
         the  mood  of  another  person,  and  statements   can   often   be
         misinterpreted. Nor is it evidence of bias or an error of law for a
         judge  to  fail  to  deal  with   every   single   factual   issue.
         Disagreement with the judge's factual conclusions, her appraisal of
         the evidence or assessment of credibility, does not  give  rise  to
         bias unless a bias can clearly be shown. A conclusion is not biased
         just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can
         be said to be possible.

     19. The assertion of bias is in my view thin  and  to  a  degree  self-
         serving. The appellant is an intelligent man who studied accounting
         in the UK. He asserts he is wanted for murder.  It  appears  to  me
         that in the modern age of the internet and email  communication  he
         could have  done  more  to  ascertain  what  the  position  was  in
         Pakistan. He has chosen not to. He has made no attempt to  contact,
         for example,  the  magistrates'  court  that  issued  the  disputed
         warrant. He has made no attempt to contact a lawyer in Pakistan (if
         scared of the police) or the bar association that issued the report
         on the allegedly false documents.  As a result,  his  claims  still
         remain largely unsubstantiated.

     20. In the circumstances I cannot find any evidence of bias and nothing
         to suggest that, in any event, there was a material error of law or
         that the outcome would be in any way different if this  matter  was
         to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be reheard.

     21. The allegation of bias in not made out and I find accordingly.

     22. The appellant was not granted permission on any other point, but  I
         observe  the  following:  it  appears  to  me  that   the   judge's
         determination was not proof-read when it was issued  by  HM  Courts
         and Tribunals Service. The appellant  spotted  30-40  mistakes  and
         there is no doubt that the decision is littered with  typographical
         and grammatical errors. While unfortunate (to say the  least)  that
         does not amount to an error of law, and certainly  not  a  material
         error of  law.  Further,  and  almost  certainly  because  a  draft
         decision appears to have been issued, the  judge  appears  to  have
         confused the burden and standard of proof in paragraphs 10  to  13.
         While this may have amounted to an  error  of  law,  it  is  not  a
         material error of law  as  the  judge  has  correctly  weighed  the
         evidence within her determination for the reasons she gives.

Notice of Decision

The appellant's appeal is refused.

The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  sitting  in  Hatton  Cross  on  29
November 2017 under reference PA/11076/2017 is confirmed.



Anonymity direction made. The appellant is unrepresented.



Signed   [pic]
     Date 18 August 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sutherland Williams

