



                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Number:
PA/11378/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Newport                       |    Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 1st August, 2017                    |    On 4th August 2017                |
|                                       |                                      |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHALKLEY

                                   Between

                                     N B
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Howard, Assistant Solicitor with Fountain
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Mills, Home Office Presenting Officer


                     REASONS FOR FINDING AN ERROR OF LAW

1.   The appellant is a national of Rwanda, who claims to have been born  on
    1st January 1987.  He made an asylum claim on the basis that he held  a
    well-founded fear of being persecuted  for  reasons  of  his  political
    opinion.  He claims that he was a member of the Democratic Green  Party
    of Uganda which was clandestinely associated with the Democratic  Green
    Party of Rwanda.

2.   The appellant applied for a visit visa on 15th January 2016, which  was
    granted from 21st January 2016, to 21st Jul, 2016.  He left  Rwanda  by
    air on 22nd February 2016, and arrived at Heathrow  on  the  same  day.
    Some 37 days after arrival, on 31st March 2016, he claimed asylum.  The
    appellant had earlier undertaken a Masters in  Business  Administration
    Degree at Cardiff Metropolitan University but had returned to Rwanda in
    October 2015.

3.   The appellant's claim for asylum was refused by the Secretary of  State
    in a decision dated 28th September 2016.  In an annex to that decision,
    detailed  reasons  for  the  Secretary  of  State's  refusal   of   the
    appellant's claim were set out.  Between paragraphs 27 and 45  of  that
    annex the  Secretary  of  State  details  numerous  challenges  to  the
    appellant's credibility.

4.   The appellant appealed the Secretary of State's refusal and his  appeal
    was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge B Lloyd on 29th March  2017,  at
    Newport.  The judge allowed the appellant's claim, concluding that  the
    appellant was a credible witness.  The Secretary  of  State  challenged
    the judge's determination on the basis  that  the  judge's  credibility
    findings were insufficiently reasoned.  The Secretary of State rejected
    the appellant's claim after having concluded that he was not  credible,
    but the judge was given no reasons at all for rejecting  the  Secretary
    of State's challenge.

5.   At the hearing before me today, Mr Mills  suggested  that  the  judge's
    reasoning for his findings was wholly lacking.  At paragraph 14(5)  the
    judge starts his findings  and  at  paragraph  48  concludes  that  the
    appellant is a credible witness.  Nowhere does the judge deal with  the
    Secretary of State's challenges  to  the  appellant's  credibility,  or
    explain why the judge reached a different conclusion on credibility.

6.   For the appellant, Mr Howard submitted that  the  determination  was  a
    clear and properly reasoned one and should be upheld since any error of
    law (if there was one) was  not  material.   The  judge's  findings  at
    paragraphs 45 to 52 were completely adequate and the  judge  had  shown
    the principles on which he acted and had provided  cogent  reasons  for
    reaching his conclusions.  At paragraph 48 the judge gives his  reasons
    and expands on them at paragraph 49 of the determination.  It is  clear
    from paragraph 16 of the determination that the judge was aware of  the
    Secretary of State's reasons for refusing the  claim.   I  reserved  my
    decision.

7.   A determination should be  a  complete  document.   It  should  not  be
    necessary for either party to look at the judge's Record of Proceedings
    or at any other document to understand  the  judge's  reasons  for  his
    findings. Either party to an appeal should be able to read it and fully
    understand why it was that they won or  lost  the  appeal.   It  should
    contain a brief summary of the evidence and  conclusions  and  findings
    should be properly reasoned.

8.   In this appeal, the Secretary  of  State's  reasons  for  refusing  the
    appellant's application for asylum were set out at some length  in  the
    letter of 28th September 2016, and the annex to it.  As I have  already
    indicated, paragraphs 27 to 45 set out the reasons why the Secretary of
    State did not believe the appellant's account.  They were  serious  and
    comprehensive challenges to the appellant's credibility.

9.   The only mention the judge makes of the Secretary of  State's  view  of
    the appellant's claim is set out at paragraph 16 of the  determination.
    This says:-

         "The appellant's appeal rests very heavily upon the  issue  of  his
         credibility and specifically the credibility of the  account  which
         he advances to argue his  engagement  of  Article  1(A)(2)  of  the
         Geneva  Convention.   The  Secretary  of  State  found   that   the
         appellant's account was inconsistent and not credible.   Supporting
         documents were not reliable in the Secretary of  State's  view  and
         she did  not  consider  that  there  was  a  reasonable  degree  of
         likelihood that the appellant had come to the adverse attention  of
         the Rwandan authorities."

10.  With very great respect to the  judge  ,that  is  a  wholly  inadequate
    treatment of the Secretary  of  State's  refusal  letter.   It  is  not
    necessary to quote the Secretary of State's refusal letter, but  it  is
    necessary to demonstrate that the judge has considered the Secretary of
    State's reasons for finding an appellant not credible and explained why
    the judge has reached a different conclusion.

11.  The judge's findings are  set  out  beneath  a  heading  "Findings  and
    Conclusions" in paragraphs 45 to 51.  I set them out below:-

         "45. I find that the appellant is a national of Rwanda and that  he
             entered the UK lawfully as a visitor on  22nd  February  2016.
             The respondent challenged that entry as one badly blighted  by
             deception.   Some  37  days  after  arriving  in  the  UK  the
             appellant  made  his  application  for  asylum.   He  made  no
             reference in the visa application to any problems  he  had  in
             Rwanda.  Neither did he make any mention of this  children  in
             Rwanda.  All that is true.  At the same time, of course, it is
             the case that principle declared reason  for  his  application
             for entry was to attend his graduation ceremony at the Cardiff
             Metropolitan University.  That much, certainly, was true.


         46.  Of course, it is likely that the appellant came to the UK with
             the underlying intention of applying for  asylum  and  gaining
             immigration status in this country  where  he  had  previously
             spent a year legitimately as a postgraduate student.


         47.  His entry to the UK and  its  overall  veracity  is  blighted.
             However, what I have to address at this appeal specifically is
             whether the appellant has  presented  a  credible  account  on
             which he bases his claim to  engage  Article  1(A)(2)  of  the
             Geneva Convention on the grounds of  his  express  or  imputed
             political opinion in Rwanda.


         48.  In that context, I  have  come  to  the  conclusion  that  the
             appellant is a credible witness.  He has held  anti-government
             and anti-establishment political views in  Rwanda,  and  given
             his history as a member of the DGPU in Uganda, which I accept,
             I believe that he is a marked man in Rwanda.


         49.  There is also the further factor  of  his  father's  political
             history.  His father has had to  flee  to  Uganda,  where  the
             appellant of course has also spent a good  deal  of  time.   I
             have believed him when he said in  evidence  that  the  police
             have drawn a connection between  information  held  about  his
             father  and  his  own  engagement  with  the  police  and  the
             political establishment.


         50.  To exacerbate matters further, he has become involved with the
             Rwandan National Congress since being in the UK.   This  is  a
             political grouping of  principally  exiled  Rwandan  political
             activists.  One example  of  the  risk  that  creates  for  an
             associate of that organisation returning  to  Rwanda,  is  the
             news that Faustin Rukundo's wife was detained by the police on
             a visit to attend her father's funeral.


         51.  There are other examples of  political  ex-patriots  who  have
             faced dire consequences who are positioned  with  the  Rwandan
             government.  A  notable  example  is  the  murder  of  Patrick
             Karegeya in Johannesburg on 1st  January  2014.   There  is  a
             miscellany of other  examples  cited  by  Human  Rights  Watch
             throughout the last section  of  the  appellant's  bundle;  in
             particular at pages 222 and 257."

12.  It seems to me that what the judge has said is wholly  inadequate.   It
    does not deal with any of the challenges made by the Secretary of State
    and does not adequately deal with the appellant's sur place activities.
     The judge has not explained whether the appeal is allowed  because  of
    the appellant's activities before he came to  the  United  Kingdom,  or
    because of his involvement with the  Rwandan  National  Congress  since
    being in the United Kingdom, or because of  both.  If  the  appeal  was
    allowed because of his sur place activities, it  does  not  demonstrate
    any real risk that anyone is likely to know that the appellant has been
    involved with the Rwandan National Congress since being in  the  United
    Kingdom.

13.  I have concluded that the determination  cannot  stand  and  I  set  it
    aside.

14.  Given the delays which would inevitably follow were I  to  adjourn  the
    hearing and reserve the appeal to the Upper Tribunal, I have  concluded
    that I must remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for hearing  by
    a judge other than Judge B Lloyd.

15.  A Kinyarwandan interpreter will be required and two and  a  half  hours
    should be allowed for the hearing of the appeal.

Anonymity order maintained.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Richard Chalkley
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley


