

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11234/2019

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester (via Skype)              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 17 February 2021                          |On 03 March 2021              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON

                                   Between

                                     RGA
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Bedford instructed by Freedom Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mr Melvin Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.

                            DECISION AND REASONS


     1. On 12 February 2020 First-tier Tribunal Judge Gribble ('the Judge')
        dismissed the appellant's appeal on  protection  and  human  rights
        grounds.
     2. Permission to appeal was granted by another judge of the First-tier
        Tribunal on 19 August 2020 the operative part of the grant being in
        the following terms:


        2.   The grounds assert that the judge had erred  in  finding  that
             the appeal had not been advanced on the grounds  of  ethnicity
             or political opinion as these issues had been  raised  in  the
             skeleton argument and it was clear that the appellant had been
             politically active in the UK; the judge  had  made  errors  of
             fact as letters from  the  Red  Cross  had  been  produced  at
             interview; that the  evidence  produced  as  to  the  shooting
             incident had been produced from the Internet and  the  website
             address  was   clearly   visible   which   could   have   been
             independently checked; that the judge  had  erred  in  finding
             that it was reasonable for  the  appellant  to  have  produced
             photographs of the farm in Iraq and that she had not  produced
             names at interview as he  had  not  been  asked;  that  having
             accepted that the appellant was a Sunni Kurd from  a  formally
             contested area who had posted anti-regime material on Facebook
             she had failed to properly consider and follow the CG case  of
             SMO, KSP, IM (Article 15  (c);  identity  documents)  Iraq  CG
             [2019] UKUT 00400 (IAC).


        3.   The judge had found at [9] that the claimant was not based  on
             ethnicity or political opinion but  referred  to  PSG  grounds
             only, which were not identified. At [43] she states  that  the
             first question is whether he is a member of a PSG but  nowhere
             in the decision  does  she  decide.  It  was  clear  from  her
             findings  at  [64]  and  [66]  that  the  appellant  had  been
             politically vocal in the UK but no consideration was given  to
             this aspect of the appeal and seemingly had been  rejected  in
             her finding at [66] that he will be returning to Diyala  as  a
             young Sunni Kurd "without".


        4.   The judge at [57] found that there was  evidence  which  could
             have been produced to substantiate the claim and to settle the
             issues which were troubling her but  there  is  merit  in  the
             assertion that sufficient evidence had been before her, noting
             her finding at [58] that if the appellant had been in a secret
             relationship and his partner had been  killed  by  her  family
             that he would be at risk.


        5.   The assessment of the appellant's credibility is important  in
             assessing the risk to the appellant on return.  The  incorrect
             focus of the appeal has arguably tainted the judge's  findings
             and may amount to an error of law.


3. In the respondents  Rule  24  response  dated  17  February  2021  it  is
   written:


         Judge Scott Baker finds  it  arguable  that  the  claim  which  was
         advanced on Ethnicity,  Political  opinion  and  Particular  Social
         Group [PSG] none of which appears to be considered in the  Decision
         of Judge Gribble.

         Ground 1 argues mistakes of fact ...
         Ground 2 argues General credibility
         Ground 3 argues risk on return ... Advanced risk  category  ...  as
         posted anti govt material on facebook

         Ground 1 ... Submissions

         The Judge, p8 (a) when considering the  HO  RFRL,  notes  that  the
         Refusal notice considers religion and political  opinion  yet  that
         neither were pursued before her.

         The Respondent does not have a copy of the ROP and  the  Presenting
         Officers hearing minute make no mention of ethnicity and  political
         opinion being pursued by Ms Bhachu at the hearing. It maybe, in the
         absence of a statement from  Ms  Bhachu  who  did  not  settle  the
         Grounds of appeal, that the Tribunal will be able to shed light  on
         that Ground of Appeal. It appears that the concentration was on the
         core claim which is the blood feud  {PSG}  which  the  judge  deals
         with.

         It is further submitted that the failure to consider the Red  Cross
         evidence which does not appear to have been before the  FtT  cannot
         be material as it was incumbent on his representatives  to  provide
         the Tribunal with any evidence they thought would assist his claim.
         A judge cannot be  called  into  error  if  the  evidence  was  not
         produced. The Representative had a copy of the Home  Office  Bundle
         which was served on 2 December 2019 with the hearing on 28  January
         2020 some 57 days later and a such would have been aware  what  was
         included and what was not.

         It is further submitted that Judge has assessed credibility on  the
         whole of the claim not  just  the  failure  to  produce  Red  Cross
         letters which in any case take the  matter  no  further  as  it  is
         unknown what evidence was given to the Red Cross on which they will
         make enquires.

         As for the news article it is submitted that the judge was entitled
         to reach a conclusion on that evidence before  her.  This  part  of
         Ground 1 is an argument against  the  interpretation/  findings  on
         that piece of evidence which is a matter for the judge  unless  the
         finding is irrational which it is not.

         Ground 2 ... Submissions
         The credibility findings were open to the judge  to  reach  on  the
    evidence presented
         The judge has assessed the core claim  from  P43  of  the  decision
         directing herself to the correct standard of proof  and  proceeding
         to assess the evidence, whether this appellant is  a  member  of  a
         PSG, and noting the importance of credibility.

         The judge considers the regular contact that he has with his  uncle
         (p48) and rejects the appellant's oral evidence that  none  of  his
         family members had CSID's and finding that his uncle could  provide
         his CSID and INC to aid the re-documentation process.

         The judge also has concerns that the document provide only was sent
         a few days prior to the hearing and relates to an event  from  2017
         but in any event considers the document in line with Tanveer Ahmed.
         (p54)

         Further consideration and findings on the core  claim  continue  at
         55, 56 and 57 and drawing all of the  threads  together  (p64)  the
         judge rejects the credibility of the claim giving her  reasons  and
         finding that he is not a member of a PSG and as such not a Refugee.

         The Judge proceeds to consider  the  Qualification  Directive  (QD)
         [Article 15 C] from p65-72 of the decision.

         Ground 3 Submissions on risk on return / advanced risk categories

         With respect to the author of the grounds of  appeal  posting  anti
         govt rhetoric on facebook is hardly indicative of opposition to the
         Government of Iraq.

         It is submitted that firstly, these do  not  appear  to  have  been
         pursued at the hearing  before  the  FTT    and  secondly,  if  you
         carefully read the decision in SMO,  not  just  the   headnote  (5)
         which is qualified, from paragraph 297 the  Tribunal  qualify   the
         sliding scale analysis required by Article 15(c)

         From paragraph 268-272 of SM  the  U/T  reject  15  (C)  in  Diyala
         province   considering   Dr   Fateh's   evidence   of   "ethnically
         heterogenous nature of Diyala".
         This appellant Has produced no evidence of who is in control of his
         local area or why as a Sunni  Kurd  he  would  be  persecuted.  His
         evidence is that he was from a farming family who had nothing to do
         with politics, in his 29 years, prior to his asylum claim.

         The Tribunal note the opposition to the GoI/ KRG  (p293 (v  &  vi))
         where the UNHCR May 2019 guidance with, at 299, Journalists being a
         risk category and, at 300, minority ethnic  groups  are  considered
         with a "contextual evaluation rather than a presumption required."
         The Respondent fails to see, on the evidence before  the  FtT,  how
         Ground 3 has any merit and again without a statement  from  Counsel
         with a record of proceedings (RoP) as to what was  actually  argued
         before the FtT as to how this appellant could bring himself  within
         any of the enhanced   risk categories.

         The Respondent submits that the GoA have no merit and are  no  more
         than an attempt to re-argue this appeal.

         As a side issue the Respondent notes that no issue  is  taken  with
    the findings on the CSID



Error of law


     4. Ground 1 asserts the Judge erred in law when stating no  claim  was
        pursued on the grounds of ethnicity or political opinion. At [9] of
        the decision under challenge the Judge writes:


        9.   The essential test is whether the appellant has a well founded
             fear of persecution if returned  to  Iraq  by  reason  of  his
             membership of a particular social group. There was  no  asylum
             claim pursued on the ground of ethnicity or political opinion.
             This was confirmed with Ms Bhachu before evidence was heard.


     5. There has been no  statement  from  Ms  Bhachu,  the  advocate  who
        represented  the  appellant  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  to
        suggest otherwise or to support the claim the Judge  was  mistaken.
        The appellant in Ground  1  asserts  the  issue  of  ethnicity  and
        political opinion were raised in the skeleton argument prepared  by
        counsel for the appellant in relation to the issue of risk.
     6. That Skeleton is dated the  28  February  2020  and  sets  out  the
        Convention reason the appellant was seeking to rely upon between [4
        - 8] which  clearly  focuses  upon  the  question  of  whether  the
        appellant is a member of a particular  social  group.  The  opening
        line of [4] reads "blood feuds are capable of falling within PSG".
     7. It is not made out the Judge misunderstood or failed to  appreciate
        the Refugee Convention ground being relied upon by  the  appellant.
        Even if others may have argued ethnicity and political opinion  the
        Judge was entitled, especially having checked the position with the
        appellant's representative, to take the view that  such  additional
        matters were not being pursued and had been abandoned (if they were
        ever live).
     8. The Judge did, however, consider in the alternative the appellant's
        claim that given his own circumstances there will be  a  breach  of
        Article 15(c) of  the  Qualification  Directive.  Such  only  being
        applicable if the appellant was not found to be a refugee.
     9. In relation to the assertion the Judge erred by failing  to  accept
        the appellant had approached the Red Cross as there was no proof of
        the same, which the Judge refers to at [47] where it is written:


        47.  He also, more significantly, said he had been  in  touch  with
             the Red Cross about his mother and sister's whereabouts. There
             was no supporting evidence for such a claim. I accept that  it
             is well known that the Red Cross are massively overloaded with
             requests and have been for some months.  I  am  aware  however
             that when an initial query is made it is responded to  quickly
             and officially by post  or  email.  There  is  a  paper  trail
             created even on an initial enquiry. The  appellant  could  not
             produce any evidence to confirm he had made  such  an  enquiry
             never mind had it taken to the next  stage.  I  remind  myself
             that the  appellant  has  had  highly  experienced  solicitors
             involved in his case and I am  confident  he  will  have  been
             given appropriate advice on  efforts  he  needed  to  make  to
             substantiate his case. That there is no evidence to suggest an
             approach to the Red Cross has ever been made is striking.


    10.  The  appellant  asserts  the  Judge  erred  as  evidence  of   the
        appellant's approach to the Red Cross  was  provided  in  forms  of
        letters at his asylum interview. Even if that is the case  that  is
        not the specific finding of the Judge which is that  there  was  no
        evidence before the First-tier Tribunal to support the claim.  This
        is factually correct. It is not disputed at this stage  before  the
        Upper Tribunal that an application  was  made  for  the  Red  Cross
        letter to be admitted as evidence,  but  that  does  not  establish
        legal error on the basis of the evidence before the Judge.  A  copy
        letter from the Red Cross, provided by Freedom  Solicitors  with  a
        notice  dated  4  February  2021,  is   dated   25   January   2019
        acknowledging a Tracing Enquiry made by the appellant, stating such
        enquiries had started but that it may take some  time  before  they
        have anything to  report.  The  letter  from  the  Red  Cross  also
        contains a notice to the recipient which reads:


        "In the view of the British Red Cross,  the  fact  that  a  Tracing
        Request is or is not opened should not be  considered  as  evidence
        that the sought person is/is not missing, or indeed that the person
        does/does not exist.  Neither  should  the  opening  of  a  Tracing
        Request be considered as credible evidence of  efforts  to  contact
        family members, nor should the  decision  not  to  open  a  Tracing
        Request be seen as absence of such credible evidence. In  the  same
        way, a request to transmit a Red Cross Message, or a failure to  do
        so  request,  should  not  be  considered  as   evidence   of   the
        relationship between the sender and the addressee, or of the status
        of the sender or addressee."


    11. Other than as evidence that a tracing request was made this  letter
        takes the appellant's  case  no  further.  That  evidence  is  not,
        however, sufficient to undermine  the  Judges  adverse  credibility
        findings as a whole.
    12. The appellant raises a further issue in relation to [52  -  53]  of
        the decision in the  of the grounds  asserting  the  Judge  made  a
        mistake and that there was  no  contradiction  in  the  appellant's
        evidence, which the Judge found did exist,  and  a  general  attack
        upon the Judges adverse credibility findings; in Ground 2.
    13. It is clear the Judge considered the risk on  return  and  all  the
        written and oral evidence  with  the  required  degree  of  anxious
        scrutiny. It was having done so the Judge writes at [64]:


        64.  So, drawing the threads together the requirements of paragraph
             339L are not met. He has not shown he is credible and I do not
             find his account of his relationship reasonably likely  to  be
             true. Accordingly, I find he is a Sunni Kurd from  a  formerly
             contested area of Iraq. He has an INC at home. He has  a  CSID
             at home. He has maternal relatives in Kirkuk who are  fit  and
             well. He has posted some  anti  regime  content  on  Facebook.
             These are  the  primary  facts.  He  is  not  a  member  of  a
             particular social group. He cannot be a refugee.


    14. Just as a judge considering whether a court below has erred in  law
        cannot find the same by imposing their own personal view of how the
        evidence should have been interpreted, as the Court of Appeal  have
        recently reminded us, the same applies to those drafting grounds of
        appeal. Whilst the author of the  grounds  may  believe  the  Judge
        should have made different findings having assessed the evidence it
        is not made out the Judge's conclusions in relation to  the  asylum
        claim are infected by material legal error such as they are outside
        the range of those reasonably open to the Judge  on  the  evidence.
        The Judge's findings are adequately reasoned and the weight  to  be
        given to the evidence was a matter for the Judge. It  is  important
        to read the decision as a whole. The finding the appellant had  not
        given a truthful account has not been shown  to  be  an  unsafe  or
        unreasonable conclusion on the evidence.
    15. From [65] the Judge considers the Article 15(c) argument noting the
        appellant has posted anti government posts on Facebook at [66], but
        also noting there was no evidence his Facebook entries had come  to
        the attention of the authorities in Iraq or that the appellant  had
        come to their adverse attention as a result of the same. The  Judge
        repeats in this paragraph that as a young Sunni Kurd  from  Diyala,
        without more, he would not be at risk of indiscriminate violence on
        the evidence.
    16. A reading of the decision shows the Judge  clearly  considered  the
        relevant country guidance caselaw.  Ground  3  refers  to  what  is
        described as risk on return relating to enhanced  risk  categories,
        setting out an argument for how the appellant would be at risk as a
        result of coming in an enhanced risk  category,  but  this  was  an
        issue clearly considered by the Judge. The Judge was  not  required
        to set out chapter and verse in relation to each and  every  aspect
        of the claim and a reader of the determination  can  quite  clearly
        understand why the Judge came to the conclusions  set  out  in  the
        decision that the appellant had  not  established,  notwithstanding
        his Kurdish ethnicity and religious beliefs, that he fell within  a
        class of those entitled to a grant of international  protection  or
        leaving of any format. The Judge's conclusion that on the  evidence
        there was no Article 3 risk made out is a finding within the  range
        of those available to the Judge on the evidence.
    17. Whilst the appellant disagrees with the outcome and clearly seeks a
        more favourable resolution to enable him  to  stay  in  the  United
        Kingdom,  the  grounds  fail  to  establish  arguable  legal  error
        material to the  decision  to  dismiss  the  appeal  sufficient  to
        warrant the Upper Tribunal interfering any further in this matter.

Decision

    18. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  Immigration  Judge's
        decision. The determination shall stand.

   Anonymity.


    19. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)  of
        the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


I make such order pursuant to rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure     (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008.


Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated 22 February 2021
