
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11787/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On Tuesday 25 June 2019              |On Monday 8 July 2019                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      THE HON. MRS JUSTICE THORNTON DBE
                 (SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL)
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  GARY [M]
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mrs Bhatti, Solomon Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

  BACKGROUND

    1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State for the  Home  Department
       against a decision of First Tier Tribunal Judge  Andrew,  promulgated
       on 1 February 2019 ("the Decision") allowing Mr [M]'s appeal  against
       the Secretary of State's decision refusing the Appellant's protection
       and human rights claim in the context of his decision  to  deport  Mr
       [M] to Jamaica.  For ease of reference, we refer below to the parties
       as they were in the First Tier Tribunal, albeit that the Secretary of
       State for the Home Department is technically the  Appellant  in  this
       particular appeal.

    2. The Appellant is a citizen of  Jamaica,  born  on  7  July  1973.  He
       arrived in the United Kingdom on 17 June 2002 aged 28 years.  He  was
       granted leave to enter for 6 months as a visitor, following which  he
       applied for and obtained leave  to  remain  as  a  student  until  30
       September 2006.

    3. The Appellant has a wife, a step daughter and four children under the
       age of 18 years.   The children are aged 11 years, 7 years, 6  years,
       3 years and just under one year.  The Appellant's wife  suffers  from
       fibromyalgia, non-epileptic seizures and depression.

    4. On 1 February 2013 the Appellant was convicted  at  St  Albans  Crown
       Court of possession of a controlled drug with intent to supply (Class
       A Heroin and Class A crack cocaine).  He was sentenced to a total  of
       33 months in prison.

    5. Following his conviction, the Secretary of State made a  decision  to
       deport the Appellant consequent on that conviction.  The  Appellant's
       appeal against that decision was dismissed in 2014 and he was refused
       permission to appeal the decision to the Upper Tribunal.   He  became
       appeal rights exhausted on 1 May 2015.

    6. Thereafter, the Appellant applied for further leave to remain and  to
       revoke the deportation  order.   That  application  was  refused  and
       rejected as amounting to a fresh claim.  In response to  the  setting
       of directions to deport him, the Appellant claimed asylum.  Following
       a judicial review challenge, the Secretary of State  interviewed  the
       Appellant in relation to his protection claim and that and his  human
       rights claim were refused by the decision  under  challenge  in  this
       appeal.

  THE LEGAL FRAMEWORK

    7. As a result of his conviction, as a foreign  criminal  who  had  been
       sentenced to a period of imprisonment of  at  least  12  months,  the
       Appellant is subject to deportation pursuant to section 32(5) of  the
       UK Borders Act 2007. Under section  33(2)  of  the  UK  Borders  Act,
       Exception 1 to the automatic deportation under section  32(5)  arises
       where the deportation  of  the  foreign  criminal  would  breach  his
       Convention  rights  or  the  UK's  obligations  under   the   Refugee
       Convention.

    8. Part 5A of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 sets  out
       the considerations to which a court or tribunal is required  to  have
       regard when determining whether a decision made under the Immigration
       Acts breaches a person's right to respect for private and family life
       under Article 8 European Convention on Human Rights. In the  case  of
       foreign criminals, Section  117C  applies.   In  brief  summary,  the
       statutory provisions and the relevant Immigration Rules  (A398-A399D)
       create two exceptions to deportation based  on  Article  8  ECHR  (in
       relation to family life and private life  respectively)  and  provide
       that, where those exceptions are not  met,  a  foreign  criminal  may
       still succeed where there are very compelling circumstances over  and
       above the exceptions.  In that regard, the statutory  provisions  are
       not clear in relation to the application of that subsection  (Section
       117C (6)) to a medium offender (that is to say  one  sentenced  to  a
       period of twelve months to under four years); the statute refers only
       to those sentenced to four years or more.  However, as the  Court  of
       Appeal concluded in NA (Pakistan) and another v  Secretary  of  State
       for the Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ 662  ("NA  (Pakistan)"),  the
       provision applies equally to medium offenders (see [24]  to  [27]  of
       the judgment).

    9. The FTT and the  Upper  Tribunal  will  respect  the  high  level  of
       importance which the  legislature  attaches  to  the  deportation  of
       criminals (NA(Pakistan) at [22]).

   10. The test in the Rules (and the corresponding test in section 117C) is
       intended to "provide  a  structured  basis  for  application  of  and
       compliance  with  Article  8,  rather  than  to  disapply   it"   (NA
       (Pakistan), at [26]).

   11.  The relevant exception in this case was Exception  2.    It  follows
       that the question which fell to be determined by the FTT was  whether
       the Appellant had  a  genuine  and  subsisting  relationship  with  a
       qualifying child  and/or  partner  and  whether  the  effect  of  the
       Appellant's deportation on that child  or  partner  would  be  unduly
       harsh.

   12.  'Unduly harsh' requires an evaluative assessment on the part of  the
       Tribunal.   It does not equate  with  uncomfortable,  undesirable  or
       merely difficult.   Rather it  poses  a  considerably  more  elevated
       threshold.  'Harsh' in  this  context  denotes  something  severe  or
       bleak.  Furthermore, the addition of the adverb  'unduly'  raises  an
       already elevated standard still higher (RA (s.117C:  "unduly  harsh";
       offence; seriousness) Iraq [2019] UKUT 00123 citing from KO (Nigeria)
       & Ors v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2018] UKSC 53 and
       MK (Sierra Leone) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2015]
       UKUT 223 (IAC) at [7]).

  THE FIRST TIER TRIBUNAL DECISION

   13. FtT Judge Andrew considered the medical condition of the  Appellant's
       wife and the evidence of a social worker, Diana Harris.   She allowed
       the Appellant's appeal on human rights grounds. Her reasons  included
       the following:

           "64    However I am satisfied that this is one of the few  cases
           in which it would be unduly harsh to separate the appellant from
           the children. His wife, because of her illnesses and  unable  to
           care for them and all the caring  responsibilities  for  on  the
           appellant. As Ms Harris says in her report if the appellant  was
           not there then referral would have  to  be  made  to  the  local
           authority as  it  is  no  one  who  can  help  and  support  the
           appellants wife. She has little to do with her step  sister  who
           lives in Bristol and her brother is in prison. There is  no  one
           else. This may ultimately mean that the children will  be  taken
           into the care of the local authority because of  their  mother's
           inability to care for them. That cannot be in the best  interest
           of the children.

           65 In saying this I take into account the ages of the  children.
            There is a baby and it will be a very long time  before  he  is
           able to care for himself.   Harmony, who  is  just  eleven,  has
           health problems of her own and cannot be expected to  assist  in
           caring for her younger siblings.   Divine,  who  is  just  three
           also has health problems.  These are detailed in the  report  of
           Ms Harris.

           66 This is not a conclusion I  have  come  to  lightly.    I  am
           satisfied however that this is one of the few cases in  which  I
           find that the Appellant benefits form the  exceptions  specified
           in paragraphs 398 to 399D of the Immigration Rules.

           67 I am not ignoring the premise that the deportation of foreign
           criminals is in the public interest and I have had regard to the
           risk  of  re-offending,  deterrence  and  public  revulsion.   I
           recognise that the Appellant has no other convictions and  I  am
           satisfied that, on the balance of  probabilities,  his  risk  of
           reoffending is low. However I find that in this case the  strong
           public interest there is in refusing to revoke  the  deportation
           order is outweighed by the Appellant's family life  in  the  UK.
           In saying this I recognise that  the  relationship  between  the
           Appellant and his wife was formed when he  was  present  in  the
           United Kingdom precariously but I am  satisfied  also  that  the
           effect of the Appellant's deportation on his wife  and  children
           would be unduly harsh for the reasons that I have given."

  DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS

   14. On behalf of the Respondent, Mr  Bramble  submitted  that  the  Judge
       failed to give adequate reasons for her conclusion that the  test  of
       'unduly harsh' was met.  She placed too much weight on the suggestion
       that the children might have to be taken into care in the event  that
       the Appellant is deported, given the absence  of  any  evidence  from
       Social Services.  Furthermore, the Judge did not give any  indication
       that  the  wife's  health  issues  post-dated  the  period   of   the
       Appellant's imprisonment when alternative care arrangements must have
       been in place for the children.   Despite being aware  of  the  prior
       Tribunal finding that the best interests of the children were  served
       by remaining with their mother, absent their father, the  Judge  only
       identified the passage of time and additional  children  as  relevant
       additional factors. There was no suggestion that the partner's health
       had deteriorated further.

   15. We are entirely satisfied that there was ample  evidence  before  the
       Judge to justify her decision  that  it  would  be  unduly  harsh  to
       separate the Appellant from his partner and the children.  Mrs Bhatti
       referred the Tribunal to the relevant  evidence,  on  which  the  FTT
       Judge based her decision.  The Appellant's wife  had  been  diagnosed
       with her medical conditions in July 2016, which post-dated the period
       of the  Appellant's  imprisonment.   The  Appellant's  wife  requires
       morphine to control her pain on a daily basis.   The Appellant is the
       only source of practical support to  the  Appellant's  wife,  who  is
       reliant on the Appellant for personal care and care of the  children.
       Two of the children have medical problems.

   16. The Judge correctly treated the previous decision of the FTT Tribunal
       in 2014 as the starting point for her assessment  before  identifying
       the developments which changed matters including the addition of  two
       more children into the family.  This is against the backdrop  of  the
       medical diagnosis of the wife's medical conditions in July 2016.

   17. Caselaw on reasons makes clear that  there  is  no  obligation  on  a
       Tribunal to deal with each  and  every  point  raised  in  an  appeal
       process. Unless a matter is  a  substantial  issue  or  a  'principal
       controversial issue' then generally it cannot fall within  the  ambit
       of the duty to give  reasons.   Even  if  the  matter  relates  to  a
       substantial or principal controversial issue, it is essential for the
       Respondent to show that the Judge has simply failed to  resolve  that
       dispute or, if the issue has been dealt with,  the  reasoning  is  so
       unclear that the Respondent can  show  a  'substantial  doubt  as  to
       whether the decision maker erred in law' and  'such  inferences  will
       not readily be drawn' (South Bucks v Porter (No 2) [2004] 1 WLR  1953
       and Save Britain's Heritage [1991] 1  WLR  168).    The  Respondent's
       challenge on reasons  fails.    The  Judge  addressed  the  principal
       controversial  issues  before  her.    Her  reasoning   is   entirely
       adequate.  The Judge does not overstate the position with respect  to
       Social Services, saying simply that "a referral would have to be made
       to the Local Authority as there is  no-one  else  who  can  help  and
       support the Appellant's wife" ([64]).

   18. The Decision acknowledges that deportation of foreign criminals is in
       the public interest but concludes that this strong public interest is
       outweighed by the Appellant's  family  life  in  the  United  Kingdom
       ([67]). That was a conclusion to which the Judge was entitled on  the
       evidence before her and for the reasons she gives.

  CONCLUSION

   19. The Secretary of State has failed  to  establish  that  the  Decision
       contains any error of law. For the above reasons, we therefore uphold
       the decision.

NOTICE OF DECISION

We are satisfied that there is no material error of law in the decision of
First-tier Tribunal Judge Andrew, promulgated on 1 February 2019.  We
therefore uphold that decision with the consequence that the Appellant's
appeal remains allowed.








Signed   The Hon. Mrs Justice Thornton  Dated: 4 July 2019

