
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                    Appeal Number:
PA/11282/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 13th May 2019                        |On 22nd May 2019                    |
|                                        |                                    |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR

                                   Between

                                     MA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Greer of Counsel, instructed by Parker Rhodes
                    Hickmotts Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is the appellant's appeal against the decision of  Judge  Atkinson
    made following a hearing at Bradford on 22nd October 2018.

Background

 2. The appellant is a citizen of  Iran  born  on  20th  August  2000.   He
    arrived in the UK on 13th November 2017 and claimed  asylum  some  four
    months later on 12th March 2018 as an unaccompanied minor.

 3. The basis for his claim is that he began a relationship with a girl  in
    Iran whose father worked for the Etelaat.  On one occasion he  went  to
    her home, where she was alone, and the couple  had  sex.   Her  parents
    returned and her father  pushed  the  appellant,  who  was  naked,  and
    shouted to his wife to get his  pistol.   The  appellant  picked  up  a
    nearby  vase  and  struck  the  father  over  the  head  rendering  him
    unconscious.  The appellant then put on his clothes and fled.  He asked
    his girlfriend to leave with him but she refused.  He rang his paternal
    uncle who arranged for an agent to enable the appellant to leave  Iran.



 4. The judge said that he found various aspects of the appellant's account
    not to be credible as on its face, it appeared unlikely.

 5. It was unlikely that the appellant would not have  been  aware  of  the
    risks of having  sex  in  his  girlfriend's  father's  house.   It  was
    unlikely that on discovery he would have been able  to  knock  out  his
    girlfriend's father as claimed.  It was unlikely that he would have had
    time to dress and escape in the manner described.  It was unlikely that
    his girlfriend would choose to remain with her father and not flee.  He
    also considered that the appellant's denial of  any  contact  with  his
    family since he  left  Iran  lacked  credibility.   On  that  basis  he
    dismissed the appeal.

The Grounds of Appeal

 6. The appellant sought permission to appeal on the grounds that the judge
    had applied the wrong standard of proof appearing to  apply  the  civil
    standard  when  he  consistently  referred  to  the  account  as  being
    unlikely.  The determination was also at odds with the well-established
    principle that inherent probability could be a  dangerous  and  even  a
    wholly inappropriate factor to rely on in asylum cases.  In  any  event
    there was nothing inherently improbable about the  account  given  that
    the appellant was only 16 at the time.  Moreover the judge's finding in
    relation to a lack of contact with his family since leaving Iran, which
    he said was not credible and suggestive that he  was  not  telling  the
    truth, ignores the fact that the  appellant  was  a  child  during  his
    journey through Europe and overlooks what  is  known  about  the  modus
    operandi of those who smuggle young boys through Europe.

 7. Permission to appeal was initially  refused  by  Judge  Smith  on  20th
    December 2018 but subsequently granted by Upper Tribunal  Judge  Kamara
    on 11th March 2019.

Submissions

 8. Mr Greer  relied  upon  his  grounds.   He  said  that  the  judge  had
    substituted his own view of what was likely to have occurred which  was
    irrelevant.  The appellant's account was not so unlikely that it  could
    not have happened.  In his view the  determination  was  insufficiently
    reasoned and could not be sustained.

 9. Mr Diwnycz defended the determination  and  said  that  the  judge  was
    entitled not to believe the appellant's account for the  reasons  which
    he gave.

Findings and Conclusions

10. This determination is a little thin  which  renders  it  vulnerable  to
    appeal.  However I am satisfied that the judge did not err in law.

11. First, this is a very experienced Immigration Judge.  I  conclude  that
    his use of the term unlikely does not indicate that he was applying the
    civil standard of proof, rather that it was shorthand for  the  correct
    standard which is that of reasonable degree of likelihood.

12. Second, the appellant's account is indeed inherently  implausible.   He
    says that he entered his girlfriend's house with a view to having a cup
    of tea and in the course of the visit they became  intimate  and  moved
    into her bedroom.  This in itself is not entirely impossible but it  is
    highly unlikely in the context of rural Iran,  particularly  since  his
    girlfriend's father was clearly a significant figure in the village who
    had his own pistol.

13. Although the grounds of appeal refer to a large vase, so far as  I  can
    see there is nothing in the appellant's evidence which suggests how big
    the vase was.  It is variously described as a vase with flowers  in  it
    in his statement and a pot in the interview.  The judge was entitled to
    conclude that it was wholly implausible that  the  appellant,  who  was
    unclothed  at  the  time,  would  have  been  able  to  knock  out  his
    girlfriend's father as claimed and then have time  to  escape,  leaving
    his girlfriend behind.

14. So far as the second ground is concerned  whilst  it  is  indeed  quite
    possible that the appellant would have had difficulty in contacting his
    family during the journey to the UK, at the date of the hearing, he had
    been here for almost a year. It was open to the judge to conclude  that
    the fact that he had not been in contact with his  family  during  that
    time cast doubt upon the credibility of his claim.

15. This determination could have been more detailed.  Nevertheless for the
    above reasons, it is sustainable.

Notice of Decision

The  original  judge  did  not  err  in  law.   His  decision  stands.   The
appellant's appeal is dismissed.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

[pic]


Signed                              Date 21 May 2019


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor
