
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11119/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 16 November 2018                  |On 29 November 2018                  |
|                                     |                                     |


                                   Before
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FINCH

                                   Between
               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and
                                 VICTOR [H]
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. D. Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr. A. Moran, Alex Moran Immigration and Asylum


                            DECISION AND REASONS






BACKGROUND TO THE APPEAL

1.   The Appellant is a national of  Venezuela.  He  initially  applied  for
    asylum with his father and his father's application was refused  on  13
    October 2017. His own application was refused on 16 October 2017.

2.   They appealed and their appeals were listed before First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Sweet on 24 July 2018. He allowed the  Appellant's  appeal  in  a
    decision promulgated on 6 August 2018.  The Secretary of State appealed
    against  this  decision  and  Resident  Judge  Appleyard  granted   him
    permission to appeal on 27 September 2018.





ERROR OF LAW HEARING

3.   At the hearing the Home  Office  Presenting  Officer  stated  that  the
    Appellant was no longer relying on his second ground of  appeal,  which
    was misconceived. Both he and the Respondent's representative then made
    oral submissions which I have  relied  on  when  reaching  my  findings
    below.

ERROR OF LAW DECISION

4.   Section 82(1) of the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002
    states that:
         "A person ("P") may appeal to the Tribunal where-
             (a)  the Secretary of State has decided to refuse a protection
             claim made by P".


5.   In paragraph 1 of his decision, First-tier Tribunal Judge  Sweet  noted
    that the Respondent's father's appeal had been "withdrawn"  as  he  had
    moved to Canada. As a consequence, the Respondent's father's appeal was
    not before the First-tier Tribunal and his name should  not  have  been
    mentioned in the heading of the decision.  In addition, his appeal  had
    not been "withdrawn" for the  purposes  of  rule  17  of  the  Tribunal
    Procedures (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.  More  properly,  it  had  been
    treated as "abandoned" for the purposes of Rules 17A(1)(a)  because  he
    had left the United Kingdom.

6.   At paragraph 33  of  his  decision,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Sweet
    listed a number of concerns which had been raised by the  Secretary  of
    State in relation to the credibility of the Respondent's account.  But,
    in paragraph 34 of his decision he went on to find that,  applying  the
    requisite lower standard of proof and taking into account the objective
    and expert evidence, the Respondent would have a well-founded  fear  of
    persecution if removed to Venezuela.

7.   The Respondent's representative relied  on  the  fact  that  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge  Sweet  had  heard  oral  evidence  and  given  detailed
    consideration to all the evidence before  him  and  that  the  findings
    which he reached were clearly open to him on that evidence and  I  find
    that this is the case. He also noted that there was no country guidance
    in relation to the current situation in Venezuela and, therefore, First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Sweet had to rely  on  the  significant  amount  of
    objective evidence and the two expert reports provided to him. He noted
    the evidence which he had taken into account and made clear findings of
    fact in relation to it.

8.   I have also taken into account the fact that, in paragraph  28  of  his
    decision, the Appellant gave some weight to the document outlining  the
    case against the Respondent for "inciting the people" as there  was  no
    way to verify its origin. He did not assert that it was not  a  genuine
    document and since then Mr. Gomez has confirmed, in paragraph 47 of his
    expert report, that an exaggerated use of stamps, official  papers  and
    formality is common in the Venezuelan  judiciary  and  law  enforcement
    agencies.

9.   In his expert report, Dr. Rodriguez, a  practicing  trial  attorney  in
    Venezuela, stated that he studied records  of  a  case  that  had  come
    before the First Criminal Court of First Instance  and  which  involved
    the Respondent. He relied on his 28 years of experience, as a  criminal
    trial lawyer, when advising the Respondent that if he did attend court,
    he could not expect to receive a fair hearing.

10.  I have also noted that in  paragraph  30  of  his  decision  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Sweet accepted that the Respondent had been charged with
    conspiracy against the Government and public incitement  and  had  been
    bailed to return to court on 8 January 2016. In  paragraph  32  of  his
    decision, he also found that there had been more than 11.000 detentions
    for political reasons in Venezuela between February 2014 and  September
    2017.

11.  Mr. Gomez gave a detailed account of his expertise in the  law  of  the
    Bolivarian Republic  of  Venezuela  and  had  been  provided  with  all
    relevant documents relating to the Respondent's application for  asylum
    and his subsequent appeal.  He did not comment on the content  or  form
    of the document being relied upon by the  Respondent  but  it  was  his
    opinion that the account given by him up to and after being detained in
    Venezuela was plausible in the context of the current social, political
    and economic conditions there. In paragraphs 23 and 24 of  his  report,
    he also confirmed that there was a strict food distribution  system  in
    force in Venezuela, that was managed  by  the  military  and  that  the
    account of mistreatment provided by the Respondent  accorded  with  his
    own knowledge of the harassment and arrests being undertaken there.  In
    paragraph 26 of his report he also noted that the Respondent's father's
    political affiliation would increase the risk that the Respondent would
    be subjected to an unfair trial and disproportionate incarceration.

12.  It was not the case that the Appellant faced charges for his  political
    activities but that he was at risk because  of  his  imputed  political
    opinion.  In paragraph 39 of his expert report, Mr. Gomez also referred
    to there being evidence of the extreme politicization of the  judiciary
    in  Venezuela  and   its   complete   submission   to   the   political
    establishment.

13.  The Appellant noted a number of adverse credibility  findings  made  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Sweet. However, a finding that little  weight
    can be attached to the Respondent's father's political activities  does
    not go directly to the Respondent's fear of persecution.  His  fear  is
    based on evidence which suggests that once a  person  is  suspected  of
    some form of incitement against the state, no fair trial is possible.

14.  The fact that  other  relatives  have  not  had  any  issues  with  the
    authorities is also not determinative of whether the  Respondent  would
    be persecuted on return. It was not  said  that  the  authorities  were
    looking for the Respondent or suspected that his relatives were  hiding
    him. It was also not the Appellant's case that the  Respondent's  other
    family  members  were  involved  in   inciting   others   against   the
    authorities.

15.  The Appellant doubted whether the Respondent would have  been  released
    on bail, if he  was  of  such  interest  to  the  authorities,  but  in
    paragraph 48 of his expert, Mr.  Gomez explained that in December  2015
    it was plausible that he would  have  been  released  to  appear  at  a
    further hearing as the authorities may have needed time to construct  a
    formal case against him to give the appearance  that  due  process  was
    being followed.

16.  For all of these reasons I find that the decision  made  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Sweet's decision does not contain any material errors of
    law and that it should not be set aside.


Decision

(1)  The appeal is dismissed.

(2)  The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Sweet stands.


Nadine Finch


Signed                                  Date 16 November 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Finch



