
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11723/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 26 February 2018                  |On 23 March 2018                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

                                    [S J]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADe)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Katani, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr Mullen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge S Gillespie, promulgated on 7 June 2017, dismissing
    his appeal against the decision of the respondent made  on  12  October
    2016 refusing his asylum and protection claim.

 2. The applicant's case is that he is  a  stateless,  undocumented  Bidoon
    from Kuwait and that he faces persecution on that account.  It is  also
    his case that he was imprisoned for a period of  six  months  following
    his participation in a demonstration  on  18  February  2014  and  that
    during that time he was tortured and subjected to other  ill-treatment.



 3. It is also the appellant's case that his two older brothers  have  been
    granted refugee status in the United Kingdom on the basis that they too
    are undocumented Bidoon.

 4. The respondent did not accept that the appellant is a Bidoon,  or  that
    he attended the demonstration in February 2014, or that he was arrested
    and subjected to ill-treatment.  She did not accept either that he  had
    left Kuwait as claimed, drawing inferences adverse to  his  credibility
    from his failure to claim asylum en route.  In addition, the respondent
    did not accept that he was related to his brothers.

 5. The judge heard evidence from the appellant and his two older brothers.
     He concluded:-

      i) the appellant was related to his brothers as claimed on  the  basis
         of the DNA test [46];

     ii) the appellant had not shown that registering in the 1965 census was
         a precondition to registering with the ECIR between 1996  and  2000
         given that the law of 2000 permitted naturalisation  to  those  who
         had participated in the 1965 census and that it was unclear why the
         father had gone to register but had not received a security card;

    iii) that the evidence produced by the appellant indicated that of those
         arrested at the 18 February 2014 demonstration, all but  the  three
         leaders were released yet he was imprisoned until July 2014 and  he
         could not provide a satisfactory answer to that [63] and  had  been
         unable to explain why they were torturing him to find out  who  was
         leading the demonstrations when the  leaders  had  themselves  been
         detained, concluding [64] that the appellant had not been  detained
         which cast doubt in light of the overall  credibility  despite  the
         medical report of Dr Crawford [65];

     iv) that it was unlikely that the  appellant  had  been  able  to  pass
         through the airport in the manner described [69] and  that  further
         inferences could be drawn from his failure to claim asylum en route
         to the United Kingdom.

 6. On that basis  the  judge  concluded  that  the  appellant  is  not  an
    undocumented Bidoon at risk of persecution and he had failed to provide
    that he is without the green card.

 7. The appellant sought permission to appeal on three grounds:-

      i) that there was no basis on which the judge could,  having  accepted
         the appellant's brothers' asylum claims, could come to  a  contrary
         conclusion in respect of the appellant;

     ii) that the judge had acted unfairly in putting questions  to  him  as
         though the information was correct as at 21  March  2014  when  the
         article had been updated (as the copy showed) on 6 March 2015,  the
         judge erring also in concluding that the detainees  had  been  held
         for only a couple of weeks, information not in the  article  relied
         upon;

    iii) that the judge failed to make any proper findings with  respect  to
         Dr Crawford's report as to the injury to the appellant's leg.

 8. On 7 December 2017 Upper Tribunal Judge  Grubb  granted  permission  to
    appeal stating:-

         "It is arguable that the judge failed to grapple with the  evidence
         that the appellant's  two  brothers  had  previously  been  granted
         asylum, it is said,  on  the  basis  that  they  were  undocumented
         Bidoons.  It is not immediately apparent, if this is the case, what
         evidence there could be that could suggest that the  appellant  was
         not likewise undocumented.  I grant permission on this ground."

 9. Permission was in fact granted on all grounds.

10. It is necessary first to have regard  to  the  position  regarding  the
    Bidoon in Kuwait and how their situation arose.  This  is  set  out  in
    some detail in the COI bulletin provided by the Home Office and also in
    NM  (documented/undocumented  Bidoon:  risk)  Kuwait  CG  [2013]   UKUT
    356(IAC) at [20] to [26].  In summary, Kuwaiti citizenship was  limited
    initially to those who had settled in  Kuwait  and  retained  residence
    there since 1920 and Arabs resident there for at  least  fifteen  years
    could be naturalised.  However, when the nationality law was enacted in
    1959 many of those living in outlying areas did not do so. In NM it  is
    noted at [22]:

         "At the time when the nationality  law  was  enacted  in  1959  the
         authorities sought to register  all  residents  within  Kuwait  and
         identify those eligible for nationality.  It appears, however, that
         many of those  living  in  outlying  areas,  primarily  of  Bedouin
         origin, either did not learn about this or  neglected  to  register
         their claims.  Some were illiterate and persons who kept no written
         records faced especial difficulties in proving that  they  met  the
         legal requirements of the new law.  Others were simply uninterested
         in the new concept of nationality, failing to  foresee  the  rights
         and benefits that would accrue to  citizens  in  later  decades  as
         Kuwait's wealth increased (it  has  been  described  as  the  fifth
         richest  country  in  the  world)  and   government   service   has
         expanded."

11.  As  is  noted  in  NM,  the  situation  for  the  unregistered  became
    increasingly difficult and particularly after  the  Iraqi  invasion  of
    Kuwait in 1990.  As noted in the COI report at [6.1]  a  committee  was
    set up to count all those declaring to  be  illegal  residents,  opened
    files on them, which was followed by a decree  followed  by  a  further
    committee set up in 2010, the object of which was to resolve the status
    of illegal residents (which  includes  Bidoon).   It  appears  also  at
    [6.1.4] that Bidoon status is regularised with some 2,969 people  being
    registered.   It  appears  however  to  be  inconsistent  interestingly
    [6.1.8] nobody had benefitted from a law permitting the  naturalisation
    of "foreigners. Also of note is what is stated at [6.1.9]:

         "The US State Department noted:

         The naturalization  process  for  bidoon  is  not  transparent  and
         decisions appeared arbitrary. Despite calls during 2015 by MPs  and
         various authorities to naturalize 2,000 to 4,000 bidoon  per  year,
         as of year's end, the government naturalized only  those  who  were
         children of soldiers killed fighting for  the  country;  the  exact
         number was unavailable but was estimated at  fewer  than  100.  The
         Central Agency had more than 100,000  bidoon  citizenship  requests
         under review at the end of 2014.  In  August  2015  the  government
         decided to consider bidoon  citizenship  applications  individually
         along with other naturalization cases.

         According to bidoon activists and government officials, many bidoon
         were unable to provide documentation proving sufficient ties to the
         country or to present evidence of their original  nationality.  The
         government maintained, however, that the vast  majority  of  bidoon
         concealed their true nationalities and were not actually stateless.
         According to the government,  7,243  bidoon  adjusted  their  legal
         status between 2011 and August 2015, claiming Saudi, Iraqi, Syrian,
         Iranian, Jordanian, and other nationalities. In November 2015,  the
         government  stated   that   34,000   bidoon   are   qualified   for
         consideration for citizenship but that only 8,000 would be eligible
         due to their security status."

12. As is noted both in NM and the COI at [6.3] Bidoons who have registered
    with the executive committee between 1996 and  2000  were  issued  with
    security cards, this being extended to some  106,000  people.   Further
    "review cards" are issued from 2000 onwards but they are  time  limited
    as can been seen from Annex C to the COI at paragraphs 18 to 20:

         "18. A particular problem exists for Bidoon who have fallen through
         the cracks and do not even qualify for Bidoon status and access  to
         the facilities above (even if on occasion this may be theoretical).
         They are colloquially known as 'Bidoon Bidoon'.  This  occurs  when
         the authorities say that an individual claiming to  be  Bidoon  has
         proof of another nationality. A cause  for  this  can  be  when  an
         individual has previously bought a forged  passport  for  a  second
         nationality in order to travel  (something  which  anecdotally  had
         previously been marketed  to  Bidoon  individuals,  allegedly  with
         government connivance), which they have then been unable to  renew,
         or if an individual has (according to the government)  admitted  in
         writing to having a second nationality at some time  in  the  past.
         The numbers of individuals in this bracket is  unknown,  but  their
         circumstances are certainly the worst.

         19.  Such individuals are  not  able  to  claim  formal  status  as
         Bidoon, and although all Bidoon are termed illegal residents by the
         Kuwaiti authorities, their status in Kuwait is as an illegal  third
         country  national.  This  means  that  they  could  be  subject  to
         arbitrary arrest and detention; illegal third country nationals are
         normally visa overstayers, who are  periodically  deported  -Bidoon
         falling in this category are unable to access  government  services
         for fear of being detained, and are dependent on familial networks,
         charity, and work in the informal sector. The process  of  formally
         become a documented  Bidoon  is  not  set,  there  is  no  judicial
         recourse or form of appeal - doing so will  doubtlessly  depend  on
         personal circumstances, contacts and the details of the case and is
         unlikely to be easy.

         20.  The Bidoon issue continues to perpetuate itself,  as  children
         of Bidoon fathers retain their Bidoon status. This is true even for
         those with Kuwaiti mothers,  as  Kuwaiti  nationality  is  entirely
         patrilineal (this also applies to Kuwaitis married to expatriates).
         There have been rumours in the press that this law may change soon,
         but as yet a formal change to existing  legislation  has  not  been
         proposed."

13. It is also notable from this letter at [28] that  the  widespread  view
    within Kuwait is that the value of obtaining Kuwait  citizenship  (both
    psychological and particularly financial) is such that any  Bidoon  for
    whom the prospect of securing Kuwaiti nationality is  likely  would  be
    very unlikely to forgo this by attempting to seek asylum elsewhere.

14. It is entirely unclear from the judge's decision what view he  took  of
    the appellant's brothers' evidence.  He clearly accepted that they  are
    undocumented Bidoon.  He does not, however, appear to have  appreciated
    that  the  conclusion  which  was  accepted  by  the  respondent,   and
    recognised them as refugees, has implications for the  apparent  status
    of the appellant and his brothers' father.   As  is  evident  from  the
    material set out above the  status  of  being  Bidoon  is  passed  down
    through the generations.  And as far as Mr Mullen submitted it was  for
    the appellant to make out his case, equally it was  for  the  judge  to
    make reasoned findings.

15. Whilst it may have been open to the judge to make  adverse  credibility
    findings against the appellant, he makes no findings about the evidence
    of the appellant's brothers which was important in the context of  this
    case.  It is to be borne  in  mind,  indeed  it  was  accepted  by  the
    Secretary of State after the country guidance decision had been  handed
    down, that the brothers were refugees  on  the  basis  that  they  were
    undocumented Bidoons.  There is no indication  that  they  left  Kuwait
    prior to the ending of the registration scheme in 2000 and the  natural
    inference is  that  their  father  was  also  an  undocumented  Bidoon.
    Accordingly, I am satisfied that the judge made a material error of law
    on this issue and that it needs to be remade.

16. Both representatives were content for me to remake the decision on this
    point without the need for any further submissions and I do so.

17. I consider that it is established that  the  appellant's  brothers  are
    undocumented Bidoons.  I am satisfied that it flows from this and their
    evidence, which  I accept,  that their father was in the same position.
     Whilst I accept that the appellant lacks credibility for  the  reasons
    given by the judge equally, there appears to be no reason why if he had
    any prospect of obtaining Kuwaiti citizenship that he would  have  left
    the country.

18. Having considered carefully the background material I find  nothing  to
    suggest that those whose fathers are undocumented bidoon could  somehow
    acquire documented bidoon status nor given that his older brothers were
    unable to do so is there any likelihood that that occurred in the  case
    of the appellant, and contrary  to  their  evidence  that  he  had  not
    acquired documented status. I am satisfied that the appellant has shown
    that he is an undocumented Bidoon and the appeal should be  allowed  on
    that basis.  It follows  from  the  finding  that  he  is  at  risk  of
    persecution that his removal to Kuwait would be in breach of his rights
    under article 3 of the Human Rights Convention.

    Notice of decision

 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law and I set it aside.

 2. I remake the decision by allowing the appeal on asylum and human rights
    grounds.

 3. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date 22 March 2018
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul
