
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11608/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard Remotely at Field House        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 10 February 2021                  |On 4 March 2021                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                                    D a s
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Razzaq-Siddiq, Counsel instructed by Direct
Access
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
2008 I make an order prohibiting  the  disclosure  or  publication  of  any
matter likely to lead members of the  public  to  identify  the  Appellant.
Breach of this order can be punished as a contempt of court.  I  make  this
order because the Appellant is an asylum  seeker  and  so  is  entitled  to
privacy.

2. This  is  an  appeal  against  a  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
dismissing the  appeal  of  the  appellant  against  the  decision  of  the
Secretary of State on 12 November 2019 refusing his claim for international
protection.

3. The appeal was brought with the  permission  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  on
limited grounds.  The essential point is it was arguable  that  the  First-
tier Tribunal had given unlawful reasons for  attaching  little  weight  to
supporting documents so that the decision as a whole became unreliable.

4. I begin by discerning exactly what the First-tier Tribunal did.

5. The appellant said that  he  was  born  in  Sylhet  and  had  an  Islamic
upbringing.  He was a married man with a 13 year old daughter.  He chose to
support a political party called Jamaat-e-Islami, commonly  abbreviated  to
"Jamaat", in April 2001.   He  became  active  and  was  appointed  a  ward
secretary in 2003.  He continued in that position until 2006 when  he  left
Bangladesh to come to the United Kingdom.  He said his work was  to  invite
people  to  join  the  party  and  to  promote  the  party   and   organise
demonstrations.

6. He entered the United Kingdom with permission in July 2006 and his  leave
was extended until 15 November 2018.  However,  that  leave  was  curtailed
because of a problem with his  sponsor's  licence  and  the  appellant  was
arrested and detained.  He was released on 4 November 2016.  He became  ill
and provided a medical certificate for the Home Office.  He says  he  heard
nothing further.  In September 2019 he was arrested and detained  and  then
claimed asylum during the course of that detention.

7. He said that in June 2010 one Moulana Delwar Hossain  Sayedee,  the  then
vice president of Jamaat, was arrested with several others.  Mr Sayedee was
charged with war crimes and crimes against humanity.  There was a  movement
in Bangladesh and amongst  the  Bangladeshi  community  outside  Bangladesh
known as the  Free  Sayedee  Movement.   The  appellant  was  a  particular
supporter of Mr Sayedee.  He went  to  Bangladesh  for  a  short  visit  in
November 2011 and took part in a protest  calling  for  his  release.   The
protest took the form of a meeting and was attended by thousands of people.
 The appellant said that he was on a stage with eighteen other people.  The
meeting was attacked by a member of the  Chhatra  League  and  the  police.
There was a fight.  The appellant took no part in the fight but went  home.
He was anxious not to be arrested in part because he wanted  to  return  to
the United Kingdom.

8. After three days the police came to his home looking for him but  he  was
not there as he had been warned to expect such a visit.  He did not stay at
his home at all at night while he remained in Bangladesh.

9. Following the incident a criminal case was filed and  he  was  named  and
there was a First Information Report, a charge sheet and an arrest  warrant
issued against him. After the case was filed he did not feel safe to remain
in Bangladesh so he returned to England on 23 December 2011.

10. A second case was filed against him in 2013 after  he  had  returned  to
the United Kingdom.  He said there was background  evidence  to  show  that
there were "ghost cases" filed against members of the opposition  including
people who were dead and who were clearly outside Bangladesh at the time of
the alleged offence.

11. The appellant said that while he was detained in the United Kingdom  his
brother collected the documents from his lawyer in  Bangladesh  and  posted
them to the appellant at a detention centre and from there they  were  sent
to the respondent.  He had no difficulty  leaving  Bangladesh  on  his  own
passport.  He said there is a "no fly list" but that only caught a  limited
number of people.

12. He had no confidence in the justice system in Bangladesh.

13. On returning to England in 2011 he said it did not occur to him that  he
could claim asylum on the basis of false cases filed.   He  realised  later
that he should have claimed asylum on or  soon  after  his  return  to  the
United Kingdom in November 2011.

14. He said he did  not  complain  to  the  police  in  Bangladesh  for  two
reasons.  They had been part of the attacking group at the meeting in  2011
and he feared persecution for his  political  beliefs  if  he  returned  to
Bangladesh and the police would beat and torture him.

15. The judge then made findings of fact.  She accepted that  the  appellant
comes from Bangladesh and that he entered the United Kingdom in  June  2006
with permission.  She found that he had no leave since December 2015.

16. She accepted that he had claimed in interview that he  was  a  supporter
of the Jamaat-e-Islami Party and that he became secretary.  The  judge  was
unconcerned that he had described  himself  sometimes  as  a  "member"  and
sometimes as a "supporter".

17. The judge set out the appellant's claim to have worked  as  a  secretary
by telling others about meetings.  He supported his  claim  with  a  letter
from one Mawlana A Karim dated 6 October 2019.  It identified the appellant
as someone who had joined the party and had  been  elected  secretary  from
2003 until 2006.

18. The judge then considered what  weight  to  attach  to  the  letter  and
directed herself that "like all the documents provided by the appellant, it
was translated in Bangladesh rather than in the UK".

19. The judge found that the documents could have  been  translated  in  the
United Kingdom.

20. The judge also noted how the writer of the  letter  said  nothing  about
the writer's own role in the party or how he knew the information  that  he
was passing on.  The judge said:

  "I do consider that  the  letter  is  vague  as  to  any  detail  of  the
  appellant's involvement in the party other than saying he "played a vital
  role  to  organise  the  organisation  from  the  route  level"  and   he
  "participated in all activities".

21. The judge found that the letter added little to the claim to  have  been
a party secretary.

22. The judge noted that, apart from a short trip  to  Bangladesh  in  2011,
appellant had been in the United Kingdom since 2006.  He had  not  involved
himself in the Jamaat-e-Islami Party in  the  United  Kingdom  although  he
clearly knew that the party had a  presence  in  the  United  Kingdom.   He
attributed his lack of activity  to  "my  head  is  not  working  properly"
(question 213).  The appellant explained in cross-examination that  he  was
suffering from stress although he had worked as a  religious  worker  at  a
mosque in the United Kingdom.

23. It was the appellant's case that although he had not  been  involved  in
the party since 2006 he would re-join it in the  event  of  his  return  to
Bangladesh.  At paragraph 35 the judge said:

  "On the evidence before me  considered  as  a  whole,  I  find  that  the
  appellant's claim to have been active in the party in Bangladesh  is  not
  borne out by his subsequent actions in the UK."

24. The judge then considered the  appellant's  claim  to  have  attended  a
party meeting in November 2011 during his return visit  to  Bangladesh  and
that meeting ending in a disturbance that led to people being sentenced  to
seven  years  imprisonment  in  their  absence.   The  judge   acknowledged
background evidence showing how the Jamaat-e-Islami leader known as Sayedee
was arrested and detained in  June  2010.   The  judge  noted  it  was  the
appellant's account that although visible at the meeting because he sat  on
the stage he took no part in the meeting and left as soon as trouble  broke
out.  He claimed at interview that thousands of  people  had  been  at  the
meeting and the fight that was said to have taken place was reported in the
media, but he did not know the name of the newspaper.

25. At paragraph 36 the judge said:

  "I bear in mind that the appellant was talking of events that happened in
  2011.  This  was  a  large  meeting  and  presumably  therefore  a  large
  disturbance.  I was provided with a great  deal  of  background  evidence
  from local media sources some dating back to 2010.  I was  provided  with
  background evidence to show that violence had broken  out  following  the
  trial of Delwar Hossain Sayedee in 2013.  There  is  nothing  however  to
  support the claim of a disturbance at a meeting in 2011.  The credibility
  of the appellant's account in relation to  this  claimed  disturbance  is
  undermined by the absence of any  background  material  in  circumstances
  where the appellant might reasonably  have  been  expected  to  be  in  a
  position to provide such material."

26. The judge noted at paragraph 35 that by November 2011 the appellant  had
been out of the UK (she must have meant Bangladesh) for five years and that
even if the appellant had been active in the Jamaat Party in  2006  he  was
not active by 2011.

27. His account was that a case was filed against him  after  that  meeting.
He was asked in interview how he had  found  out  about  the  case  and  he
replied that he had found out from  the  leader  but  the  leader  was  not
subject to such a case. Apparently he was not the leader  at  the  material
time.  The judge noted how the appellant's case rested in part on  criminal
cases being levied against people who were not even present in the country,
so it made no sense to the judge that proceedings were not made against the
person who was now, but was not  then,  the  leader.   If  the  appellant's
account was right Mr Karim was the leader on 21 November 2011 because  that
is when he told the appellant about what had happened but he  was  not  the
leader on 20 November.  The judge found no credible explanation for trumped
up charges being brought against a person of a low  profile,  such  as  the
appellant, but not against somebody who was bound to be the leader  on  the
day after the event.  The judge did not accept that the appellant's account
was right.

28. It was the appellant's case that once he found  out  he  was  wanted  he
remained in hiding until he could leave for the United Kingdom.

29. The judge considered background material and accepted that the  evidence
did not show that the Bangladeshi authorities were particularly  astute  or
interested in stopping suspects leaving the country and the judge  did  not
draw any adverse inference from the appellant's ability to leave Bangladesh
at a time when he said he was subject to police interest.

30. The judge acknowledged it was the appellant's case that in  his  absence
he had been charged with committing  the  offence  of  murder.   The  judge
accepted that such things happen in Bangladesh  but  the  judge  could  not
accept is that the appellant with his low profile would be singled out  for
such treatment.

31. The appellant said he had found out about the case from  his  brother  a
month after the case was filed.  There was no statement  from  the  brother
explaining how he had acquired the documents he had forwarded and the judge
found that a disturbing omission.

32. However the appellant had submitted a copy of a letter from an  advocate
in Bangladesh dated 7 October 2019.  The advocate, Mr Das, said that he had
been "engaged by the state" but it was the appellant's case  that  the  law
had  been  engaged  by  the  party.   The  judge  found  that  a   relevant
inconsistency.

33. The judge considered the documents that had  been  produced  and  listed
them.  She said they included a "warrant of punishment" in relation to  the
2011 case, the judgment in that  case,  an  order  sheet  relating  to  the
allegation of murder made in 2013, a warrant of arrest  for  the  appellant
and a First Information Report in relation to the murder. Again  the  judge
commented that the documents were not translated in the United Kingdom  and
no good explanation had been given for not providing such a translation.

34. The judge looked at the documents.  She found that they were  dated  but
each document contained different dates.  They were marked 1 October  2019,
2 October 2019 and 6 October 2019.  She could not understand  that  and  no
explanation was offered.

35. The complainant in the murder on the  documents  is  identified  as  one
Monir Uddin but in the appellant's interview he was identified as  "Monirar
Ahmed".

36. The judge noted however one of the documents  indicated  the  trial  had
been fixed to 23 October 2019 and when the appellant made a statement on 23
December 2019, he did not mention the trial date.  Neither  was  there  any
suggestion that any kind of representation had been arranged.

37. The judge noted that there was background evidence  showing  how  forged
documents can be obtained easily in Bangladesh.

38. The judge reviewed the background evidence and noted there was also  one
report referring to the difficulties  of  obtaining  fraudulent  police  or
court documents "because of counter signature processes and the  fact  that
all documents could be checked against the database".

39. The judge found that she could not put weight on the documents.

40. The judge  noted  the  appellant  returned  to  the  United  Kingdom  in
December 2011 and did not claim asylum until October 2019.  The  judge  was
sympathetic to his explanation that he did not see  any  need  to  make  an
asylum claim while he still had leave to be in the United Kingdom,  in  his
case as a religious worker, but that leave ran out  and  he  made  a  fresh
application for  leave  as  a  religious  worker  in  September  2012.  The
appellant said that he anticipated getting indefinite leave to  remain  and
did not see any point in a protection claim but he did not  get  indefinite
leave to remain when he made a further application as a religious worker in
October 2014 at a time when he knew, if he was truthful, that there  was  a
murder charge against him  that  was  unjustified.   However  when  he  was
encountered by immigration officials working irregularly in  December  2015
so that his leave was curtailed on 19 December  2015  leaving  him  without
permission to be  in  the  United  Kingdom  he  still  made  no  claim  for
protection.  The judge found it "inconceivable" that if he really were  the
subject of a false murder charge in Bangladesh and in fear of his  life  in
the event of his return, he would have delayed in making a claim  when  his
leave had expired.  The judge found the appellant's credibility damaged and
dismissed the appeal.

41. Mr Razzaq-Siddiq made his submissions with commendable  directness.   He
referred me to the Joint Practice  Directions  and  indeed  to  the  Border
Agency policy dealing with documents and said there was nothing to indicate
there was any requirement whatsoever for documents to be translated in  the
United Kingdom.  He also pointed out, as the judge had acknowledged,  there
was something in the background material suggesting that it was not easy to
get copies because of the checking provisions.

42. Of course Mr Razzaq-Siddiq is right.  There is no reason  why  documents
should be translated in any particular country or why  translation  in  one
country should be regarded  as  inherently  preference  to  translation  in
another country.  It all depends on the document.  Here  nothing  turns  on
the details of the translation.  It has not been necessary to look  at  the
documents  and,  for  example,  interpret  a  particular  clause.   If  the
documents are not translated accurately then someone  has  taken  the  very
bold step of obtaining court documents written  in  Sylheti  that  bear  no
resemblance to their intended purpose in these proceedings and has forged a
purported translation and hoped that nobody would notice.   That  would  be
very  bold.   There  is  no  reason  to  find  anything  wrong   with   the
translations.  I do not understand why the judge thought  it  worth  saying
that they were not translated in the United Kingdom.  Certainly Mr  Razzaq-
Siddiq again is right to say  that  they  were  not  challenged  for  their
accuracy rather than their authenticity by the Secretary of State.

43. There is always a concern that when a thoroughly bad point is taken,  as
it appears to have been taken here, the adverse  credibility  findings  are
unreliable because they are infected by something that should not be there.
 I do understand that point and have it very much  in  my  mind.   However,
when the Decision and Reasons is read as a whole it is  not  apparent  that
the judge has given much weight to the quality  of  the  translation.   She
dealt with the case on the basis that court documents  are  quite  easy  to
obtain in Bangladesh and that the documents were unreliable  because  there
was no proper evidence about their provenance and the  appellant's  conduct
in delaying his asylum claim to  seem  inconsistent  with  someone  with  a
genuine fear of being unlawfully prosecuted and punished for a grave crime.



44. I disagree with Mr Razzaq-Saddiq in his important contention that  there
is at least a real risk of the  findings  being  invalidated  by  this  bad
point.  The judge has really done no more than observe that  the  documents
were not translated in the United Kingdom.   Although  it  is,  I  find,  a
strange comment, nothing turns on it.  In  particular  the  judge  has  not
doubted the quality of the translation but rather the  reliability  of  the
documents.

45. The judge referred to the strand of evidence to the background  material
about documents from the  police  or  court  not  being  easily  obtainable
because of the counter signature process.  These documents are each counter
signed.  Mr Razzaq-Saddiq drew that to  my  attention  and  he  is  clearly
right.  However, I do not agree that on its  own  this  is  any  protection
against fraud at all.  A person who was forging a document  would  forge  a
signature three times if necessary.  That would  make  the  documents  look
right.  The point being made is that there is a counter  signature  process
and the documents can be checked against the database.  I have no  evidence
about who can access the database.  I would find it  inherently  surprising
if there was some kind of public access to that.  Surely the point that  is
being made is that police officers or  other  state  officials  can  easily
check a document to see if it is genuine because they can access a database
and if that does not give a satisfactory or convincing  outcome  there  are
three people they can speak to who purported to sign the  document.   These
are not checking measures that are readily available to the public at large
and are not relevant here.

46. Of course the Secretary of State  had  notice  of  these  documents  and
theoretically could have made enquiries but it is a  very  dangerous  thing
for the Secretary of State in asylum  appeals  to  start  making  enquiries
about documents from the country of nationality of  the  purported  refugee
and, by and large, it is not something that should be done.

47. I am quite confident  that  the  decision  is  not  undermined  by  this
strange pre-occupation with the place  of  translation  of  key  documents.
There is no material error and I dismiss the appeal.




Notice of Decision

48. This appeal is dismissed.





                              Jonathan Perkins
|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 23 February 2021               |











