
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11968/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 18 April 2018                              |On 20 April 2018              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                     B A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Hussein, instructed by Halliday Reeves
For the Respondent:    Mrs Pettersen, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, B A, was born in 1985 and is a male citizen of Iran.  He
    arrived in the United Kingdom in March 2016 and applied for asylum.  By
    a decision dated 14 September 2016, his application was refused by  the
    Secretary of State.  He appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
    Henderson) which, in a decision promulgated on 15 May  2017,  dismissed
    the appeal.  The appellant now appeals, with permission, to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

 2. At the Upper Tribunal initial hearing at Bradford on 18 April 2018, Mrs
    Pettersen, who appeared for the Secretary of State, referred me to  the
    Rule 24 statement of the respondent which indicated that the respondent
    did not oppose the appeal.  She told me that, upon her reading of Judge
    Henderson's decision, it was clear that the judge had intended to allow
    the appeal on asylum and Article 3 ECHR grounds but, for reasons  which
    were not clear, she had instead dismissed the appeal.   My  reading  of
    the decision coincides with that of Mrs Pettersen.  In  particular,  at
    [60], Judge Henderson wrote:

         "I consider there was a real risk of harm to the appellant  at  the
         "pinch point" identified in AB  and  Others  (internet  activity  -
         state of evidence) Iran [2015] UKUT 00257  (IAC)  and  that  it  is
         reasonably likely that  the  appellant  will  be  asked  about  his
         internet activity.  I do not accept  that  the  Iranian  government
         will differentiate between the supporter activist or member of  the
         KDPI and it matters not to them whether  the  appellant  is  a  sur
         place activist with limited links  to  the  organisation.   He  has
         identified as a person  who  by  implication  is  critical  of  the
         Iranian government and with an organisation which is perceived as a
         threat to the state.  This is sufficient to put him at risk of harm
         for a Convention reason - on the basis  of  his  imputed  political
         opinion."

 3. In the light of that finding, it is clear that the  judge  intended  to
    allow the appeal.  I therefore set aside  Judge  Henderson's  decision,
    preserve her findings of fact and remake the decision, allowing  it  on
    asylum and Article 3 ECHR grounds.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal which  was  promulgated  on  15  May
2017 is set aside.  All the findings of fact are preserved.  I  have  remade
the decision.  The appellant's appeal against the decision of the  Secretary
of State dated 14 September 2016 is  allowed  on  asylum  and  human  rights
(Article 3 ECHR) grounds.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed                              Date 18 April 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane



No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.

Signed                              Date 18 April 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane
