
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                    Appeal Number:
PA/11026/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Civil Justice Centre, Cardiff  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 30 August 2019                       |On 24 September 2019                |
|                                        |                                    |


                                   Before

                    MR C. M. G. OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT

                                   Between

                                     NTP
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms C Hulse, Counsel, instructed by Qualified Legal
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms S Rushforth, Senior Home Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a national of Vietnam.  She came to the United Kingdom
    apparently in March 2010 illegally.   She  claimed  asylum.   She  then
    absconded and the claim was treated as withdrawn.  Four or  five  years
    later she was  arrested  for  being  concerned  in  the  production  of
    cannabis.  She was convicted on 29 June 2015 and sentenced to  eighteen
    months' imprisonment.  She was then served with a notice of a  decision
    to deport her on the basis of being a foreign criminal.  A  deportation
    order was served on her on 10 September 2015.  She  then  made  further
    submissions and as  they  involved  an  assertion  that  she  had  been
    trafficked she was interviewed  by  the  National  Referral  Mechanism.
    There was a positive reasonable grounds decision  following  which  the
    appellant withdrew her asylum claim.   Following  a  further  interview
    there  was  a  conclusive  grounds  decision  that  she  had  not  been
    trafficked.  The appellant  was  then  detained  with  a  view  to  her
    deportation; but she made further submissions which  were  refused  and
    carry a right of appeal.  She exercised that right of  appeal  and  her
    appeal was heard by Judge Wilson in the First-tier Tribunal in March of
    this year.

 2. Judge Wilson had before him  the  appellant's  oral  evidence  and  the
    various accounts that she had given at various times  of  her  previous
    history.  Judge Wilson also had access to a country report  by  Dr  Anh
    and a medical report by Professor Graham.  Judge Wilson  dismissed  the
    appellant's appeal.  There are a  considerable  number  of  strands  to
    Judge Wilson's reasoning but it would, I think, not be inappropriate to
    begin with his  conclusion  that  although  the  various  accounts  the
    appellant had given of her history were plausible  in  the  context  of
    circumstances in Vietnam, she had  been  so  inconsistent  in  her  own
    account of her own history that there was not a  proper  basis  derived
    from her evidence for finding fact in her favour.  That is to say, that
    although no doubt the things she described could have happened  to  her
    and did happen to some people there was no reason  to  suppose  on  her
    evidence that they had happened to her.  If they had,  she  would  have
    been able to be more consistent in her description of them.  That as it
    seems to me is the principal reason why Judge  Wilson  determined  that
    she was not credible as to her history.  However, that is a summary  of
    a complex consideration running to about  60  paragraphs  in  total  in
    Judge Wilson's judgment.  The conclusion that she  was  not  worthy  of
    credit and therefore that, to put it very shortly, her appal could  not
    succeed, is criticised in grounds of appal which have been described by
    Ms Hulse who presents her case today  as  on  a  'narrow  point'.   The
    grounds of appal relate solely to the medical evidence that was  before
    the judge.  There are three grounds.  The first is headed  "Failing  to
    determine whether Professor Graham is an expert".  The second is headed
    "Failing to make findings as to the  basis  of  the  Appellant's  scars
    unreasonably dismisses Professor Graham's findings as to the scars" and
    the third is "Erred in the approach to credibility".

 3. Permission was granted by Judge Coker on the basis that it was arguable
    that given that the appellant certainly has scars the failure to  refer
    to them might be an error of law, but that even if it were it might not
    be that it could be shown to have been material.   Although  I  am  not
    confident that Judge Coker intended to allow argument on  each  of  the
    grounds, I will deal with all of them in the light of  the  submissions
    made by Ms Hulse.  The first, as  I  have  indicated,  relates  to  the
    failure to determine whether  Professor  Graham  is  an  expert.   That
    ground is with the greatest respect one which it is  barely  applicable
    to proceedings in a tribunal.  The process  of  determining  whether  a
    witness is an expert is a process which is strictly  speaking  confined
    to proceedings in  which  the  strict  rules  of  evidence  apply.   In
    circumstances in which the strict  rules  of  evidence  apply,  opinion
    evidence is simply inadmissible unless it is shown  to  derive  from  a
    person who has such expertise that his  or  her  opinion  ought  to  be
    admitted.  Those circumstances do not  apply  in  tribunal  proceedings
    where the strict rules of evidence have no  application  at  all.   The
    only question in tribunal proceedings is not whether  opinion  evidence
    is admissible but whether it is  reliable;  and  that  depends  not  on
    whether the person is or is not an expert but on the level of expertise
    shown by any person who gives an opinion on any matter.

 4. Looking at the first ground in that context it is perfectly clear  that
    the judge brought a mature and correct approach to the determination of
    Professor Graham's expertise.  The position is that at paragraph 40 the
    judge wrote this:

         "40. It is for an expert to establish that he has  the  appropriate
             expertise to opine  upon  the  matters  contained  within  his
             report.  Dr Graham does not provide a detailed summary of  his
             experience in assessing PTSD, anxiety or  injuries  caused  by
             abuse and torture.  Whilst Dr Graham provides a  list  of  his
             qualifications and memberships [it] is not  clear  that  these
             qualifications and memberships are  relevant  to  the  matters
             upon which he opines in his report and Dr Graham  provides  no
             explanation as to how he is appropriately qualified."

 5. Paragraphs 41 and 42 note Dr  Graham's  apparent  departures  from  the
    requirements of the Istanbul Protocol.  In [43] the judge writes this:

         "43. The Appellant advised Dr Graham that  she  had  self-inflicted
             knife injuries caused in 2008 and  other  injuries  caused  by
             traffickers including wounds inflicted by a concrete floor and
             being stabbed with a sharp stick.  Dr  Graham  opines  that  a
             number of the injuries are diagnostic of being caused  in  the
             manner  that  the  Appellant   describes   most   others   are
             consistent.  [It] is implicit within  the  Istanbul  protocol,
             practice direction and case law that consideration  should  be
             given to other potential causes of scarring.  There is no such
             consideration of alternative causes within Dr Graham's report.
              I find that the  lack  of  consideration  of  other  possible
             causes within the medical report is contrary to  the  guidance
             set out in KV Sri Lanka [in the Court of Appeal at that  time]
             and the Istanbul protocol.   Accordingly,  this  significantly
             affects the weight that I attach to Prof Graham's report."

 6. It seems to me that that  approach  to  the  expertise  of  the  person
    writing the report is absolutely in accordance with the law.  The judge
    was faced with an opinion given by a person in written evidence  before
    the tribunal, and it was for the judge to decide what weight to give to
    that evidence.  The crucial question about the scars is the extent,  if
    any, to which they support the appellant's case.   In  that  context  I
    move on to the second ground of appeal.  The comments on the scars are,
    I think, confined to those I have already  read  out  in  [43]  of  the
    judge's decision.  What is summarised there  is  that  the  appellant's
    assertion that she has on her body scars caused by a sharp stick and in
    addition by a  concrete  floor  are  described  by  Dr  Graham  in  the
    vocabulary of the Istanbul  Protocol  albeit  without  examining  other
    possible causes.

 7. Before me today Ms Rushforth has taken the point of the failure to look
    at  alternative  means  of  causing  the  injuries.   But  the   point,
    particularly in the context of KV (Sri Lanka) v Secretary of State  for
    the Home Department [2019] UKSC 10, is that  it  is  important  to  see
    precisely what a person opining on the causation of lesions on the body
    says and does not say.  In that case the appellant's evidence was  that
    he had been injured by hot rods when he was unconscious.   The  opinion
    not only said that the scars were diagnostic of injury by hot rods, but
    also that they could  not  have  been  caused  whilst  the  victim  was
    conscious.  That was of course because if  he  had  been  conscious  he
    would have flinched, and the scars would not  have  been  so  precisely
    delineated as they were found to be.  In most cases the  lesions  which
    are found cannot be so closely attributed to any circumstances in which
    they are caused merely by examination.  What Dr Graham in fact said  in
    the present case is that the injuries which the appellant attributed to
    having been poked with a sharp stick were  diagnostic  of  having  been
    caused, and I quote, "by a sharp object such as  a  sharp  stick",  and
    that the injury which she said was caused by her being dragged along  a
    concrete floor was consistent with  contact  with  sharp  stones  in  a
    floor.  In other words, what is being said by the author of the report,
    taking the opinion  at  its  highest,  is  that  the  injuries  on  the
    appellant's body  to  which  reference  is  made  in  these  terms  are
    consistent with some contact at some time with  a  sharp  object  which
    might or might not have been a sharp stick and consistent with  contact
    at some time with a concrete floor: and that is  as  far  as  it  goes.
    This is not, I repeat, a case like KV (Sri Lanka)  where  the  injuries
    themselves are such as to show some sort of activity by others.

 8. The injuries are not even (by comparison  for  example  with  cigarette
    burns) injuries of the sort  that  by  their  nature  indicate  hostile
    activity by others.  Encounter with sharp  objects  and  with  concrete
    floors is part of the normal circumstances of life, and the effect that
    a person has injuries of this sort does not necessarily take an  asylum
    claim very much further.  It is clear that the judge had those findings
    in mind because they are, as I have indicated, summarised in  [43].   I
    cannot see that the  judge  was  required  to  give  them  any  further
    consideration, nor, despite Ms Hulse's best endeavours, can I see  that
    if the judge had mentioned again the fact that the appellant  had  been
    in contact with a sharp object such as a stick  and  a  concrete  floor
    some time during her life that would demonstrate whether either of  the
    two completely different accounts she had given, or some other account,
    was in fact the account of her history.

 9. That takes me on to ground  3.  Ground  3  asserts  the  Mibanga  error
    (Mibanga v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2005]  EWCA  Civ
    367).  It sometimes happens that judges fail to take into  account  all
    the  evidence  at  once  when  reaching  a  judgment  on   credibility.
    Sometimes in such circumstances a judge may listen  to  an  appellant's
    oral evidence and decide that it is not  credible  and  that  in  those
    circumstances it is not necessary to look  at  medical  evidence  which
    might otherwise have supported it.  The  assertion  that  a  judge  has
    fallen into that error is sometimes based simply on  the  fact  that  a
    judge who has properly taken all the evidence into  account  has  dealt
    with one area of the evidence in a decision before another area,  which
    of course is necessary in any properly structured  decision.   It  does
    not appear to me here that there is any  basis  for  saying  that  this
    judge made the Mibanga error.  In particular, I notice that the judge's
    extensive consideration of the medical evidence precedes what the judge
    says about the appellant's own story and its inconsistencies.  When the
    judge writes in paragraph 63 that the evidence has been considered as a
    whole and in the round there is no basis either in the decision  itself
    as I read it or identified in the grounds for thinking that was not so.
     The point here is simply  that  the  medical  evidence  going  to  the
    appellant's injuries is as, I have said in relation to ground 2, simply
    not sufficient to show that her account of the injuries  is  worthy  of
    credit, in the context of the  rest  of  her  extensive  circumstantial
    account, which was evidently not  worthy  of  credit.   Those  are  the
    matters raised by the grounds and  they  are  the  matters  upon  which
    Ms Hulse made her substantive submissions.  It seems to  me  that  the
    grounds are not made out.

10. This was a case where the judge was entitled to  attribute  the  weight
    that he did to the evidence before him, was entitled to reach the views
    that he did about the credibility  of  the  appellant's  evidence,  was
    entitled to conclude as he did that the assessment to be made  was  the
    risk to the appellant on return.  I quote from paragraph 64:

         "The risk to the appellant on return against the background of a 37
         year old woman who has not previously been trafficked or subject to
         domestic violence and who has  family  and  other  contacts  within
         Vietnam but who suffers from mental health issues  including  PTSD,
         anxiety and depression."

11. Very properly no complaint is made about the judge's assessment of  the
    rest of the evidence in that context.  It follows that this  appeal  to
    the Upper Tribunal falls to be dismissed.  The judgment of Judge Wilson
    stands.






                                                           C. M. G. OCKELTON
                                        VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                     Date: 19 September 2019

