
 [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
PA/11921/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      | Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 15 May 2017                            | On 31 May 2017                   |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE A MONSON

                                   Between

                               SW (Bangladesh)
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms R Head (Counsel instructed by Lawrence Lupin
                    Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Ms K Pal (Specialist Appeals Team)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant appeals to the Upper Tribunal from the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge Sweet sitting at Hatton Cross on 13 November
    2016), dismissing his appeal against the decision of the  Secretary  of
    State to refuse his protection and human rights claim which was brought
    on the basis that  he  was  a  Christian  convert;  that  he  would  be
    perceived as gay in Bangladesh (although he was heterosexual); and that
    he faced a real risk of serious harm on account of being involved in  a
    family property dispute and because of his unusual sexual  preferences.



 2. On 23 March 2017, the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Osborne  granted  the
    Appellant permission to appeal for the following reasons:

         "2.  The Grounds assert the Judge failed to make  a  finding  on  a
             relevant  matter.   The  authenticity   of   the   Appellant's
             conversion to Christianity was a  matter  of  dispute  in  the
             appeal.  The Judge found  the  Appellant  was  not  a  genuine
             convert to Christianity.  The Appellant also submitted that he
             had changed his  name  which  was  a  necessary  step  in  his
             conversion to Christianity.  The documentary evidence  clearly
             demonstrated the Appellant had formally changed his name.  The
             Judge failed to  make  a  clear  finding  as  to  whether  the
             Appellant would be perceived as a  Christian  upon  return  to
             Bangladesh.  Notwithstanding  the  Judge's  finding  that  the
             Appellant was not a genuine convert to Christianity, the Judge
             should  have  considered  whether  the  Appellant   would   be
             perceived as such in the light of his  change  of  name.   The
             Judge made a finding which was inconsistent with  the  medical
             evidence.  The psychiatric report  included  a  clear  opinion
             that the Appellant has developed a serious psychosexual  order
             of paraphilia.  The  evidence  also  confirmed  the  Appellant
             suffered with PTSD.  Although  the  Judge  found  the  medical
             evidence was not recent (it dated from 4 November 2014 and  15
             September 2015) there is no indication that the disorders from
             which the Appellant suffers  are  likely  to  subside  as  the
             medical evidence suggests the conditions are likely to be long
             term.  The Appellant  has  not  yet  undergone  treatment  and
             therefore  his  conditions  continue.   The  Judge  failed  to
             consider the impact of the Appellant's removal in the light of
             his serious psychiatric condition.

         3.   In an otherwise careful, succinct, and  focused  decision  and
             reasons, it is nonetheless arguable that the Judge  failed  to
             make a finding upon whether return to Bangladesh the Appellant
             would be perceived as a Christian due to  his  having  changed
             his name from his previous Muslim name to [SW].  It  is  clear
             from the Appellant's statement that the genesis and use of the
             Appellant's name is an issue to be decided in the appeal.   It
             was arguably an error of law that the Judge failed to  do  so.
             Additionally, it  is  arguable  that  the  Judge  should  have
             considered the impact to the Appellant's removal in the  light
             of his serious psychiatric condition."

Relevant background facts

 3. The Appellant is a national of Bangladesh, whose date of  birth  is  22
    February 1986.  On 18 June 2006 he applied for  entry  clearance  as  a
    student, and he was granted  entry  clearance  in  this  capacity.   He
    entered the United Kingdom shortly thereafter.

 4. In August 2008 he changed his name by deed poll to an English name.  On
    11 January 2009, he was baptised by the Reverend David McConkey  at  St
    Mark's Church in Swindon.  The Appellant's student visa  ran  until  31
    December 2009.  He overstayed, and  was  encountered  in  2013  working
    illegally.  The Appellant claimed asylum, following his arrest.

 5. As summarised in the subsequent refusal decision, the Appellant's claim
    was that while growing up in  Bangladesh,  he  had  been  subjected  to
    sexual abuse by his aunt. Since coming to the UK, he had converted from
    Islam to Christianity.  Between 2009 and 2012 he had received  five  to
    six threats on his telephone and via email from his cousin, I, who  was
    connected to Jamaat Islami and who had become aware  of  his  religious
    conversion.  His uncle, I's father, and cousin threatened his mother in
    person about this in 2009.  The Appellant also received  death  threats
    from the same paternal uncle in relation to a property dispute.

 6. On return to Bangladesh, he would be perceived as gay  because  of  his
    appearance and behaviour.  He feared his paternal uncle in relation  to
    the property dispute; he feared his cousins, Jamaat  Islami  and  wider
    society in relation to his religious conversion; and he feared his aunt
    in relation to sexual abuse.  He also feared wider society due  to  his
    uncommon sexual preferences and his perceived homosexuality.

 7. On 10 October 2016,  the  Secretary  of  State  gave  her  reasons  for
    refusing the Appellant's  protection  and  human  rights  claim.   With
    regard to his conversion to Christianity, he said he changed  his  name
    because he had become Christian.  However it was noted  that  since  he
    changed his name by Deed Poll on 1 August 2008, he had  also  used  his
    birth name in relation to his dealings with the NHS.  If he had changed
    his name from a  Muslim  name  to  a  Christian  name  out  of  genuine
    religious feeling, it was reasonable to expect him to use the same name
    consistently in all his dealings with public bodies in the UK  since  1
    August 2008, however he had failed to do so.

 8. With regard to childhood sexual abuse, he claimed he was  subjected  to
    sexual abuse from the age of seven until the age of 16 by his  maternal
    aunt.  He also claimed that his aunt had made a video recording of  the
    abuse which she had shown  to  others.   This  account  was  internally
    inconsistent and also ran counter to the background evidence which  was
    that a woman  who  disclosed  rape  faced  stigma  and  humiliation  in
    Bangladesh.  So it was not credible that his  aunt  had  made  a  video
    recording of sexual acts with him which she had showed to others.

 9. He claimed that, as a consequence of his childhood sexual abuse, he had
    developed a strong sexual preference for performing  oral-anal  sex  on
    women.  The Medico-Legal report which he provided said he had a serious
    psychosexual disorder which required treatment.  But he had provided no
    evidence that he had engaged in a course of psychosexual  treatment  or
    that he was awaiting such treatment.  He had  provided  photographs  of
    himself with various  young  women,  but  these  photographs  were  not
    accepted as evidence  that  he  had  engaged  in  any  specific  sexual
    practices with these women.

The Hearing before, and the Decision of, the First-tier Tribunal

10.  Both  parties  were  legally  represented  before  Judge  Sweet.   The
    Appellant was called as a witness, and was  extensively  cross-examined
    by the Presenting Officer.

11. He had chosen his new first name because it was a  Christian  name  and
    the name of one of the twelve disciples of Jesus Christ.  He had chosen
    his new surname because he liked the product associated with this name.



12. He had gone to a  doctor  about  his  health  problems  in  2013  after
    claiming asylum.  He still took medication, which  was  Chinese  herbal
    medicine.  He could not get a prescription  from  a  GP.   He  had  not
    renewed his previous prescription, because it did not help him.

13. His last date with a girl had been 2013/2014.  Before that he was  with
    a Romanian girl for five years on and off.  He  did  not  want  to  get
    married to her.  She was more like a friend.  He did not tell his  work
    colleagues that he liked girls in the way that he did.

14. In his subsequent decision, the Judge found at paragraph [39] that  the
    Appellant's conversion  to  Christianity  was  not  genuine  but  self-
    seeking, and effectively he was not an active Christian.  Therefore  he
    would not be at risk on return to Bangladesh in respect of this  aspect
    of his claim.

15. At paragraph [40], the Judge referred to  the  medical  evidence  which
    included a medical report of Dr Worwood dated 1 October 2013, a  report
    from the Helen Bamber Foundation of 4 November 2014, a report  from  Dr
    Nair, Consultant Clinical Psychologist, and a report from Annette Wade,
    CBT therapist.

16. The Judge took into account the Appellant had not reported his  medical
    condition until 2013 after he was arrested as an overstayer and when he
    made his claim for asylum.  He also observed that he had not  made  any
    effort to undergo further medical treatment or to provide  any  updated
    medical evidence in support of his claim.  Although  he  accepted  that
    his sexual  deviation  would  be  regarded  as  unusual  on  return  to
    Bangladesh and adverse attention might be drawn to him,  he  held  that
    there was no updated medical evidence  to  confirm  his  condition  and
    there was no updated evidence that he would behave in an  inappropriate
    way on return to that country.

17. On the issue of risk on return, the Judge  further  observed  that  the
    Appellant was unable to explain satisfactorily  why  his  mother  still
    lived with his aunt, if his aunt was as deviant as he claimed.

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

18. At the hearing before me to determine whether an error of law was  made
    out, I reviewed some of the documents which were before the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge, including Ms Head's Skeleton Argument and  the  Medico-
    Legal report from the Helen Bamber Foundation.

19. Ms Head agreed that she had not put forward a case that  the  Appellant
    faced a real risk of serious harm on return to Bangladesh on account of
    his mental health.  She submitted that, having accepted that his sexual
    deviation would be regarded as unusual in Bangladesh, the Judge had not
    adequately  explained  why  the  Appellant  would  not  behave  in   an
    inappropriate way so as to draw adverse attention to himself.

Discussion

20. The case put forward by Ms Head in her  Skeleton  Argument  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal was that the Appellant would be at risk  on  return
    to Bangladesh as a  genuine  Christian  convert:  either  he  would  be
    persecuted as a convert or  he  would  not  be  able  to  practice  his
    religion openly due to fear of persecution.

21. Ms Head did not advance an alternative case that, even if the Appellant
    was not a genuine convert to Christianity, nonetheless he would  be  at
    risk of being perceived as a Christian convert simply on account of him
    having adopted an English name.

22. In his witness statement of 24 November 2016, the Appellant admitted at
    paragraph 27 that he had stopped studying the Bible in 2008 - which was
    before he was baptised. He also admitted that one of  his  motives  for
    changing his name and converting to Christianity was his attraction  to
    white girls.  He said at paragraphs 92 and 93 that he had come  to  the
    United Kingdom partly to study, but also he wanted to  experiment  with
    sexual activity with white girls.  He thought white girls would be more
    attracted and interested in him if he was a Christian.

23. At paragraph  [39]  of  his  decision,  the  Judge  accepted  that  the
    Appellant had been baptised on 11 January 2009 and that he  had  chosen
    his new first  name  because  it  was  the  name  of  one  of  Christ's
    disciples.  But he observed that his attendance at church, by  his  own
    admission, had been extremely brief and fitful.  The  Judge  also  took
    into account his limited knowledge on Christianity which had  been  set
    out in the Refusal letter.

24. It is not argued by way of appeal to the Upper Tribunal that the  Judge
    did not give adequate reasons for concluding in paragraph [39] that the
    Appellant's conversion to Christianity was not genuine, but was  "self-
    seeking"; that he was not an active Christian; and that  he  would  not
    wish to practice Christianity on return to Bangladesh.

25. Since he would not be practising Christianity on return  to  Bangladesh
    either openly or discreetly, it was not incumbent  upon  the  Judge  to
    consider whether a real risk of harm would  arise  simply  because  the
    Appellant chose to continue to refer to  himself  by  an  English  name
    which includes as a first name the same  name  as  one  of  the  twelve
    Apostles.  As it happens, the name chosen by the Appellant does not  in
    fact precisely correspond to the name of the apostle in question, as is
    clear from the Judge's discussion of this issue at paragraph  [39].  So
    the connection is tenuous at best. If the Appellant does not  otherwise
    present as a Christian convert in Bangladesh through  his  conduct  and
    behaviour, there is no reason to suppose  that  his  chosen  name  will
    arouse  suspicion  that  he  is  a  secret  convert  to   Christianity,
    particularly in a Muslim society where there would  be  no  reason  for
    people to have knowledge of the names of the twelve Apostles.

26. Moreover, in the light of the Judge's sustainable findings of fact, the
    Appellant's new name is not an essential part of his identity.   It  is
    not a genuine expression of a new religious faith. So it is  reasonable
    to expect the Appellant to revert to his old  name  to  avoid  societal
    embarrassment in Bangladesh. As the Judge held at the end of  paragraph
    [39], HJ (Iran) and HT (Cameroon) [2010] UKSC 31 does  not  assist  the
    Appellant.

The Report of Dr Worwood dated 1 October 2013

27. In his report of 1 October 2013, Dr  Graham  Worwood,  lead  Consultant
    Psychiatrist, reported to the Appellant's GP  in  Nottingham  that  the
    Appellant's presenting problem was that he could not form relationships
    in the way he would like with women and he  felt  persistently  low  at
    points and was struggling to sleep.  He stated he found  it  impossible
    to have a  normal  relationship  with  a  woman  because  he  was  only
    interested in engaging with them sexually in the way that he  did  with
    his aunt.  He described a five year relationship with a  Romanian  girl
    in England in which he did this and he had also gone to prostitutes  in
    London and in Nottingham who he had paid to be  able  to  provide  them
    with oral sex.  He described being unable to get an erection unless  he
    engaged in this activity.  He also reported at times he ingested female
    faeces during the process and he reported that this gave  him  vitamins
    to make him feel healthy and positive.  He reported feeling very  happy
    and positive after being able to engage in  this  activity.   When  not
    doing this, the Appellant described that he felt quite low.   In  terms
    of physical issues, the Appellant described that he had erectile issues
    but otherwise his physical health was good.

28. He would always ask women if they wanted to engage  in  anal  oral  sex
    with him and he had never imposed himself on anyone to do this.  He had
    no history of violence.  He recently gave up smoking, and  he  did  not
    drink any alcohol and did not take medication.

29. On a mental state examination, there was no  formal  thought  disorder.
    There was no current suicidal intent or plans.  There was  no  evidence
    of any delusions or psychosis.   He  was  not  worthless  or  hopeless.
    There was no obsessive  compulsive  behaviour.   He  appeared  to  have
    symptoms of PTSD, but cognitively he presented as grossly  intact  with
    no issues.

30. Dr Worwood asked the Appellant's GPs to prescribe  the  Appellant  with
    mirtazapine, with the aim of improving his PTSD symptoms and  insomnia.
    He did not feel that the Appellant  presented  a  significant  risk  of
    violence or sexual assault others.

The Medico-Legal  Report  based  on  an  examination  of  the  Appellant  in
November 2014

31. The Helen Bamber Foundation Medico-Legal report bears  two  dates.   At
    the front of the report, the date of report  is  given  as  4  November
    2014.  But the statement of truth at the end of  the  report,  made  by
    Professor Muhammad Abou-Saleh, Consultant Psychiatrist, bears a date of
    15 September 2015.

32. It appears that the consultant saw the Appellant in a  consulting  room
    at the Helen Bamber  Foundation  of  4  November  2014,  and  that  the
    resulting report is based on that examination and upon medical  records
    from 2013 and earlier in 2014.

33. He diagnosed the Appellant as having developed a  serious  psychosexual
    disorder of paraphilia, which is defined as any intense and  persistent
    sexual interests other than sexual interest in genital  stimulation  or
    preparatory fondling with  phenotypically  normal,  physically  mature,
    consenting human partners.  For  a  form  of  diagnosis  of  paraphilia
    disorder,  the  behaviour  must  cause  significant  distress  to   the
    individual and/or to others.

34. With regard to treatment and prognosis, he said that the Appellant  had
    good insight in his mental health problems and appreciated the need for
    treatment.  He advised the Appellant to seek the help of  his  GP.   He
    was currently on appropriate pharmacological treatment which needed  to
    be  continued  for  many  months.   More  importantly,  he  would  need
    specialist psychological treatment for his  complex  PTSD  and  chronic
    psychosexual disorder.  The treatment was long-term and  needed  to  be
    provided for many months.  His mental health conditions  were  unlikely
    to improve without appropriate treatment.  Moreover, his condition  was
    aggravated by his uncertain resident  status  and  the  threat  of  his
    appeal being rejected and him being removed to Bangladesh.

35. In his view, there was a high risk that the Appellant's  mental  health
    would deteriorate if he was told that he had to  return  to  Bangladesh
    such that there might be a real risk of him attempting to self-harm  or
    commit suicide.

The Appellant's account of his current state of health

36. In his witness statement for the appeal  hearing,  the  Appellant  said
    that he had been taking Chinese herbal antidepressant tablets  for  the
    past four or five months.  He found that they  made  him  feel  better.
    But sometimes they did not help him.  He was not sure whether the  same
    tablets  were  available  in  Bangladesh,  because  he  did  not   have
    depression in Bangladesh.

37. At paragraph [89] of his witness statement, he said he feared  for  his
    safety and future in Bangladesh.  He continued:

         "Another reason I could not live in Bangladesh is that  due  to  my
         sexual preferences it would be too difficult."

38. The Appellant went on to explain that he needed to have  oral-anal  sex
    with white girl.  In Bangladesh there were no white  girls  and  so  he
    would not be able to have sex with them.  He did not have attraction to
    Asian girls.

39. The  report  from  Professor  Abou-Saleh  laid  the  foundation  for  a
    potential claim under  Article  3  and/or  Article  8  ECHR  on  mental
    health/suicide risk grounds.  But as Ms Head confirmed  to  me  in  the
    course of oral argument, she  did  not  advance  such  a  case  on  the
    Appellant's behalf, recognising that the evidential threshold  for  the
    maintenance of such a claim was very high.

40. Instead, the case which was advanced on the Appellant's behalf was that
    he would be liable to face persecution in  Bangladesh  as  someone  who
    openly suffered from a serious psychosexual disorder. At  Paragraph  37
    of her Skeleton  Argument,  Ms  Head  submitted  that  the  Appellant's
    unusual sexual preferences would "without doubt" draw adverse attention
    from the general public and also from extremist groups.  The  Appellant
    could not live openly as he chose in Bangladesh without putting himself
    at real risk.

41. At the time of the hearing before Judge Sweet, two  years  had  elapsed
    since the Appellant's last examination by a consultant psychiatrist.  I
    consider that it was open to the Judge to find for  that  reason  alone
    that his condition was not shown to be as bad as it had  been  assessed
    two years earlier, particularly when the Appellant  reported  that  the
    Chinese herbal medicine that he was taking was of some help in managing
    his depression.

42. For the same reason, it was open to the Judge to find  that  there  was
    not a real risk that he would  behave  "in  an  inappropriate  way"  on
    return to Bangladesh so as to attract adverse attention, as  there  was
    no updated medical evidence to  show  that  he  could  not  manage  his
    psychosexual disorder, despite not having  undergone  the  therapy  and
    counselling recommended by  the  Consultant  Psychiatrist  in  November
    2014.

43. As I explored with Ms Head in oral argument, the  Appellant's  evidence
    was that he had pursued his sexual preferences discreetly  in  the  UK,
    and only with consenting adults.  It was not part of his  account  that
    his sexual activity had caused distress to  others:  the  distress  was
    only to himself.  Although he did not fear persecution in the  UK,  his
    evidence was that he did not openly discuss his sexual  preferences  or
    act in a way which drew attention to his sexual preferences.

44. So while adverse attention might be drawn to the Appellant on return to
    Bangladesh  if  his  sexual  preferences  became  a  matter  of  public
    knowledge, there is not, and was not, any reason to  suppose  that  the
    Appellant would be any less discreet in  Bangladesh  about  his  sexual
    preferences than he was in the UK.

45. Ms Head raised with me the  potential  difficulty  that  the  Appellant
    would encounter in Bangladesh in  finding  prostitutes  to  answer  his
    sexual needs.  However, since his sexual needs are said  to  reflect  a
    psychosexual disorder, the difficulty in gratifying them in  Bangladesh
    is not a matter which engages the Refugee Convention.

46. The thrust of the Medico-Legal report was  that  the  Appellant  needed
    treatment to cure him of his psychosexual disorder, and it was not part
    of the Appellant's case before the First-tier Tribunal  that  he  would
    not be able to  access  psychiatric  treatment  for  this  disorder  in
    Bangladesh.  The case was solely put  on  the  basis  that,  while  the
    disorder was untreated, the Appellant would be liable to persecution as
    a sexual deviant.

47. As I have rehearsed above, there was in fact no evidential platform for
    the proposition that there was a real risk  of  the  Appellant  drawing
    attention to himself as a sexual deviant on return to Bangladesh,  even
    if his condition remained as diagnosed by the  Consultant  Psychiatrist
    in the Medico-Legal report of 4 November 2014.

48. In conclusion, for the reasons given above, I find that the decision of
    the First-tier Tribunal does not contain a material error of law.   The
    Judge has given adequate reason  for  finding  against  the  Appellant,
    bearing in mind the way in which the case was put on  his  behalf,  and
    the  Appellant's  own  evidence  that,  with  regard  to   his   sexual
    preferences, his  apprehension  on  return  was  not  that  his  sexual
    preferences would become public knowledge, but that he  would  find  it
    very difficult to pursue them.

Notice of Decision

49. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain  an  error  of
    law, and accordingly the decision stands.  This  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date:  27 May 2017
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson


