
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11711/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard Columbus House, Newport                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 10 December 2018                          |On 11 January 2019            |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE L J MURRAY


                                   Between

                                    E K O
                         (anonymity directioN MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Profumo, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Howells, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant is a national of Nigeria. Her claim for asylum and
humanitarian protection made on 10 February 2017 was refused by the
Respondent on 6 October 2017. She appealed against this decision to the
First-tier Tribunal and her appeal was dismissed by First-tier tribunal
Judge Rolt in a decision promulgated on the 21 February 2018. The Appellant
sought permission to appeal this decision and permission was granted on
renewal of her application to the Upper Tribunal by Deputy Upper Tribunal
Judge G A Black as there was an arguable error of law that the Judge did
not give adequate consideration to the Appellant's claim to be at risk as a
member of a particular social group as a lone single mother.

The Grounds

2.   Ground 1 alleges that the First-tier Tribunal made a material
misdirection and/or failed properly to consider the Appellant's asylum
claim. It is asserted that the Appellant's claim had two limbs, namely,
firstly a fear on the basis of honour-based violence on return from her
Christian mother having discovered she was pregnant by her Muslim partner
and, secondly, on the basis of her membership of a particular social group,
a lone female returnee, specifically a lone mother. It is submitted that
the First-tier tribunal undertook a lengthy consideration of the Appellants
credibility before rejecting a claim concerning honour-based violence but
failed to consider, adequately or at all, the second part of her asylum
claim, namely that she was at risk as a lone Nigerian female. It is
submitted that this stood entirely apart from any findings of credibility,
relying on the general country conditions for lone female returnees. The
only reference to this aspect of the claim was a summary rejection of such
risk without reasons with reference to AI (Nigeria) v SSHD [2007] EWCA Civ
707. It is submitted that the First-tier Tribunal Judge failed to consider
the particular risk the Appellant faced as a lone female with a child and
that it was argued at the hearing that this enhanced her vulnerability to
sexual predation and destitution to a persecutory extent. Whilst these
submissions were summarised in the decision, the substantive evaluation did
not deal with them. The Judge conflated her circumstances with those in the
case of AI. The fact that the Judge had already determined that the
Appellant was not at imminent risk from her mother did not preclude
consideration of her return as a lone female. The First-tier tribunal made
no findings as to the mother's prospective treatment of the Appellant other
than that she would not kill or seek to kill her. It did not therefore
follow from this conclusion that her mother would support her and her son.
Indeed, her mother's strongly held Christian beliefs and the fact that the
Appellant's son was mixed heritage were accepted. The inference therefore
remained open that she would be returning in essence, as a lone female
rejected by her Christian family.

3.   Ground 2 asserts that the First-tier Tribunal failed to properly
consider or make findings on the supporting evidence which corroborated the
risk the Appellant would face as a lone female mother. A social work report
was relied upon which raised concerns that if the Appellant returned to
Nigeria she could be targeted and then exploited based upon risk factors.
The risk factors were the vulnerability of both her and her son who had
significant developmental needs, lack of social support networks, and
inability to provide for herself. This was bolstered by the findings of a
psychiatric report which confirmed the Appellant's diagnosis of PTSD and
her fears she would be "stigmatised, shamed and isolated from the community
in Nigeria because she is a single mother with a son from a Muslim father."
Further, an expert report produced on behalf of the Appellant corroborated
the specific risks she would face as a lone mother, namely the absence of
welfare support for single mothers, placing her at risk of ending up in a
slum as well as being homeless and the risk of susceptibility to
trafficking from being alone with the child having been alienated by her
family. No findings were made on the expert evidence and supporting
evidence in relation to the risk the Appellant would face as a lone female
mother.

The Hearing

4.   The appeal therefore came before the Upper Tribunal in order to
determine whether there was an error of law in the decision of Judge Rolt
and if so whether to set that decision aside.

5.   There was no Rule 24 Response. Mr Howells stated that the Respondent's
position was that there was no error of law. I heard submissions from both
representatives. Ms Profumo amplified on her grounds. The second limb of
claim was the risk of as a member of a particular social group,
specifically with a young child and mental health conditions. The only
consideration the Judge gave to that was reliance on AI which was a 2007
Court of Appeal case which considered the circumstances at the time and it
was not enough. The fact that she was not at risk from her mother did not
preclude a risk as a lone female. There was a failure to consider
supporting evidence. There were three reports from her psychiatrist, social
worker and a country expert. The conclusion was that she would be targeted
and exploited and her son had developmental difficulties. Also, concerns
were raised over her parenting capacity. Her son would require support. The
Judge accepted that she suffered from PTSD and that should have formed part
of consideration if that was enough to place her at risk. The experts'
reports were clearly detailed. The Judge referred to them but there was no
consideration as to the specific risk to a lone woman with a child and the
absence of welfare, economic discrimination and her vulnerability to
trafficking.

6.   Mr Howells submitted that Ground 1 had to be made out for Ground 2 to
prosper. It was only at paragraph 74 that the Judge referred to the risk as
lone single woman. However, the inference was that she could return to her
home area and would not be a lone single mother and it was important to
note the evidence before the Judge and the findings that her mother funded
her studies and she had a large number of family members, worked and may
have a degree. Those would be relevant considerations on that issue. At
paragraph 77 the best interests of her son were considered. In summary, the
Judge's consideration of this second limb was brief but no material error
of law resulted.

7.   Ms Profumo replied that no inference could be readily drawn that she
could return to her home area. The mother's support of the Appellant had
been before she had her child. It was not in dispute that her mother was a
devout Christian. This was not a case of there being a failure to state the
blindingly obvious because it could make a difference to the reasoning.
There was a significant residual risk factor. Her son needed support and
she would be at risk due to her mental health and the stigma and would be a
figure of enhanced vulnerability. That she would not be at risk as a lone
woman was not an inference that could be sensibly be concluded from the
findings of fact. Wide-ranging findings were required.

8.   Both representatives agreed that if I were to find an error of law the
appeal should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal and the credibility
findings should stand in relation to the first limb of the claim.

Discussion

9.    It is clear from the summary of Miss Profumo's submissions at
paragraph 24 of the decision that the Appellant advanced two limbs to her
asylum claim as asserted by Ms Profumo in her grounds seeking permission to
appeal to the Upper Tribunal. The argument in relation to there being a
risk on return on the basis of being a lone Nigerian female was argued in
the skeleton argument before the First-tier Tribunal.

10.  Judge Rolt found that the Appellant was not a credible witness. He
found, and these findings of fact have not been challenged, that her
evidence was inconsistent in material respects and he did not accept that
she had given reliable evidence regarding the financial situation in
Nigeria. He found that she had funds and did not accept her account of
prostitution and multiple terminations of pregnancies. He accepted that she
had mental health problems as diagnosed by Dr Battersby. He accepted that
she had a child with a Nigerian Muslim father and that they had now
separated. At paragraph 70 of the decision he found that he had no reason
to disbelieve her account that she and her mother were of the Christian
faith or to doubt that her child's father was of the Muslim faith. However,
he did not accept that her mother, a devout Christian, who had been very
committed to the Appellant by funding her education in Nigeria and in the
UK, would go against her strongly held beliefs and kill or seek to kill her
daughter.

11.  At paragraph 74 he states that he found that the Appellant's account
was not credible and referred to the decision in AI (Nigeria) v SSHD [2007]
EWCA Civ 707 as authority for the proposition that there was no evidential
basis for a risk of persecution as a Nigerian woman or lone Nigerian woman.
He concluded on this basis that the Appellant did not have a genuine fear
of persecution on return to Nigeria.

12.  The issue in this case is whether it flowed ineluctably from the
Judges findings in relation to the first limb of the Appellant's claim that
the second limb also could not succeed. The only reasoning specifically in
relation to the Appellant's claim to be at risk on this basis consisted of
a reference to AI. In that case the Court of Appeal concluded, on the facts
of the case, that there was no evidential basis on which the Judge could
reasonably find that the Appellant in that case was at risk of persecution
as a Nigerian woman, or a lone Nigerian woman. However, in the instant case
the Appellant had produced three expert's reports which were, in my
judgment, certainly arguably supportive of the Appellant's claim that she
could be at risk on the basis of being a lone female with a child. A
reference to the case of AI was insufficient to dispose of this issue.

13.  Whilst the Judge found that the Appellant's account that her mother
would not kill or seek to kill her was not credible, it does not follow
from this that she would support her. The Judge accepted that the Appellant
was suffering from mild complex PTSD as diagnosed by Dr Battersby. The
Appellant also relied on a social work assessment in relation to the best
interests of her child. According to the social worker the Appellant's son
has significant developmental delay in the number of areas and if staying
in the UK would need ongoing support from a range of professional networks.
He states he has significant concern about how they would survive on a day-
to-day basis let alone the long term if they return to Nigeria. He further
states that whatever the merits of the immigration claim he was clear that
there were significant welfare/health concerns which would need ongoing
support and intervention. The Appellant also relied on a country expert who
was asked to comment on the situation of human trafficking in Nigeria and
the risk to the Appellant and her son. Whilst much of the report is posited
on the acceptance of the Appellant's account as to the risk from her mother
as being a credible one, the report also deals with the situation of women
with children out of wedlock, children of mixed heritage, the prospects of
finding housing and support and the prospects of her son accessing
education.

14.  There was evidence in the reports produced by the Appellant that on
the basis of being a lone mother alone she could be at risk of ending up in
a slum, being homeless and at risk of enhanced vulnerability to sexual
predation. These were matters that arguably could have amounted to
persecution. I therefore find that the First-tier Tribunal Judge failed
adequately to consider the second limb of the Appellant's claim in light of
the facts as he found them to be.

15.  I agree with the representatives that the credibility findings stand
and that in the light of the fact-finding required and having regard to
Part 7.2 of the Practice Statement the appeal should be remitted in order
for the Appellant's claim that she is at risk as a lone female with a child
should be considered in light of the experts reports and background
evidence.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained a material  error  of  law
and I set it aside.  I preserve the findings in relation to the  Appellant's
credibility in relation to the first limb of her case at  paragraphs  53  to
75 of the decision.

I remit this matter for a hearing before a Judge other than Judge Rolt.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date 20 December 2018
[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge L J Murray

