
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11281/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 26th November 2018                         |On 18th December 2018         |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                                 marsida [c]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Bonavero, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr S Withwell, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The  Appellant  is  a  citizen  of  Albania  born  on  [~]  1988.   The
    Appellant's immigration history is that she left Albania on  20th  July
    2015 travelling to the UK by lorry and  claimed  asylum  on  28th  July
    2015.  The Appellant's application for asylum was based on a  purported
    well-founded fear of  persecution  in  Albania  on  the  basis  of  her
    membership of a particular social group namely a victim of trafficking.
     The Appellant's appeal was dismissed by Notice of Refusal  dated  18th
    October 2017.  The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before  Judge
    of the First-tier Tribunal Sweet sitting at Hatton Cross on  25th  July
    2018.  In a decision and reasons promulgated on  6th  August  2018  the
    Appellant's appeal was dismissed on asylum grounds and under Articles 2
    and 3 of ECHR.  The Appellant was also found not to  have  made  out  a
    case for humanitarian protection.

 2. On 17th August  2018  Grounds  of  Appeal  were  lodged  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  Those grounds contended:-

      1) That the First-tier Tribunal Judge had made an  erroneous  approach
         to the assessment of credibility and that the credibility  findings
         were based on speculation.

      2) Had made an erroneous approach to the treatment of expert evidence.

      3) Had failed to consider the country guidance when assessing the risk
         on return.

 3. On 2nd August 2018 Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Landes  granted
    permission to appeal.

 4. It is on that basis that  the  appeal  comes  before  me  to  determine
    whether or not there is a material error of law in the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.  The Appellant  appears  by  her  instructed
    Counsel, Mr Bonavero.  Mr Bonavero is familiar with this matter  having
    appeared before  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   The  Secretary  of  State
    appears by her Home Office Presenting Officer, Mr Withwell.

Submissions/Instruction

 5. As a preliminary point Mr Bonavero notes that there is reference to the
    suggestion that the First-tier Tribunal Judge ignored the  decision  of
    the Court of appeal in MS (Pakistan) [2018] EWCA Civ 594 which suggests
    that it is not the judge's role to consider afresh whether an Appellant
    is a VOT.  It is pointed out to me that that  authority  has  now  been
    addressed in the decision of ES (Albania) and consequently that is  not
    an issue that is now pursued by the Appellant.

 6. I am consequently taken by Mr Bonavero to the Grounds  of  Appeal.   He
    points out that the only credibility findings effectively to  be  found
    within the decision are those to  be  found  at  paragraph  33  of  the
    decision.  The question that he poses is whether they  are  sufficient.
    He submits that they are not.  He acknowledges  that  therein  what  is
    stated by the judge is that the  standard  of  proof  is  different  in
    asylum cases but for the same reasons as in the NRM report  and  asylum
    refusal letter, the judge found  the  Appellant's  account  not  to  be
    credible or consistent.  He accepts that this is not merely a  reciting
    of the Notice of Refusal but that the judge did find  that  there  were
    inconsistencies having heard the evidence.  However, he points out that
    there was before the judge a very extensive witness  statement  running
    to some fourteen pages to be found within the bundle and that the judge
    has not analysed this witness statement in any detail.  He submits that
    there has been no real engagement on the part of the judge  to  address
    the objective evidence or the country guidance in the  context  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal's role and that had the  judge  considered  country
    guidance properly in  the  light  of  this  and  objective  information
    available  to  the  judge,  he  would  have  found  there  was  nothing
    implausible in the Appellant's account.

 7. Secondly, he submits that the judge has adopted a  flawed  approach  to
    the assessment of the expert report of Dr Korovilas.  He considers that
    the judge has considered the expert  evidence  having  already  reached
    conclusions regarding the Appellant's  credibility.   He  submits  that
    this constitutes a material error of law and that the judge  reached  a
    consideration based on the material issue of the  length  of  time  the
    Appellant had known Arlind before she was trafficked and the judge made
    the conclusions set out at paragraph 33 that "It is most unlikely  that
    Arlind would have remained in a relationship with  her  for  two  years
    before then selling her on to a trafficker".  He submits that the judge
    reached such a conclusion without considering the  expert's  report  in
    this regard despite Dr Korovilas describing the Appellant's account  of
    her experiences as being "entirely consistent" with  his  understanding
    of how trafficking networks operate in Albania.  He submits that it  is
    necessary to look at the expert's report when making an  assessment  on
    credibility rather than  just  making  a  finding  on  credibility  and
    thereafter looking at the expert's report.

 8. Finally he submits that there has been a failure  to  consider  country
    guidance when assessing the risk  on  return  in  particular  that  the
    judge's poor credibility assessment influenced his overall  conclusions
    but that the approach  to  sufficiency  of  protection  was  flawed  in
    particular that the judge had failure to have regard to the headnote in
    the country guidance authority of TD and AD [2016]  UKUT  92  where  at
    headnote 4 it states that, "When considering whether or not there is  a
    sufficiency of protection for a victim of  trafficking  her  particular
    circumstances must be considered".  He submits that the finding by  the
    judge that there are no reasons  why  the  Appellant  cannot  seek  the
    protection of the authorities is contrary to the conclusions reached by
    the Upper Tribunal and submits that consequently the judge has erred in
    law.  He asked me to remit the matter back to the First-tier Tribunal.

 9. In response Mr Withwell points out that looking at it  in  first  blush
    the decision is actually quite succinct and  that  paragraph  33  takes
    into account the Appellant's oral evidence.  He notes  that  the  judge
    effectively takes into account at paragraph 33 in the final sentence an
    analysis that Arlind would not have remained in a relationship with her
    for two years before selling her on to traffickers.   He  does  however
    accept that her profile does not fit a typical profile of  many  claims
    namely that the Appellant has been educated to  Masters  degree  level,
    had been married and was of an old age for  being  a  trafficked  lady.
    However, he considers that the judge has done  sufficient  in  reaching
    his findings on credibility.

10. So far as the second ground is concerned he submits that there are  two
    bases upon which the judge needs to look at this,  firstly,  the  judge
    has to take into  account  credibility  and  that  that  must  be  done
    alongside an expert's report and he submits that  the  judge  has  done
    this.  So far as the third ground  is  considered  he  is  prepared  to
    concede that if I were to find that there is an error  of  law  in  the
    former grounds then there would also be a failure to have given due and
    proper consideration of country guidance.

11. In brief response Mr Bonavero submits that what Mr Withwell  is  asking
    me to do is to adopt a two-stage approach with regard to the assessment
    of credibility and the expert's report in that he asked me to take into
    account credibility and then to  look  at  it  alongside  the  expert's
    report but points out that that is not in fact what  has  happened  and
    that if I look at the final sentence of  paragraph  34  the  judge  has
    already made a credibility finding.  He asked me  again  to  find  that
    there are material errors of law in the First-tier Judge's decision.

The Law

12.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

13. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings on Error of Law

14. In this case it is more appropriate to start with the second Ground  of
    Appeal in that this is the Appellant's strongest argument  in  that  it
    follows on from the first finding namely that the judge has found  that
    the Appellant's account was not consistent or credible.  I accept  that
    the judge has had the opportunity to hear the evidence but there is  no
    reference within the decision to the detailed witness statement by  way
    of rebuttal of the Notice of Refusal provided by the Appellant nor  has
    the judge considered substantial factors that might well  be  based  in
    the Appellant's favour, namely such  matters  that  would  make  her  a
    typical from the normal trafficked victim and to balance them into  the
    equation.  This then has to be looked at alongside the finding  of  the
    judge at paragraph 34 that,

         "I have not accepted the Appellant's account that she is  a  victim
         of trafficking in  any  event  and  therefore  his  (Dr  Korovilas)
         findings are of limited probative value."

15. Such an analysis is wrong and an incorrect assessment  of  the  process
    that needs to be followed.  The process was set out in Mibanga  v  SSHD
    [2005] EWCA Civ 367.   That  case  is  authority  for  stating  that  a
    Tribunal should not make findings in relation to credibility  and  then
    consider if they are displaced by the expert evidence.  That appears to
    me to be exactly what the judge has done in this matter.   To  such  an
    extent I find that the decision therefore  reached  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge is one that is not sustainable in law.

16. Further the judge has failed to give due consideration to  the  country
    guidance authority of TD and AD which states quite  clearly  that  each
    case has to be  looked  at  on  its  own  facts  and  that  it  is  not
    appropriate to immediately assess whether someone has a typical profile
    of a trafficked person in Albania  when  making  a  decision  on  those
    facts.

17. For all the above reasons I am consequently satisfied that the decision
    contains material errors of law and I set aside the decision and I give
    directions hereinafter for the rehearing of this matter.

Decision and Reasons

1.   The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge contains material  errors
    of law and is set aside.  Directions  are  given  hereinafter  for  the
    rehearing of this matter:-

    (1)  That on finding that there are  material  errors  of  law  in  the
         decision of the First-tier Tribunal  Judge,  the  decision  of  the
         First-tier Tribunal Judge is set aside and the matter  is  remitted
         to the First-tier Tribunal sitting at Hatton  Cross  on  the  first
         available date 28 days hence with an ELH of three hours.

    (2)  That the appeal is to  be  before  any  Judge  of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal other than Immigration Judge Sweet.

    (3)  That none of the findings of fact are to stand.

    (4)  That there be leave to either party to file and/or serve a  bundle
         of objective and/or subjective evidence upon  which  they  seek  to
         rely at least seven days prior to the restored hearing.

    (5)  That an Albanian interpreter do attend the restored hearing.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 18 December 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris
