

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/11852/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 18 October 2018                       |On 22 October 2018              |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                  HIEV [D]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr C McGinley, of Gray & Co, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This decision is to be read with:

      i) The respondent's decision  dated  9  November  2017,  refusing  the
         appellant's claim.

     ii) The appellant's grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.

    iii) The decision of FtT Judge Handley, promulgated on 17 January 2018.

     iv) The appellant's  grounds  of  appeal  to  the  UT,  stated  in  the
         application for permission to appeal filed on 30 January 2018.

      v) The grant of permission by FtT Judge Alis, dated 18 February 2018.

 2. Mr McGinley submitted that the FtT's decisions errs in these respects:

      i) The judge incorrectly founded at paragraph 45 on the appellant  not
         mentioning at interview that he sustained injuries to his body.  At
         Q/A 45 he said, "I [was] injured all over my  body  and  my  arms".
         This led the judge further  astray  in  finding  it  odd  that  the
         appellant might have been hospitalised for 3 days,  in  absence  of
         serious injury.

     ii) The judge recorded at paragraph 20 that the appellant received  two
         summonses in 2013, to which the  respondent  attached  some  weight
         (paragraph 46 of the refusal letter).  The summonses were  tendered
         at the interview, but not  then  accepted  by  the  respondent,  in
         absence  of  translations,  and  in  keeping  with  practice.   The
         summonses and translations were provided shortly thereafter and are
         copied in the respondent's bundle.  The judge failed  to  make  any
         findings about the summonses.

 3. Mr Matthews said that paragraph 43 of the FtT's decision might be  read
    as implying a finding about the summonses, but it was unclear; and even
    if intended as a  finding,  it  risked  the  criticism  of  reaching  a
    conclusion in isolation from the whole evidence.  He accepted that  the
    refusal letter might have been clearer on the amount of weight given to
    the summonses.  He said that the FtT might have intended to  find  (and
    would have been entitled to find) that events took place in  2013  much
    as the appellant related, but gave rise to no ongoing risk; that  there
    were sound reasons to reject claimed events in 2017; and so, the appeal
    failed.  However, he accepted there was  error  about  the  appellant's
    account of his injuries, as well as in absence of conclusions about the
    summonses.  Having considered the  grounds  further  in  light  of  the
    appellant's submissions, he conceded that the decision could not safely
    stand.

 4. The outcome was agreed.

 5. The decision of the FtT is set aside. It stands only  as  a  record  of
    what was said at the hearing.  The nature of the case is such  that  it
    is appropriate under section 12 of the 2002 Act and Practice  Statement
    7.2 to remit to the FtT for an entirely fresh hearing.   The  member(s)
    of the FtT chosen to  consider  the  case  are  not  to  include  Judge
    Handley.

 6. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.

            [pic]

            18 October 2018
            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman
