
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11084/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester CJC                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 7th March 2019                             |On 21st March 2019            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                 sarbasi [m]
                       (ANONYMITY direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr G Madubuilke (Solicitor)
For the Respondent:    Mr Tan (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge A A Parker, promulgated on 2nd November 2018, following a hearing
    at Manchester on 16th October 2018.  In the  determination,  the  judge
    allowed the appeal of the Appellant, whereupon the Respondent Secretary
    of State, subsequently applied for,  and  was  granted,  permission  to
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Iraq, and was born on  [~]  1987.
    He appealed against the decision of the Respondent Secretary of  State,
    dated 3rd September 2018,  refusing  his  claim  for  asylum,  and  for
    humanitarian protection, pursuant to paragraph 339C of HC 395.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The essence of the  Appellant's  claim  is  that  has  no  brothers  or
    sisters.  He is an only child.  He had a maternal uncle  who  lived  in
    Mosul.  His mother died in 2013.  That was the last time he had contact
    with his maternal uncle.  He cannot return to Mosul because  he  has  a
    genuine fear of persecution there.  He cannot return to Iraq because he
    does not have a CSID card.  His father and uncle were both involved  in
    the Ba'ath Party.  There is a previous decision by the  judge  to  this
    affect.  That remains relevant under the Devaseelan principles.

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge observed,  at  the  outset  of  the  determination,  that  Mr
    Madubuilke, who appeared also on that occasion  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, had at the outset stated that "There is nothing new to add to
    his previous claim and bases the Appellant's  fear  on  return  on  the
    facts found by the previous Immigration Judge as the Respondent accepts
    he cannot return to Mosul" (paragraph 23).

 5. The judge also observed that  the  Respondent  had  accepted  that  the
    Appellant was a truthful witness with respect to his subjective fear of
    return to Mosul.  However, the objective evidence does show that  there
    is another area  in  Iraq  to  which  the  Appellant  could  reasonably
    relocate (see paragraphs 18 to 19).

 6. The judge held that the Appellant  could  not  reasonably  relocate  to
    another part of Iraq.  He had regard to the leading decisions  in  this
    jurisdiction in this matter.  Reference was  made  to  BA  (returns  to
    Baghdad) Iraq CG [2017] UKUT 18 and  to  AA  (Article  15(c))  Iraq  CG
    [2015] UKUT 544.  Moreover, reference was also made to AAH (Iraqi Kurds
    - internal relocation) Iraq CG UKUT 212 (see paragraphs 38 to 43).   In
    particular, the judge observed that he would have  to  agree  with  the
    Presenting Officer on the day of the hearing "That the fact his  father
    and uncle were Ba'athist Party members does not create a risk  for  him
    as the rule was not significant.  These were essentially  the  findings
    that the previous Immigration Judge made" (paragraph 38).

 7. Even so, however, what transpired from the latest case of AA [2018] was
    that the Appellant is from an area associated with ISIS and this  would
    create problems for him in the IKR.  He would need a civil registration
    card.  The evidence of Dr Fatah suggested that between 2014  and  2017,
    ISIS had closed up all the relevant registration offices in areas under
    its control, destroying many of them, and  that  "Dr  Fatah  maintained
    that he has never known anyone to obtain new documents from the central
    registry in Baghdad" (paragraph 54) as a result of this.

 8. The appeal was allowed.

Grounds of Application

 9. The  grounds  of  application  state  that  the  judge  had  materially
    misdirected himself in law because he had come to the  conclusion  that
    the Appellant qualified for refugee asylum status  without  giving  any
    reasons  for  such  a  conclusion.   Throughout  the  entirety  of  the
    determination, the  judge  made  no  findings  in  regard  to  how  the
    Appellant is at risk due to the reason of  imputed  political  opinion.
    In fact, the judge had accepted what the Presenting Officer had  stated
    (at paragraph 38) and that he would have to agree that "The  fact  that
    his father and uncle were Ba'athist Party members did not create a risk
    for him ...."

10. On 23rd November 2018, permission to appeal was granted by the Tribunal
    on the basis that it was arguable that the  judge  erred  in  making  a
    finding regarding the Appellant's risk in his home  area  of  Mosul  on
    Convention grounds.  The judge accepted that following the case of  AA,
    the Appellant would be at risk of indiscriminate violence.  However, in
    the judge's consideration of the reasonableness of internal relocation,
    the judge finds a risk to the Appellant on Convention grounds,  namely,
    on imputed political opinion grounds, but  this  only  relates  to  the
    situation in Baghdad (see paragraph 47).

Submissions

11. At the hearing before me on 7th March 2018, Mr Tan, appearing on behalf
    of the Respondent Secretary  of  State,  relied  upon  the  grounds  of
    application.  He submitted that, although it had been accepted that the
    Appellant  had  a  well-founded  fear  of  persecution  in  Mosul,  the
    Respondent Secretary of State did not accept that the Appellant  cannot
    return.   This  is  because  Mosul  was  no  longer  a  contested  area
    (paragraph 22).  Moreover, Mr Madubuilke had stated before the judge in
    no uncertain terms that "There is nothing new to add  to  his  previous
    claim and bases the Appellant's fear of return on the  facts  found  by
    the previous Immigration Judge" (paragraph 23).

12.  For  his  part,  Mr  Madubuilke  submitted  that  the  application  of
    Devaseelan, given that there had been a  previous  determination  by  a
    judge, was actively considered by the judge  (at  paragraph  23).   The
    judge had observed that, "This is a case where the Appellant is telling
    the truth regarding core elements of his  claim."  The  judge  observed
    that, "he is an Iraqi citizen, speaks Kurdish, is a Sunni  Muslim,  and
    from Mosul" (paragraph 23).  But even so, what is now being  said,  did
    not form part of the grounds of application.  These were predicated  on
    the basis that the judge had  failed  to  give  proper  reasons.   That
    cannot be right.  The judge  gave  ample  reasons  for  coming  to  the
    conclusion that he did.

13. This is clear from the judge's careful reference to AAH  [2018],  where
    the judge observes that the  Tribunal  there  (at  paragraph  125)  had
    stated that an individual returning with no family would need  to  find
    accommodation and a single returnee according to Dr Fatah "Would not be
    able to rent in the traditional neighbourhoods and living on the street
    becomes a real possibility" (paragraph 45).  In that case (at paragraph
    28) the Respondent Secretary of State accepted "That individuals facing
    destitution (by which we understand means  living  on  the  street  and
    having no food security) cannot be returned to Iraq as it would violate
    the United Kingdom's obligations under Article 3 ..." (paragraph 45).

14. The judge had then applied that general position, as  set  out  in  the
    country guidance case of AAH [2018], to the particular  facts  of  this
    case, which was that the Appellant was  a  person  without  any  family
    members, and that "He does not know anyone in Baghdad.   Sunni  Muslims
    are targeted as it is believed they support ISIS" (paragraph 46).   The
    judge had gone on to say that, "The Appellant  is  from  Mosul,  he  is
    Kurdish and a Sunni Muslim, without a CSID  card.   All  these  factors
    would mean he is at risk of being targeted in Baghdad" (paragraph 57).

15. In reply, Mr Tan submitted that it was important  to  consider  whether
    internal relocation would be available to the  Appellant,  even  if  he
    could not return back to Mosul in his home area.  The headnote  of  AAH
    [2018] appears to have been applied by the judge at  paragraphs  43  to
    44, but it was still necessary for the judge to ask what  risk  factors
    applied to the Appellant, who had now been in the UK since 2010.

No Error of Law

16. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA 2007) such that I should set aside the decision.  My  reasons  are
    as follows.  This was a case where the  essential  facts  were  not  in
    dispute.  There had been a previous decision, to which the judge had  a
    proper regard under the principles in Devaseelan.  By the time that the
    appeal arose before the  judge  the  issues  were  clear  cut,  and  Mr
    Madubuilke, with exemplary economy, had made it clear  that  "There  is
    nothing new to be added to his previous claim" (paragraph 23).

17. Second, the fact that the Appellant was an only child, had no  parents,
    and no family members  to  turn  to  (see  paragraph  11)  was  not  in
    contention.

18.  Third,  the  judge  dutifully  applied  the  leading  cases  in   this
    jurisdiction (see paragraphs 38 to 43).  Reliance was placed  upon  the
    case of AAH [2018], with close attention paid to the expert  report  by
    Dr Fatah, that the civil registration system in Iraq  is  in  disarray,
    and that he has never  known  anyone  obtain  the  documents  from  the
    central registry in Baghdad.

19. But even leaving all of this aside, the judge provided ample reasons in
    the conclusion that the Appellant, "Returning with no family would need
    to find accommodation and a single returnee according to Dr Fatah would
    not be able to rent in the traditional neighbourhoods and living on the
    street becomes a real possibility", such that this "Would  violate  the
    United Kingdom's obligations under Article 3" (paragraph 45).

20. Finally, it is noted that he is from Mosul, is of Kurdish ethnicity, is
    a Sunni Muslim, and risks being targeted  in  Baghdad  (paragraph  47).
    These conclusions were based on evidence that was before the  Tribunal.
    The conclusions were accordingly open to the judge to make.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of  an
error on a point of law.  The decision shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.

This appeal is refused.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 20th March 2019

