
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11315/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 23 September 2019                 |On 17 October 2019                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN


                                   Between

                                    M S T
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Chakmakjian, Counsel, instructed by AASK
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant, who is a national of Sri Lanka, appealed to a Judge of
the First-tier Tribunal against the Secretary of State's decision of 11
September 2018 refusing to grant asylum or humanitarian protection.

2.   The appellant claimed to have been arrested in Sri Lanka on 15 July
2009 and held for three days during which time he was questioned and
tortured including being sexually abused.  His account was that he had
handed a bag or parcel containing gun powder and guns to people who were
believed to be members of or involved in the LTTE.

3.   He spent one day in hospital after the period of detention and his
father spoke to a senior officer at the hospital who allowed him to go.
There were no conditions for his release.  He went to his uncle's home and
stayed there until he left the United Kingdom later in 2009.

4.   He claims that since he had left for the United Kingdom the police had
been to his home on a number of occasions.  He had not claimed asylum until
2018 because he thought that after his problems were over in Sri Lanka he
could return.

5.   The appellant did not give evidence at the hearing.  According to
medical evidence he was fit to attend the hearing though regular breaks in
cross-examination were advised.  Subsequently the doctor advised that the
appellant was unfit to attend a court hearing or give evidence.  The
hearing therefore proceeded on the basis of submissions only.

6.   The judge accepted that the appellant had been detained and ill-
treated by the authorities in Sri Lanka sometime prior to his departure for
the United Kingdom.  The judge did not, however, accept the appellant's
evidence that the authorities had visited his home after his departure for
the United Kingdom.  He concluded that the appellant had not been
prosecuted, was not sent to a rehabilitation camp and was not subject to
any condition when he was released.  The judge considered that manifestly
even with his history he would not be taken to be active in the diaspora
abroad.  The submission that there was probably a warrant for his arrest
was rejected as being based on no evidence.

7.   The judge also considered that there was a discrepancy in the
appellant's evidence in that he said he was released on bail and taken to a
hospital, according to his statement, and yet in interview he said that the
police officer allowed him to go free from the hospital and he was given no
conditions of release.  The judge concluded that the authorities were
satisfied that his answers that he was not involved with the LTTE and had
acted under coercion were the truth.

8.   The judge noted the medical evidence including the finding of Dr
Dhumad that the appellant was at moderate risk of suicide and there was a
risk of deterioration.  The judge considered the authorities in J [2005]
EWCA Civ 6239 and Y & Z and found factual distinctions, in particular
between Y & Z and the instant case where there had been no example of any
attempt at self-harm and there was an absence of the aggravating factors
that existed in Y & Z.  The judge did not accept that there were
insurmountable obstacles to the appellant's return to Sri Lanka in the form
of his health.  He had family there, had previously worked there and spoke
the language and was not of interest to the authorities.  The appeal was
dismissed on all grounds.

9.   The appellant sought and was granted permission, ultimately on all
grounds, which included the contention that the judge had failed to apply
properly the guidance in Y & Z, employed the incorrect standard of proof in
dealing with the asylum claim, had failed to take into account the
appellant's vulnerability in assessing his evidence and had failed to give
adequate reasons or consider material evidence with regard to his release
from detention.

10.  In his submissions Mr Chakmakjian adopted and developed the points
made in the grounds.  He argued that the mental health concerns were a
direct consequence of the actions of the Sri Lankan authorities and the
judge had accepted that the appellant was a victim of torture.  It was
clear from the guidance quoted in the grounds from Y & Z at paragraph 36
that because it had been decided that there was objectively no real risk of
repetition of ill-treatment all such fears would evaporate in the light of
day and the subjective reality of fear had to be given its full weight.

11.  With regard to ground 2, although the finding in respect of which the
wrong standard of proof had been employed favoured the appellant, it was
argued that there was a real danger that the judge had erroneously assessed
the claim elsewhere on the balance of probabilities rather than the correct
standard.

12.  Ground 3 concerned the failure of the judge to take into account the
appellant's vulnerability, which was a matter that had been argued in the
skeleton argument and before the judge.

13.  Ground 4 was in respect of the judge's failure to acknowledge the
reasons given for ongoing interest if the appellant was released as
claimed.  He had said he had been released on payment of a bribe and the
judge had not accepted coercion, but a bribe had been a constant element of
his claim.  He had referred to a visit to his home when he was staying with
his uncle.  If the judge accepted that the appellant was a victim of
torture then he would come to the adverse attention of the authorities
because of transporting weapons for the LTTE and there was a real risk of
him being seen as high profile.  He faced continuing risk.  Bribery and the
nature of the gun-running had not been considered and this was a central
factor of ongoing risk.

14.  In his submissions Mr Tufan argued that KH (Afghanistan) [2009] EWCA
Civ 1354 was relevant.  It was a question of whether this was a very
exceptional case.  It was difficult for the judge to treat the appellant as
a vulnerable witness, given that he had not given evidence, and though it
could be factored into the discrepancies, there was such a clear difference
in the issue considered at paragraph 29 that it was unclear how
vulnerability could explain that.  Giving the appellant the benefit of the
doubt as in effect the judge had done at paragraph 27 in saying that it was
more likely than not that the appellant was in fact detained and ill-
treated by the authorities did not go against the appellant.  There was no
materiality in that ground.  He was not a person who was in the GJ risk
categories.  There was a serious delay in claiming asylum.  The medical
evidence had all been considered.  There was no material error of law.

15.  By way of reply Mr Chakmakjian argued that KH was irrelevant as there
was no reference to Y & Z as KH was not a suicide risk case.  The health
concerns were a consequence of the actions of the authorities.  The lack of
live evidence was irrelevant to vulnerability.  It was a question of the
consistency of the appellant's accounts across interviews and witness
statements.  Paragraph 29 emphasised the errors set out in ground 4 of the
failure to refer to release on the basis of bribery and the need to
consider the consistencies as well.  Of particular relevance were the
answers to questions 88, 107, 108, 110, 111 and 114.  It showed that the
judge had looked at question 88 and made adverse findings but failed to
consider this in the context of the interview as a whole.  Therefore, there
was an argument that there was a likely continuing adverse interest in him.

16.  I reserved my decision.

17.  The main point of concern, as it seems to me, is that raised in ground
3.  It is clear from the skeleton argument that was before the judge that
the appellant's vulnerability was raised as an issue, and the judge
nevertheless failed to take into account that vulnerability in the adverse
credibility findings, perhaps in particular with regard to the point
considered at paragraph 29 concerning the appellant's release from custody.
 It was necessary for the judge to factor that into his findings in order
to come to proper conclusions on credibility.  With regard to ground 2,
although the judge applied the incorrect standard of proof at this
particular point, paragraph 27, that was a point which favoured the
appellant, the correct standard of proof was set out at paragraph 15 of the
judge's decision, and there is no indication that anywhere else did he
apply that correct standard.  Ground 4 is essentially covered by ground 2,
and I consider that there is a proper issue raised there as to the judge's
findings concerning the appellant's release from detention in light of his
failure to factor into his assessment of credibility the vulnerability of
the appellant.  Ground 1 I consider also to have some merit in that the
judge appears to have focused excessively on the facts in Y & Z rather than
considering the relevant legal principles and in particular the need to
take proper account of the subjective fear of the appellant in this case
rather than in effect concluding that because there was no well-founded
risk on return therefore the suicide risk fell away.

18.  Accordingly, there must be a reconsideration of the issues in this
case and unfortunately the extent of the remaking of the judge's decision
that will have to take place in light of the flawed credibility findings is
such that that rehearing will have to take place in the First-tier
Tribunal, at Hatton Cross.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed to the extent set out above.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

[pic]

Signed   Date 11 October 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Allen
