
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11367/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13 September 2019                         |On 12 November 2019           |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 ARTHUR [J]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT made)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Jones, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.
For the Respondent:    Ms E Daykin of Counsel instructed by Duncan Lewis &
Co.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

1.   This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Adio promulgated on 9 July 2019 allowing the appeal of  Arthur  [J]  on
    protection grounds.


2.   Although before me the Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  is
    the appellant and Mr [J] is the respondent, for the sake of consistency
    with the proceedings before the First-tier Tribunal I  shall  hereafter
    refer to Mr [J] as the Appellant and the  Secretary  of  State  as  the
    Respondent.


3.   The Appellant is a citizen of Jamaica  born  on  [~].  His  immigration
    history, and his criminal offending history in the UK, is a  matter  of
    record  in  the  various  documents  on  file,  and  is  summarised  at
    paragraphs 2 and 3 of the Decision of the First-tier  Tribunal.  It  is
    unnecessary to repeat the full history here. Suffice to  say  that  the
    Appellant raised a protection claim and a  human  rights  claim  on  20
    April 2018 in circumstances where he was facing enforcement action. The
    basis of his case is succinctly summarised in the Decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal in these terms: "The basis of the  Appellant's  claim  is
    that he will be persecuted by a criminal gang in Jamaica due to  giving
    evidence at previous trials of gang  members"  (paragraph  4).  Further
    details of the basis of the claim are summarised at paragraph 5 of  the
    Decision by way of paraphrasing the RFRL.


4.   The Respondent refused the Appellant's claims on 13 September 2018  for
    reasons set out in a 'reasons for  refusal'  letter  ('RFRL')  of  that
    date..


5.   The Appellant appealed to the IAC.


6.   The appeal was allowed for reasons set out in the  Decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Adio promulgated on 9 July 2019.


7.   The Respondent applied for permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal.
    Permission to appeal was  granted  by  Designated  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge MacDonald on 13 August 2019.


8.   On 11 September 2019 the Appellant filed a Rule 24  response  resisting
    the Respondent's challenge to the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.


Consideration of 'Error of Law' challenge

9.   The Respondent's Grounds of Appeal in support of  the  application  for
    permission to appeal essentially seek to challenge the Decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal on two bases: paragraphs 2 and  3  of  the  Grounds
    challenge the Judge's  consideration  of  credibility;  paragraphs  4-9
    submit that even if the Appellant's account is to be accepted the Judge
    misapplied 'country guidance' caselaw which, if applied properly, would
    have resulted in the appeal being dismissed.


10.  It is adequately clear that the First-tier Tribunal Judge was alert  to
    the fact that the Respondent disputed the Appellant's  credibility.  In
    the body of the Decision the Judge rehearses the substance of the RFRL,
    including noting the Respondent's contentions that "the  Appellant  had
    been inconsistent with the  timeline  he  provided  concerning  events"
    (paragraph 6), "had given an entirely vague account" concerning a court
    hearing (paragraph 6), and that he had made his claim for asylum  "very
    late"  (paragraph  7).  The  Judge  also  noted  that  the   Respondent
    considered that the scars on the Appellant's body could  have  resulted
    from "everyday injuries", and did not outweigh  the  other  credibility
    issues identified by the Respondent (paragraph 6).


11.  It  is  also  plain  on  the  face  of  the  Decision  that  the  Judge
    appropriately directed himself that the burden  of  proof  was  on  the
    Appellant, and in respect of  protection  the  standard  of  proof  was
    "reasonable degree of likelihood" (paragraph 10).


12.  In my judgement it is clear from the Decision that the  Judge  did  not
    lose sight of the competing positions of  the  parties  in  respect  of
    credibility when  he  brought  his  own  judgement  to  bear  upon  the
    available evidence - at paragraph 24  et  seq..  The  Judge  noted  the
    available medical evidence in respect of the Appellant's scarring,  and
    also noted the  Appellant's  account  of  how  he  had  sustained  such
    injuries (paragraphs 25 and 26) - further observing that he had related
    his experiences on a number of  occasions  (paragraph  27).  The  Judge
    expressly took into account the delay  in  claiming  asylum,  observing
    that this "no doubt raises the issue of Section 8  of  the  Asylum  and
    Immigration (Treatment of Claimants, e.g. see.)  Act  2004"  (paragraph
    26). Having considered such matters the Judge made  findings  in  these
    terms:

         "Regardless of the late claim there has been a general  consistency
         with his experience in Jamaica. I am therefore prepared to find  on
         the basis of the overall  consistency  of  the  evidence  that  the
         Appellant witnessed a murder in 1999  and  was  approached  by  the
         police and he gave evidence in a trial." (paragraph 27)


13.  Such a finding was made  with  regard  to  the  applicable  burden  and
    standard of proof, was reached pursuant to a careful  consideration  of
    the evidence and the issues between the  parties,  and  was  adequately
    reasoned. Indeed in this context, save in respect  of  the  generalised
    criticism in the Grounds of Appeal at paragraph  2(d)  in  relation  to
    'delay' and 'section 8', the particularised  criticisms  at  paragraphs
    2(a), (b), and (c) relate to matters  after  the  initial  problems  in
    1999.


14.  Having set out his findings favourable to the Appellant in  respect  of
    the issues that were at the origin of his claimed fear of returning  to
    Jamaica, the Judge indicated his  findings  in  respect  of  subsequent
    events. The Judge accepted that the  Appellant  had  been  stabbed  and
    wounded after he gave evidence in the trial because he "was  discovered
    as a police informer" (paragraph  28).  I  am  satisfied  that  such  a
    conclusion  must  necessarily  have  been  informed  in  part  by   the
    consistency of the  Appellant's  account  in  respect  of  how  he  had
    sustained his scars, and the broad consistency of  such  scarring  with
    his account (even if there might be  other  means  of  sustaining  such
    scars): this was a relevant consideration even if not  a  determinative
    consideration; there is no suggestion on the face of the Decision  that
    the Judge thought such scarring was determinative  of  the  Appellant's
    account. The Judge addressed the Respondent's point about the Appellant
    remaining in Jamaica until December 2002  as  being  indicative  of  an
    absence of risk, in these terms -  "I  am  also  willing  to  give  the
    Appellant the benefit of doubt that he thought  he  could  continue  to
    survive in Jamaica and hid to the best of  his  ability,  also  he  had
    assistance" (paragraph  28).  The  Judge  found  that  the  Appellant's
    evidence of having been targeted in the UK by the same gang  "has  also
    been consistent"; further, in this context the Judge had regard to  the
    fact  that  the  Appellant  was  "not  able  to  name  the  same  names
    throughout", but noted that "his general account has been  consistent",
    and  took  into  account  "his  medical  problems  which   affect   his
    concentration" (paragraph 28).


15.   The  above  analysis  and  findings  led  to  the  Judge's  conclusion
    expressed at paragraph 29: "...I have found the Appellant's account  is
    credible with regards to what he experienced in Jamaica and the UK  and
    him being a target for the Shower Posse".


16.   In  my  judgement  the  Respondent's  challenge  to   these   findings
    essentially amounts to  a  disagreement,  and  does  not  identify  any
    material error of law.


17.  Paragraph 2(a) of  the  Grounds  of  Appeal  repeats  the  Respondent's
    argument that there might be other possible causes for the  Appellant's
    injuries, highlighting his history of criminal behaviour and drug  use.
    In substance this is to reargue the case that was before the First-tier
    Tribunal, and with which the Judge, I find, adequately engaged.


18.  Paragraph 2(b) of the Grounds submits that the Judge failed to  make  a
    finding in respect of a particular aspect of the Appellant's evidence -
    that he had received threatening text messages and a voicemail from the
    gang whilst in the UK. The Respondent notes that the Appellant  claimed
    that the police and his lawyer had seen this evidence;  the  Respondent
    submits that in such circumstances the  failure  of  the  Appellant  to
    produce the evidence in the context of his protection claim and  appeal
    should have been considered as potentially giving rise  to  an  adverse
    inference.


19.  It is to be acknowledged that the Judge did not directly  address  this
    issue, notwithstanding that it was raised at paragraph 20 of the  RFRL.
    However on the very particular facts of this case in my judgement  such
    an omission is not to be  considered  as  materially  damaging  to  the
    Judge's overall conclusion. The premise of the Respondent's argument in
    this regard is that in the absence of production of supporting evidence
    where such evidence might reasonably be expected to  be  available,  an
    adverse inference may potentially be  drawn  to  the  effect  that  the
    Appellant's claim  to  have  received  such  messages  is  untrue.  Two
    significant factors in the instant case would counter  the  possibility
    of making an adverse inference: at his asylum interview  the  Appellant
    offered  to  play  a  threatening  message  on  his  telephone  to  the
    interviewing officer (see question 41); corroboration of  the  fact  of
    the existence of a text  message  was  provided  in  the  report  of  a
    psychologist, Dr Chisholm, who was shown such a message (see report  in
    the Appellant's supplementary bundle). Taking into account the  Judge's
    otherwise careful and thorough consideration of the available  evidence
    and his consideration of the Respondent's case on credibility, I am not
    prepared to conclude either that this point,  or  the  Judge's  failure
    directly to engage with this point,  could  rationally  have  made  any
    difference to the outcome in the appeal. Even if there were an error of
    law in this regard I would not be prepared to set aside the decision of
    First-tier Tribunal on such a basis.


20.  Paragraph 2(c) pleads that  the  Judge  did  not  address  all  of  the
    inconsistencies in the Appellant's evidence identified in the RFRL, and
    argues that the  Judge's  reasoning  is  consequently  inadequate.  The
    Ground does not specify which inconsistencies it is suggested that  the
    Judge has failed to address and Ms Jones did not seek to  amplify  this
    particular Ground. In any event it seems to me that this is  a  further
    example of the Respondent essentially rearguing case that  has  already
    adequately been addressed by the Judge. The Judge  plainly  had  it  in
    mind that the Appellant's  credibility  was  disputed  for  reasons  of
    inconsistency, but concluded - sustainably within the scope of rational
    judgement - that the general consistency of account together with other
    features of the Appellant's case was such as to discharge the burden of
    proof at the lower standard. In a similar way the  Judge  had  adequate
    regard to the potential damage to credibility by  reason  of  delay  in
    claiming protection (Grounds at paragraph 2(d)).


21.  In all such circumstances I reject the substance  of  the  Respondent's
    challenge to the credibility findings of the First-tier Tribunal.


22.  Having made his findings as to the Appellant's narrative  account,  the
    Judge considered the question of risk in the event that  the  Appellant
    were to be returned to Jamaica. The Judge did so within  the  framework
    of Article 3 of the ECHR rather than the Refugee Convention because  it
    was considered that no 'Convention ground' was identifiable  (e.g.  see
    paragraph 24). The Judge had regard to the Respondent's Country  Policy
    and Information Note ('CPIN') of March 2017 in respect of risk from  an
    organised criminal gang, and found that he was satisfied the  Appellant
    faced a real and serious threat to the person (paragraphs 29 and 30).


23.  The Judge then considered the potential  protection  mechanism  of  the
    witness protection  programme,  noting  that  the  CPIN  considered  it
    provided effective protection (paragraph 30). However, the Judge  found
    that there was no evidence that the Appellant had ever been part of the
    witness protection programme (paragraph 30).


24.  The Judge went on to consider internal relocation. In this context  the
    Judge   had   particular   regard   to   the   Appellants   "individual
    circumstances", noting that he had been street homeless in the UK,  and
    acknowledging the expert evidence suggesting that there was  likely  to
    be a repetition of such  homelessness  if  the  Appellant  were  to  be
    removed from his support networks and  present  housing;  it  was  also
    noted  that  he  had  "a  multiple  of  medical  problems",   including
    hypertension, diabetes, ischaemic stroke affecting the left side of his
    body, and impaired mobility (paragraph 31). It was noted  that  it  was
    not disputed that the  Appellant  had  no  family  support  in  Jamaica
    (paragraph 32). Further to this the  Judge  noted  the  evidence  of  a
    country expert to the effect  that  the  Appellant  would  be  entirely
    dependent on state agencies and "at  very  significant  risk  of  being
    destitute, homeless and without adequate medical or  therapeutic  care"
    (paragraph 32).  In  consequence  the  Judge  found  "in  view  of  the
    Appellant's multiple medical problems, his lack of  economic  means  as
    well as vulnerability, it  would  be  unreasonable  to  expect  him  to
    relocate in Jamaica" (paragraph 33).


25.  The Judge then concluded the appeal in these terms:

         "I therefore find that the Appellant has shown that if returned  to
         his country he would face a real risk of suffering serious harm  as
         defined in Article 15 and is unable or owing to such risk unwilling
         to avail himself of protection of Jamaica. Harm would be from  non-
         state  agents.  Further,  internal  relocation/internal  flight  is
         unreasonable or unduly harsh in  the  situation.  In  view  of  the
         multiple medical issues that the Appellant has as well as the  risk
         from the Shower Posse and  his  poor  and  psychological  condition
         coupled with the previous attacks he has experienced in Jamaica,  I
         find that the Appellant is in a vulnerable  situation  and  without
         any relatives back  in  Jamaica  will  end  up  most  likely  being
         destitute and homeless. In light with my findings above I find  the
         Appellant would also have his rights under Article 3 of  the  Human
         Rights Convention breached." (paragraph 33)


26.  The Respondent's Grounds  of  Appeal  seek  to  challenge  the  Judge's
    evaluation of risk on return by placing reliance on  the  cases  of  AB
    (Protection - criminal gangs - internal relocation) Jamaica  CG  [2007]
    UKAIT  00018  and  JS  (Victims  of  gang  violence  -  sufficiency  of
    protection) Jamaica [2006] UKAIT 00057: "It is  respectfully  submitted
    that applying the rationale of  these  two  reported  Country  guidance
    determinations to the appellant's circumstances the appeal is bound  to
    be dismissed" (Grounds of Appeal at paragraph 4). Paragraphs 5 and 7 of
    the Grounds contain quotations from each of these cases. Otherwise  the
    substance of paragraphs 4-9 of the  Grounds  are  to  the  effect  that
    because his testimony at court had led to gang members being  sentenced
    "there is no reason why [the Appellant] would not be  admitted  to  the
    witness protection scheme", which would be effective because he was not
    a 'high-profile' case, in which case he would not be at risk and  would
    not need to relocate.


27.  Ms Jones readily accepted Ms Daykin's observation (set out in the  Rule
    24 response) that the decision in JS had been set aside by the Court of
    Appeal with consent of the parties on 14 June 2007, and  therefore  did
    not stand as country guidance.


28.  The country guidance offered in AB,  as  summarised  in  the  headnote,
    pertinently includes "...unless reasonably likely to be  admitted  into
    the Witness Protection programme, a person targeted by a criminal  gang
    will not normally receive effective protection in his home area".


29.  As noted above, the Judge found "there is no indication  the  Appellant
    has been included in the witness protection programme" (paragraph  30).
    In this context it is also to be noted that the Judge  found  that  the
    Appellant had been attacked and injured in Jamaica subsequent to giving
    evidence in a trial: this would suggest that he was not in the  witness
    protection programme. (It is to be  noted  that  in  his  evidence  the
    Appellant indicated that he had not  asked  for  protection  whilst  in
    Jamaica, and was  unaware  of  the  programme:  e.g.  see  Decision  at
    paragraph 14.)


30.  I note, pursuant to the Judge's findings, that the Appellant  gave  his
    testimony against gang members in 1999. If he was not admitted into the
    witness protection programme at that time, I queried by what  mechanism
    it might be suggested that he could now enter  witness  protection.  Ms
    Jones responded by stating that if the Appellant had  not  been  cross-
    examined by the Presenting Officer on this point before the  First-tier
    Tribunal, it was not for her to offer any submissions on this issue  at
    the 'error of law' stage because that would involve a change of dynamic
    in the presentation of the Respondent's case.


31.  It does indeed appear to be the case that the Appellant was not  cross-
    examined in this regard: see  paragraphs  13-16.  Moreover  it  is  not
    apparent that the Presenting  Officers  submissions  addressed  such  a
    matter: see paragraph 17. Ms Jones also accepted that there was nothing
    identified in any of the  country  information  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal as to how  a  witness  might  access  the  witness  protection
    programme some 20 years after the event.


32.  In such circumstances it seems to me that I am left with the  essential
    finding of the First-tier Tribunal that there "is  no  indication  that
    the Appellant has been included in the  witness  protection  programme"
    (paragraph 30). There being nothing  further  by  way  of  evidence  or
    exploration on this point, I am unable to see  how  the  Judge  can  be
    criticised for concluding - in line with AB - that the Appellant  would
    therefore be at risk from an organised criminal gang.


33.  For the avoidance of any doubt, in my judgement the conclusions of  the
    First-tier Tribunal in respect of internal relocation were  sustainably
    reached after careful consideration of the very  particular  individual
    circumstances of the Appellant, and as such were in  keeping  with  the
    well-established orthodoxy, reiterated at paragraph  164  of  AB,  that
    "each case will turn on its own facts".


34.  In all the circumstances I find no basis for impugning the Decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal. The Respondent's challenge fails.


Notice of Decision

35.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained no material error  of
    law and accordingly stands.


36.  The Appellant's appeal remains allowed.



Signed:                                 Date: 8 November 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis
