
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: pa/11502/2019 (P)



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Decided Under Rule 34 (P)            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 6 October 2020                    |On 12 October 2020                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEKI?



                                   Between

                                     R T

                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and



                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation (by way of written submissions)

For the appellant:     Mr J Dhanji of Counsel instructed by  SMA  Solicitors


For the respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting  Officer




                            DECISION AND REASONS


         Background


      1. This appeal comes before me following the grant  of  permission  to
         appeal to the appellant by Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara  on  4  June
         2020  against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal   Judge
         Anthony, promulgated on 6 February  2020  following  a  hearing  at
         Birmingham on 31 January 2020.

      2. The appellant is an Afghan national born  on  1  January  2000.  He
         entered the UK as a minor aged 16 1/2 on 31 August 2016. He  claims
         asylum on 29 September 2016. His claim was refused on 19  September
         2017 and an appeal against that decision was  dismissed  by  First-
         tier Tribunal  Judge  Chapman.  The  appellant  then  made  further
         submissions on 18 October 2018. these  were  accepted  as  a  fresh
         claim but  refused  on  4  November  2019,  giving  rise  to  these
         proceedings.

      3. Judge Anthony heard  oral  evidence  from  the  appellant  and  his
         brother who was granted refugee status in 2012 after  a  successful
         appeal  before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  McMahon.  She   found,
         however, that the fresh evidence could  not  displace  the  adverse
         findings of Judge Chapman on the protection claim. She  also  found
         that the appellant's relationship with his brother did  not  amount
         to family life for the purpose of article 8 and  that  his  private
         life which was established during a  period  when  his  status  was
         precarious did not engage article 8. Accordingly, she dismissed the
         appeal.

      4. The grounds argue that the judge  erred   on  two  counts:  (i)  in
         failing to give weight to Judge McMahon's positive findings on  the
         appellant's brother's credibility which would, if considered,  have
         impacted upon the Judge Anthony's assessment of his evidence at the
         hearing; and (ii) in failing to consider paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) in
         the context of the appellant's relationship with  his  brother  and
         former foster carer, his depression and inability to access  mental
         health care on return to Afghanistan.

         Covid-19 crisis: preliminary matters

      5. The usual procedure following the grant of  permission  would  have
         been to list the  matter  for  hearing  but  due  to  the  Covid-19
         pandemic and need to take precautions against its spread, this  did
         not happen and instead directions were sent to the  parties  on  29
         July 2020. They were asked to present any objections to the  matter
         being dealt with on the papers and to make any further  submissions
         on the error of law issue within certain time limits.

      6. The parties have responded. The appellant's submissions  are  dated
         12 August 2020 and the respondent's are dated 17 August 2020. There
         has  been  no  reply  from  the  appellant  to   the   respondent's
         submissions to date.  I now proceed to consider the matter.

      7. In doing  so  I  have  regard  to  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
         Tribunal) Rules 2008 (the UT Rules), the judgment of Osborn  v  The
         Parole Board [2013] UKSC 61, the Presidential Guidance  Note  No  1
         2020: Arrangements during  the  Covid-19  pandemic  (PGN)  and  the
         Senior President's Pilot Practice Direction (PPD). I have regard to
         the overriding objective which is defined in rule 2 of the Tribunal
         Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 as being "to enable the Upper
         Tribunal to deal with cases fairly and justly". To this end I  have
         considered that dealing with a case  fairly  and  justly  includes:
         dealing with it in ways that are proportionate to the importance of
         the case, the complexity of the issues, etc;  avoiding  unnecessary
         formality and seeking flexibility in the proceedings; ensuring,  so
         far as practicable, that the parties are able to participate  fully
         in the proceedings;  using  any  special  expertise  of  the  Upper
         Tribunal effectively; and avoiding delay, so far as compatible with
         proper consideration of the issues (Rule 2(2) UT rules and PGN:5).

      8.  I  have  had  regard  to  the  grounds,  the  determination,   the
         submissions and to all the evidence before me before  deciding  how
         to proceed. A full account of the facts are set out in  the  papers
         on file and the issues to be decided are straightforward. There are
         no  matters  arising  from   the   papers   which   would   require
         clarification and so an oral hearing would not be needed  for  that
         purpose. I am satisfied that  the  appellant  has  been  given  the
         opportunity to raise any objections to a  paper  determination  and
         has not done so in  his  written  submissions.  The  respondent  is
         content that the matter be determined without an oral hearing. I am
         satisfied that I am able to fairly and justly deal with this matter
         on the papers before me and I now proceed to do so.

         Submissions

      9. Mr Dhanji, in his submissions for the appellant,  relies  upon  the
         grounds for permission. He submits that the judge erred in  law  in
         failing to give any weight to the fact that the appellant's brother
         had previously been found by the tribunal in his own appeal to be a
         credible witness. It is submitted that that assessment should  have
         been given weight when his credibility as a witness in  support  of
         the  appellant's  appeal  was  assessed.  The   appellant   adduced
         documentary evidence from a man in Afghanistan in  support  of  his
         claim that he had been abducted  and  imprisoned  by  the  Taliban.
         These documents were purportedly obtained  with  the  help  of  the
         appellant's brother. The judge considered the documents but was not
         satisfied that they were reliable. It is  submitted  that  had  the
         judge given weight to the fact that  the  appellant's  brother  had
         previously been found to be a  credible  witness,  she  would  have
         reached  a  different  conclusion  as  to  the  provenance  of  the
         documents from  Afghanistan.  It  is  accepted  that  the  positive
         credibility findings in the past did not mean that  the  judge  was
         bound to accept the brother's evidence in the present  appeal,  but
         it is argued that it was a  relevant  consideration  to  which  the
         judge should have attached some weight.   The  judge's  failure  to
         take any account of the previous positive credibility  findings  in
         respect of the brother tainted her assessment of  his  credibility,
         which in turn undermined her conclusion that the  documents  relied
         upon by the appellant were unreliable

     10. With respect to the second ground of appeal, it is argued that  the
         judge erred in law in finding  that  the  appellant's  right  to  a
         private life was not engaged. It is submitted  that  the  appellant
         had lived in the UK for three years and five months at the date  of
         hearing, having entered at the  age  of  16,  and  that  there  was
         evidence before the judge about his relationship with  his  brother
         and the relationship he had developed with his former foster carer.
         It is submitted that on the basis of that evidence the judge should
         have found that the appellant had established a private  life  that
         fell to be protected under article 8. It  is  submitted  that  this
         error was material as it resulted in the judge failing to determine
         whether the appellant could satisfy the private life provisions  in
         the rules at paragraph 276ADE. It is submitted that the appellant's
         depression, low mood and sadness and the difficulties he would face
         in accessing mental health care in  Afghanistan  all  went  towards
         demonstrating that he would  face  very  significant  obstacles  to
         integration  on  return.  It  is  submitted  that  when  the  broad
         evaluative judgement recommended in Kamara [2016] EWCA Civ 813  was
         carried out, the appellant was able to demonstrate  that  obstacles
         existed and that this would have been positively  determinative  of
         his article 8 grounds of appeal. The tribunal is urged to set aside
         the decision and to remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal for
         a de novo hearing, regardless of whether one or both  grounds  were
         made out.

     11. In his submissions for the respondent, Mr Whitwell notes that there
         has been no direct attack on the finding  that  the  appellant  had
         failed to discharge the burden on him to demonstrate a well founded
         fear of persecution. It is submitted that it is not  particularised
         in the grounds  how  the  appellant's  brothers  evidence  directly
         affects those findings. Whilst it is accepted that  the  judge  did
         not expressly set out that she had taken into account the  previous
         positive  credibility  findings  in  respect  of  the   appellant's
         brother, it is submitted that the judge had not erred  because  she
         had taken account of Judge Chapman's determination  in  respect  of
         the appellant which had cast doubts on  the  previous  findings  in
         respect of his brother's circumstances. Judge  Anthony  noted  that
         Judge Chapman found that the  appellant's  family  did  not  go  to
         Turkey with the appellant's brother, contrary  to  judge  McMahon's
         decision. Judge Chapman also found that the appellant had continued
         to live in Afghanistan with his family and that he had close family
         members who live there. Having rejected his claim of being abducted
         by the Taliban, Judge Chapman found that the appellant would not be
         at risk in his home area and that if there had  been  any  interest
         shown in the appellant's family that was over 10 years ago when the
         appellant's  brother  had  fled.  Judge  Anthony   considered   the
         appellant's  brother's  oral  evidence  as  to  the   documentation
         obtained from Afghanistan but considered that  there  were  reasons
         for not accepting his account as  it  was  not  explained  why  the
         letter  was  written  on  official  notepaper  from  the   taxation
         department and  that  there  was  no  satisfactory  trail  for  the
         documentation to establish its provenance even  though  this  could
         have easily been provided. Mr Whitwell submits that the  weight  to
         be attached to the evidence of witnesses is a matter for the  judge
         who looked at the matter  in  the  round  and  in  accordance  with
         Tanveer Ahmed principles.

     12.  On  ground  two,  it  is  submitted  that  the  finding  that  the
         appellant's  private  life  was  not  sufficient  to   engage   the
         Convention  was  not  irrational.  It  is  submitted  that  nothing
         specific was relied upon by the appellant  as  to  the  nature  and
         extent of his private life other than the length of residence of  3
         1/2 years. It is not suggested that the appellant was engaging with
         the local mental health services in respect of his depression,  nor
         was there any evidence as to his engagement with his former  foster
         carer. It is submitted that, in any event, if there were an  error,
         it was immaterial given the findings that the appellant  had  spent
         the majority  of  his  life  in  Afghanistan,  that  he  spoke  the
         language, that he had close family members  who  continue  to  live
         there, that he would have family support on return, that  he  could
         readily readjust to life on return and that he  would  be  able  to
         receive financial  remittances  from  his  brother  in  the  UK  if
         necessary.  Based  on  these  factors  it  is  submitted  that  the
         appellant would be enough of an insider to participate in  life  in
         Afghanistan (as per Kamara). The Tribunal is asked to find that the
         determination  contains  no  material  errors  and  to  uphold  the
         decision to dismiss the appeal.

         Discussion and conclusions

     13. I have considered all the evidence, the grounds for permission, the
         determination and the  submissions.

     14. The appellant puts forward two complaints. The first  is  that  the
         judge failed to factor  in  the  positive  credibility  finding  in
         respect of the appellant's brother made  in  his  own  appeal  when
         assessing his reliability as a witness in the appellant's appeal. I
         can find no merit in this argument. The judge had note, however, of
         Judge  Chapman's  later  decision  which  took   account   of   the
         determination of  Judge  McMahon  in  respect  of  the  appellant's
         brother. It cannot, therefore, be said that the first determination
         was disregarded  and  indeed  Judge  Anthony  engaged  with  it  at
         paragraphs 6-7, noting that the appellant's brother had been  found
         to be credible and reliable (at  7).  However,  contrary  to  Judge
         McMahon's findings, Judge Chapman did not  accept  the  appellant's
         brother's account of the family circumstances. It was entirely open
         to Judge Anthony to  rely  on  Judge  Chapman's  findings  that  an
         entirely truthful account had not previously been  given  to  Judge
         McMahon.

     15. The judge heard oral evidence from the appellant  and  his  brother
         and considered the documentary evidence relied upon. The weight she
         attributed to the oral evidence was a matter for her having had the
         benefit  of  hearing  from  both  witnesses.   Her  reasoning   for
         rejecting the unreliability of the documentary evidence was  wholly
         rational and  in  accordance  with  Tanveer  Ahmed  principles.  No
         explanation was provided for how a Facebook acquaintance would have
         had access to official notepaper when it was not suggested that  he
         worked in the Taxation and Revenue Department of Laghman  province.
         Similarly, she was entitled to reject the other supporting  letters
         which were also written  on  the  same  notepaper  even  though  no
         connection between the authors of the letters and  that  department
         had been established. The judge was also entitled to find  that  no
         supporting evidence from Facebook had been  adduced  to  show  that
         contact had been made with the man who is said to have supplied the
         evidence. This was  evidence  that  could  easily  have  been  made
         available. No explanation was provided for why this  had  not  been
         done. Further, the judge noted that the contents of  the  documents
         did not accord with the  appellant's  own  evidence  and  that  the
         inconsistencies thus further  undermined  the  reliability  of  the
         documents. The grounds fail entirely to explain  how  consideration
         of a past positive credibility of  the  appellant's  brother  could
         overcome  these  deficiencies.  The  judge's  conclusion  that  the
         protection claim was not made out was, therefore, entirely reasoned
         and remains sustainable.

     16. I turn now to the second complaint regarding the judge's assessment
         of article 8. The judge found that there was no family life between
         the appellant and his brother  as  although  they  saw  each  other
         regularly they did not live together, they  were  both  adults  and
         there  was  nothing  between  them  which  went  beyond  the  usual
         emotional ties. Reliance is placed on the witness statements of the
         appellant and his brother as to the relationship between  them.  It
         has to be said that these are of very poor quality;  the  print  is
         faint and makes them partially illegible. Other than  an  assertion
         that he is supported by his brother, the appellant gives no further
         details in his statement. There is no information as to the  nature
         of the support given, the frequency of their contact or  its  form.
         The appellant's brother provides some information. He confirms they
         see each other on weekends as he lives in Croydon and the appellant
         lives in Milton Keynes, that  they  speak  regularly  and  that  he
         encourages the appellant to go to the gym, but this alone does  not
         demonstrate a relationship of particular dependency. Furthermore, a
         large part of what the appellant and his brother say  is  based  on
         the account of the appellant's abduction, an event which two judges
         have rejected. Moreover, the appellant's brother's concerns  as  to
         how the appellant would manage in Afghanistan without him is  based
         on the premise that he would be returning to no one  and  would  be
         destitute. That is not, however, the true situation as found by the
         judge. The appellant would be returning to  his  family  and  would
         have more family members to support him than the single relative he
         has here and with whom  he  does  not  even  reside.  Although  the
         grounds rely on the appellant's relationship with his former foster
         carer, the appellant gives a sparse account of his contact with her
         and her letter is silent on the issue of whether contact  continues
         between them or of any relationship they continue to have. The  two
         sentences on article 8 contained in Counsel's skeleton argument for
         the hearing provide no assistance.

     17. The judge had regard to the medical evidence and accepted that  the
         appellant was depressed and  that  contributing  factors  were  his
         ongoing immigration case, the  uncertainty  in  his  life  and  his
         dependency on others. She  found,  however,  that  the  appellant's
         depression was not caused the events described by the appellant but
         by growing up in a country ravaged by war. She also properly  found
         that Dr Latif's conclusions were premised on  the  assumption  that
         the appellant would be without a support network on return  whereas
         she had found that he had family in Afghanistan to whom he would be
         returning and that with their help and support he would be able  to
         access any care he required. These findings are unchallenged.

     18. The judge further  found,  as  listed  by  Mr  Whitwell,  that  the
         appellant had lived the majority of his life in  Afghanistan,  that
         he had been here less than 3 1/2 years, that he spoke the language,
         that he had a mother and siblings there, that he would have  family
         to return to, that he would be able to readjust to life  on  return
         and could continue to receive support from his brother in the UK as
         required.

     19. On the basis of these findings, therefore, it is difficult  to  see
         how a private life established at a time of precarious  immigration
         status and over a relatively short period of time could  be  strong
         enough to be deserving of protection under article 8.  The  judge's
         conclusions were wholly open to her on the evidence and disclose no
         material errors of law.

         Decision

     20. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain any errors
         of law and it is upheld. The appeal is dismissed.

         Anonymity

     21. Pursuant to Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
         Rules 2008, I continue the anonymity order made by  the  First-tier
         Tribunal.

     22. Unless the Upper Tribunal or a court directs otherwise, no  reports
         of these proceedings of  any  form  of  publication  thereof  shall
         directly or  indirectly  identify  the  appellant.  This  direction
         applies to, amongst others, the appellant and the  respondent.  Any
         failure to comply with this direction could give rise  to  contempt
         of court proceedings. I do so in order to  avoid  a  likelihood  of
         serious harm arising to the  appellant  from  the  content  of  the
         protection claim.



Signed



R. Keki?

Upper Tribunal Judge



Date: 6 October 2020
