
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11857/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 8 May 2018                                 |On 14 May 2018                |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FROOM


                                   Between

                                     M A
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J H Trumpington, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                    DECISION AND REASONS ON ERROR OF LAW

 1. The appellant appeals with the permission of the  First-tier  Tribunal,
    against a decision of Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Seelhoff  in
    which he dismissed the appellant's protection appeal. The appellant  is
    a Turkish national and he claimed to  be  at  risk  of  persecution  on
    account of his political opinions. He also  claimed  to  have  suffered
    past persecution.

 2. The respondent  accepted  the  appellant  was  a  Turkish  Alevi  Kurd.
    However, the account he gave of arrests for involvement  with  the  HDP
    and membership of HADEP was rejected on credibility grounds.

 3. Judge Seelhoff, after hearing the appellant give evidence,  also  found
    him not credible. He gave seven main reasons that this conclusion:

      1) the appellant had not been able to explain why he had not been able
         to  obtain  evidence  of  his  past  involvement   with   political
         organisations;

      2) there was background evidence to the effect that  ordinary  members
         of  the  HDP  who  have  come  to  the  adverse  attention  of  the
         authorities  have  done  so  because  they  were  participating  in
         demonstrations and rallies. An ordinary member would not  generally
         attract the adverse attention of  the  authorities  on  account  of
         their political beliefs;

      3) the judge considered the appellant had been very vague  about  what
         he had done for the HDP since  his  arrest  in  2014.  He  had  not
         described doing anything  apart  from  occasionally  attending  the
         headquarters when it was quiet, having tea, chatting  with  friends
         and maybe delivering leaflets. In  particular,  he  never  attended
         rallies or big crowds. The appellant would not therefore have  been
         of any interest to the authorities;

      4) someone who had been involved in political  opposition  since  1996
         would have had a better idea, than the appellant had been  able  to
         show at his interview, of what had actually happened with the party
         since then;

      5)  the  appellant  had  been  inconsistent  regarding   keeping   his
         involvement with the HDP's secret;

      6) the authorities would not have regarded the appellant as a valuable
         source of  information  about  the  HDP  or  the  PKK  because  the
         appellant had never been associated with PKK  and  his  involvement
         with the HDP was peripheral at best; and

      7) the scarring which the appellant has was not what might  have  been
         expected given his account of being subjected to extreme torture.

 4. The  grounds  seeking  permission  to  appeal  challenged  the  judge's
    decision on to main grounds. In relation to his  consideration  of  the
    scarring report, he had failed to have regard to the  country  guidance
    decision of IK (Returnees - Records  -  IFA)  Turkey  CG  [2004]  UKIAT
    00312, which made clear that less detectable methods  of  torture  were
    used. Also, the judge failed to provide reasoned findings for rejecting
    the expert's conclusion that the appellant was  suffering  from  mental
    health problems attributable to torture and ill-treatment. The  grounds
    challenged the judge's assessment that the  appellant  had  been  vague
    about his activities  for  the  HDP  since  2014.  Again,  the  country
    guidance decision of IK was relied on for the proposition that  adverse
    interest  often  results  from  grassroots  activism.  Had  the   judge
    considered this he would not have reasoned that the appellant could not
    plausibly have come to the adverse interest of the authorities.

 5. Permission to appeal was granted by the First-tier Tribunal because  it
    was unclear on what evidential or expert basis the  judge  had  reached
    the conclusion about more extensive scarring  beyond  speculation.  The
    judge was not an expert.  Permission  was  granted  to  argue  all  the
    grounds.

 6. The respondent has not filed a rule 24 response.

 7. I heard submissions from the representatives on the  issue  of  whether
    the judge's decision contained a material error of law.

 8. Mr Trumpington's submissions expanded on the written grounds. He placed
    more emphasis on the first ground concerning the judge's assessment  of
    the medical report of Dr Hajioff.

 9. I note that Dr Hajioff is a consultant psychiatrist but  he  states  at
    the beginning of his report  that  he  has  made  many  assessments  of
    scarring as well. He set out a summary of the  appellant's  account  of
    receiving numerous beatings, having his head pushed  into  dirty  water
    and electrocution. He found the scar on the appellant's left  cheek  to
    be consistent with a blow to that area. The linear scar on the back  of
    his head was typical of a blunt injury to that area. The scar below his
    right knee was typical of an injury to that area  which  had  repaired.
    The age of the scars was consistent with the account. The appellant  is
    right-handed and his injuries are scattered in a pattern not typical of
    self-harm but he could not rule out self-harm by proxy.  He  found  the
    appellant met the criteria for a diagnosis of depression and PTSD.  The
    appellant had given  an  account  of  being  exposed  to  events  which
    generated great fear.

10. The judge  summarised  the  medical  report  in  paragraph  15  of  his
    decision. In the section of his  decision  in  which  he  set  out  his
    findings  and  conclusions,  the  judge  returned  to  the  report   in
    paragraphs 36 and 37. He said he was "troubled by the medical  report".
    He quoted from the appellant's substantive interview at  which  he  had
    described his beatings.  The  appellant  had  said,  "there  was  blood
    everywhere". The judge noted the only physical  evidence  of  the  ill-
    treatment which the appellant claimed to have undergone was the scar on
    his face  and  the  scar  on  the  back  of  his  head.  He  continued,
    "[a]lthough I am not a medical expert it seems to me unusual  that  the
    extreme campaign of abuse described  left  only  two  injuries  visible
    which the doctor simply said were consistent with being  struck  either
    with a fist or with a  blunt  object.  I  am  not  satisfied  that  the
    injuries were necessarily caused in the manner the Appellant claims. If
    the Appellant had been subjected to the extremes of torture he claims I
    find that it would be likely that there would be something  further  to
    show for it and more importantly it would be likely that he would  have
    needed medical treatment on release from detention."

11. Mr Trumpington challenged  the  adequacy  of  this  reasoning.  I  have
    recorded his submissions in full but I  shall  only  mention  the  main
    points. In relation to the judge's choice of  language,  in  particular
    the use of the words "necessarily" and "likely", I do not  accept  this
    shows the judge erred by imposing an inappropriately high  standard  of
    proof. The judge directed himself correctly  in  paragraph  12  of  his
    decision and there is no real basis for arguing that he  departed  from
    the low standard when it came to examining the medical evidence. It  is
    entirely clear what the judge meant. He did not regard the report to be
    of such cogency that the support it offered to the appellant's claim as
    corroboration that he had been  ill-treated  in  the  manner  described
    warranted significant weight. Rather, the judge explained with adequate
    reasons why he came to the conclusion that it did not. It was perfectly
    open to the judge to criticise  the  report  on  the  basis  that  what
    appeared obvious even to someone who is not a medical expert  warranted
    consideration in order for the report to  be  regarded  as  a  thorough
    assessment of the physical consequences of the lengthy ordeal described
    by the appellant.

12. Mr  Trumpington  took  issue  with  the  judge's  assessment  that  the
    appellant had not required medical treatment and pointed out  that  the
    appellant said he had been instructed not to go to a doctor. However, I
    consider this issue takes the argument no further. Again, all the judge
    is saying here is that, if the appellant  had  been  the  victim  of  a
    sustained beating, common sense dictates that  he  is  likely  to  have
    suffered far greater injuries than the report and his  account  suggest
    he did. Likewise, the argument set out in the written  grounds  seeking
    permission to appeal, that the judge  failed  to  have  regard  to  the
    elderly country guidance which described the methods of abuse  used  by
    the Turkish security forces which  did  not  necessarily  leave  marks,
    fails to recognise  that  the  judge  was  simply  comparing  what  the
    appellant had described (blood everywhere) with the  lack  of  apparent
    after-effects (two scars).

13. I was referred to the decision of the Court of Appeal  in  Reza  Fatemi
    Reka v SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ 552, particularly the passage in  paragraph
    35 which criticises the approach of an adjudicator who  had  based  his
    rejection of the appellant's explanation on the narrow ground  that  he
    thought it most unlikely that the appellant would not have had marks on
    his body if he had been beaten as claimed.  The  adjudicator  had  made
    that finding, not on the basis of any  medical  evidence,  but  on  the
    basis of his own knowledge and experience.  The  Court  expressed  some
    doubt about the soundness of that finding. However, as  Mr  Trumpington
    acknowledged, any error in this approach did  not  lead  the  Court  to
    allow the appeal. That is because this was only  one  of  a  string  of
    reasons given by the adjudicator for rejecting the credibility  of  the
    appellant's account. So it is in the current appeal. As set out  above,
    the judge gave seven main reasons for rejecting the claim and  even  if
    there were serious ground for "uneasiness" regarding his assessment  of
    the absence of further scarring, that would be insufficient  reason  to
    pull down the entire edifice decision.

14. If I  understood  him  correctly,  Mr  Trumpington  also  attempted  to
    challenge the judge's reasoning  on  the  basis  that  he  had  made  a
    decision on the appellant's credibility before turning to  the  medical
    evidence to see whether, to use  his  word,  it  "rescued"  the  claim.
    However, whilst it is true the judge dealt with  the  medical  evidence
    towards the end of his findings and conclusions,  this  does  not  show
    that he had already made up his mind  before  considering  the  report.
    That much is clear from the  fact  he  summarised  his  conclusions  in
    paragraph 39, after he has dealt with the report. There is therefore no
    force in this challenge.

15. The next point taken by Mr Trumpington was that  the  judge  failed  to
    give any  reasons  not  to  accept  that  the  appellant's  psychiatric
    symptoms, as found by Dr Hajioff, could be  attributed  to  torture  as
    claimed. It appears from paragraph 38, that the  judge  reasoned  that,
    because he did not  consider  the  scars  were  caused  in  the  manner
    claimed, it followed that the appellant's psychiatric  symptoms  should
    not be attributed to torture either. Mr Bramble argued that  the  judge
    did not need to go further than he did.

16. As said, Dr Hajioff is a consultant psychiatrist and his conclusions on
    mental health therefore  deserve  respect.  Obviously,  PTSD  has  been
    caused by a traumatic experience of some sort.  However,  it  does  not
    necessarily follow that this must have been related  to  the  incidents
    described by the appellant. The report does  not  consider  alternative
    causation and, I see no fault in the logic of the judge  in  concluding
    that there must be another cause in the circumstances that he  was  not
    satisfied the appellant had been beaten up, as claimed.

17. In sum, I do not accept that the  judge's  assessment  of  the  medical
    evidence was flawed such that his overall assessment of the appellant's
    credibility was vitiated by material error of law.

18. The second ground of challenge was characterised by Mr Bramble as  mere
    disagreement with the judge's decision. I agree. It was for the  judge,
    having heard the appellant give evidence, to assess whether his account
    was sufficiently detailed regarding his claimed political activities so
    as to warrant the adverse attention of the Turkish  authorities.  There
    is no basis for suggesting the judge was  not  conscious  of  the  risk
    factors  described  in  the  country  guidance.  In  paragraph  16,  he
    considered  whether  conditions  in  South-East  Turkey  had   worsened
    following the 2016 coup attempt.

19. The grounds do not show that the judge misunderstood the  evidence.  Mr
    Trumpington attempted to argue that, contrary to the reasoning  of  the
    judge, the Turkish  authorities  are  more  likely  to  have  recruited
    someone with a low profile to inform on his colleagues because  such  a
    person was less likely to face regular detention. That is a theory  but
    it does not mean the judge was not entitled to take the opposite view.

20. Mr Trumpington also questioned the judge's use of the word "maybe" when
    setting out the appellant's account of delivering leaflets.  He  argued
    there was no basis for the uncertainty introduced by the  use  of  that
    word given the appellant had  been  consistent  and  clear  about  this
    activity. However, in my judgement, this is also simply a matter of the
    judge's manner of self-expression.  Paragraph  31  should  be  read  as
    meaning that, even if the appellant's account were taken at its highest
    as regards his political activities, they did not amount to much.  That
    was a view he was entitled to take.

21. There is no error of law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  to
    dismiss the appeal and the decision shall stand. The appellant's appeal
    is dismissed.



Notice of Decision

The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal did not make a material  error  of  law
and his decision dismissing the appeal is upheld.


Signed                                  Date 9 May 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Froom
