
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11286/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Cardiff Civil Justice Centre|Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|                                     |On 16 February 2021                  |
|Working Remotely by Skype for        |                                     |
|Business                             |                                     |
|On 28 January 2021                   |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                                   t m t h
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Williams instructed by Qualified Legal
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Howells, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/2698) I  make  an  anonymity  order.   Unless  the  Upper
    Tribunal or court directs otherwise, no  report  of  these  proceedings
    shall directly or indirectly identify the  appellant.   This  direction
    applies to both the appellant and to the respondent and  a  failure  to
    comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Introduction

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Vietnam who was born on 15 November 1986.
     The appellant, together with her husband,  illegally  arrived  in  the
    United Kingdom on 2 August 2016.  She claimed to have  been  trafficked
    and falsely claimed to be a  minor  and  she  gave  a  false  identity.
    Together with her husband, the appellant was interviewed  on  9  August
    2016 and claimed asylum.  On 15 August  2016,  the  appellant  and  her
    husband absconded and her asylum and trafficking claims were implicitly
    withdrawn.  She was subsequently arrested, whilst working illegally, on
    29 August 2017.

 3. On 4 September 2017, the appellant again claimed asylum.  She completed
    her asylum screening interview on  6  September  2017  and  her  asylum
    interview took place on 18 September 2017.  Again, she made allegations
    of trafficking.  Further submissions were made on  21  September  2017.
    On 22 September 2017, a negative reasonable grounds decision  was  made
    in respect of her trafficking claim by the NRM.  Her asylum  claim  was
    refused on 2 October 2017.  In a  determination  sent  on  12  December
    2017, the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Davey) dismissed her appeal on all
    grounds.  She was subsequently refused permission to appeal by both the
    First-tier Tribunal and  Upper  Tribunal  on  9  January  2018  and  16
    February 2018 respectively.  She became appeal rights exhausted  on  16
    February 2018.

 4. On 29 August 2019, the appellant lodged further submissions which  were
    treated by the Secretary of State as amounting to a fresh  claim  under
    Art 8 of the ECHR.  She sought to rely upon her relationship  with  her
    'partner' in the UK ("the sponsor") and with  her  partner's  son,  who
    lived with his mother in the UK.  The sponsor's  son  was  born  on  14
    November 2007,  so  was  almost  12  years  old  at  the  date  of  the
    application.

 5. On 31 October 2019, the Secretary  of  State  refused  the  appellant's
    claims under the  Rules  and  under  Art  8  outside  the  Rules.   The
    appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 6. The appeal was heard by Judge G Wilson on 22 January  2020  and,  in  a
    determination sent on 3 February 2020,  he  dismissed  the  appellant's
    appeal.

 7. Judge Wilson accepted that the appellant had a genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship with her partner ([31]).  However, he did not accept  that
    their relationship fell within GEN.1.2.  of  Appendix  FM  (HC  395  as
    amended) as he did not accept that they had, as the appellant  claimed,
    been living together in a relationship akin to marriage  for  at  least
    two years prior to the date of application.  He did not accept that the
    appellant and her partner had lived together since November  2016  but,
    instead, on the basis of the evidence, the judge found  that  they  had
    lived together since "early to mid 2018" ([31]).

 8. Further, the judge found that, despite the fact  that  the  appellant's
    relationship with her partner did not fall within the 'partner'  Rules,
    the  judge  concluded  that  applying  para  EX.1,   there   were   not
    "insurmountable obstacles" to their family life continuing  in  Vietnam
    ([44]).

 9. Finally, in relation to the Rules, the judge found that there were  not
    "very significant obstacles" to the appellant's integration  on  return
    to Vietnam and so para 276ADE(1)(vi) did not apply ([45]).

10. The judge went on to consider Art 8 outside the Rules ([47]-[56]).   In
    relation to the claim under Art 8 outside the Rules, the judge  applied
    the five-stage approach in Razgar [2004] UKHL 27 ([48]).

11. The judge accepted that there was "family life" between  the  appellant
    and  her  partner  ([49]).   However,  he  did  not  accept  that   the
    relationship between the appellant and her partner's  son  amounted  to
    "family life" though he accepted that  it  constituted  "private  life"
    ([34] and [49]).  The judge reached his adverse finding in relation  to
    "family life" between the appellant and her partner's son on the  basis
    that he did not accept that the appellant had a "genuine and subsisting
    parental relationship" with her partner's  son  ([34]  and  [49]).   He
    accepted that the appellant's removal would interfere with "this family
    and private life" so as to engage Art 8.1 ([49]).

12. The judge then went on to conclude that the interference was  necessary
    for a legitimate aim, namely the maintenance of  effective  immigration
    control ([50]).  At paras [50]-[56] considered whether the interference
    with the appellant's family and private life that he had identified was
    proportionate striking "a  fair  balance  between  the  rights  of  the
    individual and the interests of the community which is inherent in  the
    whole of the Convention".  The judge said this:

         "50. The maintenance of effective immigration  control  is  in  the
             public interest (per section 117B(1) of the NIA Act 2002).   I
             place significant weight on the  respondent's  policy  aim  of
             legitimate immigration control.

         51.  The appellant has had no lawful right to be in  the  UK  since
             she entered in 2016.  The  appellant  used  deception  in  her
             dealings with immigration officers providing a false  date  of
             birth  and  false  identification  documents.   The  appellant
             brought a fabricated asylum claim to remain in  the  UK.   The
             appellant cannot meet  the  requirements  of  the  Immigration
             Rules.  Each of these factors weighs significantly  in  favour
             of the public interest in the appellant's removal.

         52.  Looking at the appellant through the  lens  of  section  117B,
             there is no evidence before me to suggest that  the  appellant
             speaks English.   This  weighs  against  the  appellant.   The
             appellant is financially self-sufficient through  the  sponsor
             and I find this does not weigh against the appellant.  I  have
             found that the appellant has a private  life  within  the  UK.
             However, this private life was developed when the  appellant's
             status in the UK has either been precarious or unlawful.   For
             these reasons I attach little weight  to  this  private  life.
             The appellant's and sponsor's relationship was established and
             had developed at a time when they have both  been  aware  that
             her status has  either  precarious  or  unlawful.   For  these
             reasons, pursuant to section 117B, I place little weight  upon
             their relationship.  The appellant  and  sponsor  have  always
             been aware that  the  appellant  would  need  to  satisfy  the
             Immigration Rules if she were to stay within the UK  and  they
             have  entered  into  and  developed  a  relationship  in  full
             knowledge of  this  fact.   The  appellant  does  not  have  a
             parental relationship with the sponsor's son  and  accordingly
             the provisions of section 117B(6) do not apply.

         53.  I bring forward my rational and findings in relation  to  very
             insurmountable  obstacles  to  the   appellant   and   sponsor
             continuing their family life outside the  UK  in  Vietnam  and
             very significant obstacles to the appellant's integration.  In
             particular, I have found that the appellant and sponsor  speak
             the language of Vietnam, to the extent that they have  medical
             conditions.  They have failed to demonstrate  treatment  would
             be  unavailable  and  accessible;  they  will  understand  the
             culture and societal expectations upon them in  Vietnam,  they
             will be  able  to  support  themselves  financially  and  have
             familial support.  Accordingly, I find that  the  family  life
             can be preserved by the appellant  and  sponsor  returning  to
             Vietnam together.  In addition, similar factors  apply  should
             the appellant return without the sponsor.

         54.  I have found it would be within  the  best  interests  of  the
             sponsor's child for both the  sponsor  and  the  appellant  to
             remain within the UK.  I have found that this is marginally in
             the sponsor's son's interest that the appellant should  remain
             in the  UK  given  that  she  does  not  have  a  genuine  and
             subsisting parental relationship with the sponsor's child, the
             sponsor's child spends the  majority  of  his  time  with  and
             resides with his mother who provides the majority of his care.
              The appellant's care for the sponsor's child is  limited  and
             in essence is assisting the sponsor with daily tasks such that
             he can prove the quality of time that he spends with his  son.
             It is in  the  sponsor's  child's  best  interest[s]  for  the
             sponsor to remain in the UK such that he can continue to  have
             regular direct contact with his father.

         55.  I found that the appellant  has  failed  to  demonstrate  that
             should she return to Vietnam that  the  sponsor's  care  needs
             could not be met by social  services  or  by  a  private  care
             provider.

         56.  I have considered each of the factors set out above  and  have
             balanced those factors against one another.  Having  conducted
             this exercise, I find that the balancing exercise  that   must
             be conducted in relation to Article 8 weighs in favour of  the
             respondent's policy aim of legitimate immigration control.   I
             find that the return of the appellant to Vietnam  without  the
             sponsor, such that the sponsor could maintain his relationship
             with  his  son,  would  not  amount  to   a   disproportionate
             interference with the appellants, sponsors or sponsor's  son's
             rights pursuant to Article 8 of the ECHR.  Should the  sponsor
             choose to follow the appellant to Vietnam, with the associated
             impact that may have on his relationship with his son, that is
             a matter of the sponsor's own choice.  Given my findings, I am
             satisfied that the respondent's decision is  not  an  unlawful
             interference with  the  appellant's,  sponsor's  or  sponsor's
             son's rights pursuant to Article 8 of the ECHR."

13. As a consequence, Judge Wilson  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal  on
    human rights grounds.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

14. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  on  a
    number of grounds.

15. First, the judge had erred in law in finding that there was no  "family
    life" between the appellant and the sponsor's son given that the  judge
    had accepted the evidence from the Independent Social Worker  that  the
    appellant, sponsor and his child formed a "family unit" and  a  settled
    and stable life with one another.

16. Secondly, the grounds contend in a  variety  of  ways  that  the  judge
    failed properly to factor in the "best interests" of the sponsor's  son
    and to provide adequate reasons why, given the judge found that it  was
    in the child's best interests for  the  appellant  and  his  father  to
    remain in the UK, that those best  interests  were  outweighed  by  the
    public interest.

17. Permission to appeal was initially refused by the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (UTJ Martin) on 5 March 2020.  However, the renewed application to  the
    Upper Tribunal was granted by UTJ Owens on 20 May  2020  on  the  basis
    that it was arguable that the judge erred in-law in finding that  there
    was  no  "family  life"  established  between  the  appellant  and  the
    sponsor's son and in failing properly to take into account the  child's
    best interests.

18. The appeal was listed at the Cardiff Civil Justice Centre on 28 January
    2021 working remotely.  The appellant was represented by Ms A Williams,
    and the respondent by Mr C Howells, a  Senior  Home  Office  Presenting
    Officer, who both joined the hearing remotely by Skype for Business.

The Submissions

19. Ms Williams sought  to  marshal  the  variety  of  grounds  under  four
    headings in her skeleton argument.

20. First, she submitted that the judge had been wrong in law to find  that
    there was no "family life" between the appellant and the sponsor's  son
    given his acceptance of the evidence that they formed a  "family  unit"
    and had a "settled and stable life  with  one  another".   Ms  Williams
    submitted that the judge had been  wrong  in  law  to  conclude  simply
    because there was no "parental relationship" between the appellant  and
    sponsor's son for the purposes of s.117B(6) of the NIA Act  2002   that
    there was no "family life" between them.  Ms Williams submitted that it
    was not adequate to consider the relationship, as the judge  had  done,
    solely under the rubric of "private life".

21. Secondly, Ms Williams submitted that in treating  the  relationship  as
    only giving rise to "private life"  the  judge  had  erred  in  law  by
    failing to consider the "family unit as a whole" and crucially to  take
    into account his earlier finding that the child's best interests  (even
    if only marginally so) were best served by the appellant  remaining  in
    the UK.

22. Thirdly, the judge had failed to consider  the  effect  of  severing  a
    genuine and subsisting relationship between the sponsor and his son  if
    he and the appellant returned to Vietnam together.  In that regard,  Ms
    Williams submitted that the judge  had  minimised  the  effect  of  the
    appellant and sponsor returning to Vietnam on the relationship with the
    sponsor's son by equating remote contact by the sponsor with his  adult
    children in France and teenage daughter in Vietnam with the  effect  of
    losing the regular contact that the sponsor had with his son in the UK.

23. Fourthly, Ms Williams submitted that the judge had failed  properly  to
    take into account the best interests  of  the  sponsor's  son  and  had
    placed excessive weight on the appellant's poor immigration history.

24. On behalf of the Secretary of State, Mr Howells accepted that the judge
    had erred in-law in finding that there was no "family life" between the
    appellant and sponsor's  son.   He  accepted  that  "family  life"  was
    established between them.  Nevertheless, he submitted  that  error  was
    not  material.   He  submitted  that  the  judge  had  considered   the
    relationship between the appellant  and  sponsor's  son  to  amount  to
    "family life" and, he submitted, family life  did  not  have  a  higher
    status than private life.

25. Secondly, Mr Howells submitted that the judge had considered  the  best
    interests of the sponsor's son.  Mr Howells submitted  that  the  judge
    had considered the case law at para 11 and at para 35 he had found that
    it was "marginally" in the son's best interests for A to remain in  the
    UK.  Given the relationship between the sponsor, son and the appellant,
    Mr Howells submitted that the judge was entitled to make  that  finding
    on the evidence.

26. Thirdly, Mr Howells submitted that the grounds did  not  challenge  the
    judge's finding that para EX.1., if it had  been  applicable,  was  not
    satisfied in that the judge found that there  were  not  insurmountable
    obstacles to the appellant and sponsor enjoying their  family  life  in
    Vietnam.

27. Fourthly, the judge had, given  the  appellant's  immigration  history,
    been entitled to give "little weight"  to  her  family  life  with  the
    sponsor.  The relationship had  been  formed  when  the  appellant  was
    "unlawfully" in the UK.  He submitted that the judge had been  entitled
    to find that there was no breach of Art 8 if the appellant and  sponsor
    returned to Vietnam together.  Likewise, he submitted  that  the  judge
    had been entitled to find, given the  sponsor's  son's  best  interests
    were only "marginally" in favour of the appellant remaining in the  UK,
    that if the appellant returned to Vietnam alone then there would be  no
    breach of Art 8 of the ECHR.

Discussion

28. It is accepted that the appellant's claim was only under Art 8  outside
    the Rules.  The 'partner' rules in Appendix FM did not apply because of
    the definition of a 'partner' in GEN.1.2.   Further,  no  challenge  is
    brought against the finding that para 276ADE(1)(vi) did not apply.

29. The appellant's claim was, therefore, that her removal breached  Art  8
    because it would be a disproportionate  interference  with  the  family
    life (1) between her and the  sponsor  and  (2)  between  her  and  the
    sponsor's son.

30. It is accepted by the respondent that the appellant has established the
    first of her grounds, namely that the judge erred  in  law  in  finding
    that there was no "family life" between the appellant and the sponsor's
    son.  Indeed, Mr Howells accepted that the  finding  should  have  been
    that there was "family life" between them.  In those circumstances,  it
    is unnecessary to set out the relevant law relating to what amounts  to
    "family life" for the purposes of Art 8.1 in the well-known decision of
    Kugathas v SSHD [2003] EWCA Civ 31 and the helpful summary of  the  law
    by the Court of Appeal in Rai v ECO, New Delhi [2017] EWCA Civ  530  at
    [17]-[20] per Lindblom LJ.  In my judgment, Mr Howells was  correct  to
    concede that, given the judge's findings  based  upon  the  Independent
    Social Worker's report at para 30 of his determination, there  was  the
    necessary closeness of relationship (amounting to "real" or "committed"
    or "effective" support)  between the appellant and  sponsor's  son  who
    together with the sponsor, when the sponsor's son came to stay with his
    father and the appellant on weekends, formed a "family  unit"  and,  to
    that extent, had a "settled and stable life with one another".

31. Mr Howells' submissions was that this error was not material, not least
    because the judge had fully considered  the  relationship  between  the
    appellant and sponsor's son under the rubric of "private life".   There
    is certainly dicta that, providing the substance of the relationship is
    considered under the rubric of "private life", it  is  unlikely  to  be
    material  that  the  relationship  was  wrongly  not  characterised  as
    amounting to "family life".  The Court of Appeal acknowledged  this  in
    Singh and Singh v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 630 where at  [25]  Sir  Stanley
    Burnton (with whom Richards and Christopher  Clarke  LJJ  agreed)  said
    this:

         "However, the debate as to whether an applicant has or  has  not  a
         family life for the purposes of Art 8 is  liable  to  be  arid  and
         academic.  In the present case, in  agreement  with  Sullivan  LJ's
         comment when refusing permission to appeal,  the  issue  is  indeed
         academic, and clearly so.  As the European Court  of  Human  Rights
         pointed out in AA [v UK [2012] INLR 1], in a judgment which I  have
         found most helpful, the factors to be examined in order  to  assess
         proportionality are  the  same  regardless  of  whether  family  or
         private life is engaged.  The question for the Secretary of  State,
         the Tribunal and the Court is whether those  factors  lead  to  the
         conclusion  that  it  would  be  disproportionate  to  remove   the
         applicant from the United Kingdom.  I reject Mr Malik's  submission
         that the Upper Tribunal Judge's assessment of  proportionality  was
         flawed  because  she,  on  his  case  wrongly,  based  it  on   the
         appellants' private life rather than their family and private life.
          In my judgment, she took all the relevant  factors  into  account,
         and her conclusion on proportionality is  not  open  to  challenge.
         Indeed, I would go further, in my judgment no reasonable  Tribunal,
         on the  facts  found  could  properly  have  come  to  a  different
         conclusion."

32. In other words, the Court of Appeal recognised that the proportionality
    assessment under Art 8.2 must in substance be undertaken  even  if  the
    form is wrong by characterising the relationship under  the  rubric  of
    "private life" rather than "family life".   That said,  therefore,  the
    issue is whether despite the error in characterising  the  relationship
    between the appellant and sponsor's  son,  the  judge  nevertheless  in
    substance  properly  considered  the  factors  relevant  in   assessing
    proportionality.  That, in  turn,  relates  to  the  remaining  grounds
    relied on by Ms Williams before me.

33. Before I turn to those, there is in this case one issue  which,  in  my
    judgment, was material when considering the  issue  of  proportionality
    under Art 8(2) which was affected by the  judge's  characterisation  of
    the relationship as only giving rise to "private life".  In  para  [52]
    of his determination, which I set out above,  the  judge  concluded  he
    would place "little weight" upon the relationship between the appellant
    and sponsor because they had been aware of her status which was  either
    precarious or unlawful.  No objection can be taken to that because,  as
    Ms Williams accepted, the appellant had throughout been  unlawfully  in
    the UK and as a consequence s.117B(4)(b) of the NIA Act  2002  entitled
    the judge to give "little  weight"  to  the  relationship  between  the
    appellant and her partner.

34. However, the judge also gave "little  weight"  to  the  "private  life"
    between the appellant and sponsor's  son.   To  the  extent  that  that
    "private life", and any interference with it engaging Art 8.1  occurred
    during  the  time  that  the  appellant  was  unlawfully  in  the   UK,
    s.117B(4)(a) entitled the judge to give it "little  weight".   However,
    if the  relationship  between  the  appellant  and  sponsor's  son  was
    properly to be characterised as "family life", s.117B(4) did not  apply
    to  that  "family  life"  since  it  only  applies  to  "family   life"
    established by a relationship formed with a "qualifying partner" whilst
    the appellant was in the UK unlawfully.  It  could  not  apply  to  the
    "family life" between the appellant and the sponsor's  son.   If  their
    relationship is properly  characterised  as  "family  life",  then  the
    "little weight" approach in s.117B(4)((b) may well be reflected in  the
    Strasbourg Court's approach to breaches of Art 8 involving the  removal
    of non-settled migrants where it can be said  "family  life"  has  been
    formed or established where the non-settled migrant's stay  in  the  UK
    was "precarious" (see Jeunesse v the Netherlands (2015)  60  EHRR  17).
    That is not limited to relationships with 'partners'.

35. That notion of "precarious" appears, however, to import  a  requirement
    of "knowledge" by the individual  whose  family  life  is  said  to  be
    infringed by the removal decision (see R (Agyarko) and another  v  SSHD
    [2017] UKSC 11 at [49]-[53]).  No doubt, the  appellant's  relationship
    with the sponsor's son would have been formed when she had  "knowledge"
    of her status but,  as  the  grounds  contend,  it  was  not  only  the
    appellant's "family life" which was infringed by her removal  but  also
    that of the sponsor's son.  It is difficult, if not impossible, to  see
    how, consistently with the approach in Jeunesse  (as  approved  by  the
    Supreme Court in Agyarko) that the "family life" between the  sponsor's
    son and the appellant was formed at a time when he  was  aware  of  her
    precarious status.  There are certainly no findings  by  the  judge  in
    that regard.  In the light of that, by characterising the  relationship
    as only giving rise to "private life", the judge was drawn, wrongly  in
    my view, to conclude that he should give it  "little  weight"  to  that
    relationship in para 52 of his determination.  Notwithstanding what was
    said in Singh and Singh, that, in my judgment,  leads  me  to  conclude
    that the mis-characterisation of the relationship between the appellant
    and the sponsor's son may have affected the outcome of the appeal.

36. I turn now to the remaining  grounds.   I  have  found  it  helpful  to
    approach those grounds compositely, focussing as they do upon the issue
    of whether the judge properly had regard to the "best interests" of the
    sponsor's son.  The grounds impact both upon the  judge's  findings  in
    relationship to the impact, not only upon the family life  between  the
    sponsor's son and, the appellant and sponsor, but also the family  life
    between the appellant and sponsor.

37. There is no doubt that the  judge  had  well  in  mind  that  the  best
    interests of the sponsor's son  was  a  primary  consideration  and  an
    integral part of the proportionality assessment.  He cited s.55 of  the
    Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act  2009  at  para  [10]  of  his
    determination and the leading decisions of  the  Supreme  Court  in  ZH
    (Tanzania) v SSHD [2011] UKSC 4 and Zoumbas v SSHD [2013] UKSC  74,  at
    para [11] of his determination.

38. There were two different scenarios which the judge had to consider: (1)
    the appellant would return to  Vietnam  alone  and  the  sponsor  would
    remain in the UK (the "remain scenario"); and (2) the  appellant  would
    be accompanied to Vietnam by the sponsor (the "leave  scenario").   The
    judge had to consider, and take into account, the impact upon the  best
    interests of the sponsor's child in each of these scenarios. It is  not
    suggested, of course, that the sponsor's son could  (or  should)  leave
    the UK as he lives with his mother (his primary carer) in the UK.

39. The judge directly addressed the best interests of the sponsor's  child
    in para [35] of his determination in the  'remain  scenario'  where  he
    said this:

         "The sponsor's son lives with his mother.  The  sponsor's  son  has
         weekly contact with his father.  There is no  evidence  to  suggest
         that the  sponsor's  medical  conditions  or  other  factors  would
         prevent him having  contact  with  his  son  should  the  appellant
         return.  I accept the appellant's assertion that the appellant does
         carry out the day-to-day tasks such as cooking and  visits  to  the
         park which I accept, due to the sponsor's health  conditions,  help
         facilitate the sponsor's  contact  with  his  son  and  ensure  the
         sponsor can spend quality time with his son.  There is no  evidence
         to suggest that the  appellant's  removal  would  prevent  contact.
         Although I accept that the quality of such contact may be  reduced.
         Given that the sponsor's son resides with his mother  I  find  that
         the removal of the appellant is  unlikely  to  have  a  significant
         effect on his education or day-to-day care save for the  assistance
         that the appellant gives during  overnight  contact.   Accordingly,
         whilst I find that it is in the sponsor's son's best interests  for
         the appellant to remain in  the  UK,  I  find  that  this  is  only
         marginally so."

40. That is, of  course,  an  assessment  of  the  best  interests  of  the
    sponsor's son if the appellant returns to Vietnam.  It may  well  be  a
    sustainable finding given the appellant's role in  the  "family  unit".
    It does not, however, entail a consideration of  the  "leave  scenario"
    where the appellant and  sponsor  both  return  to  Vietnam,  with  the
    sponsor's son in the UK.  The "leave scenario" is, of course, connected
    to the issue of whether the sponsor can be expected to return with  the
    appellant  to  Vietnam,  including  the  issue  of  whether  there  are
    insurmountable obstacles to continuing family life with  the  appellant
    there (see Agyarko at [42]-[48]).

41. In para [44], looking through the lens of para  EX.1  the  judge  found
    that there were  no  insurmountable  obstacles  to  the  appellant  and
    sponsor enjoying family life in Vietnam.  That finding is not  directly
    challenged in the  grounds  of  appeal.   It  is,  however,  indirectly
    challenged by the undercutting of one of the bases  in  para  [44]  for
    reaching that conclusion, namely what the judge says about  the  impact
    upon the sponsor's son if the sponsor goes to Vietnam.  At  para  [44],
    the judge said this:

         "Whilst I accept that the sponsor has a  son  within  the  UK,  the
         sponsor also has children within France, albeit  [I]  accept  [they
         are] adult children, and a child in Vietnam who is  a  minor.   The
         sponsor  has  maintained  his  relationships  through  visits   and
         electronic means of communication and  whilst  I  accept  that  the
         quality of the relationship may not  be  the  same  [as]  currently
         enjoyed with his son it can nonetheless be maintained in a  similar
         way."

42. This finding, taken into account in  the  judge's  assessment  at  para
    EX.1, stands in contrast to his clear finding that it is in the child's
    best interests for the sponsor to remain in the UK "such  that  he  can
    continue to have regular direct contact  with  his  father"  (see  para
    [54]).

43. At para [44], the judge did not take into  account  his  clear  finding
    that it was in the child's best interests that his father should remain
    in the UK so that direct contact could be maintained (see  [54]).   The
    impact upon the sponsor's son  if  the  sponsor  went  to  Vietnam  was
    central to the issue of whether there were insurmountable obstacles  to
    the appellant and sponsor continuing  their  family  life  in  Vietnam.
    Instead, the judge  considered  that  the  impact  upon  the  sponsor's
    relationship with his son was only diminished  by  the  fact  that  the
    sponsor would have to continue his relationship with  his  son  in  the
    same way that he had done, by electronic means of  communication,  with
    his adult children in France and his child in Vietnam.   Certainly,  as
    regards the former - but also in all  probability  in  regards  to  the
    latter  -  the  status  quo  was  quite  different  from  that  of  his
    relationship with his son in the UK.  The  evidence,  which  the  judge
    accepted, was that the sponsor's son came to stay  with  appellant  and
    his father on weekends when they formed a "family  unit"  which  was  a
    "settled and stable life"  It is difficult to see how "electronic means
    of communication" - even if it was the status  quo  for  the  sponsor's
    relationship with his other children - provided a comparable substitute
    for the relationship he had with  his  son  in  the  UK.   There  would
    inevitably be a greater impact upon the sponsor's  son  if  his  father
    could only communicate with him by "electronic means" as his son  would
    'lose out' on direct  contact,  the  beneficial  nature  of  which  was
    established by the evidence (see e.g., paras [30] and [54]).  The judge
    did make some reference to this in the final sentence of para [44]  set
    out above but, in my judgment, failed to place it in the context of his
    finding on the child's best interests.

44. As a result, the judge fell into error both in making his finding under
    para EX.1 and in reaching his decision on Art 8 outside  the  Rules  as
    the judge read across his finding that there  were  not  insurmountable
    obstacles to the sponsor going with the appellant to Vietnam.

45. In substance, therefore, I accept that the  judge  failed  properly  to
    consider the son's best interests both in assessing the impact upon his
    family life with the appellant but also upon the  family  life  between
    the appellant and sponsor.   The  insurmountable  obstacles  issue  was
    pertinent to  the  proportionality  issue  when  deciding  whether  the
    appellant and sponsor would likely be  separated  by  the  decision  to
    remove the appellant and, if they were, whether that was proportionate.



46. For these reasons, therefore, I am satisfied that the judge  materially
    erred in law in reaching his finding that the appellant's  removal  did
    not breach Art 8 outside the Rules.

Decision

47. For the above reasons, the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to
    dismiss the appellant's appeal under Art 8 involved the  making  of  an
    error of law.  That decision cannot stand and is set aside.

48. Both representatives invited me, if that was my  conclusion,  to  remit
    the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for a de novo re-hearing.

49. Given the nature and extent of fact-finding required, and having regard
    to  para  7.2  of  the  Senior  President's  Practice  Statement,   the
    appropriate disposal of the appeal is to remit  it  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for a de novo  rehearing  before  a  judge  other  than  Judge
    Wilson.  Given the errors of law, it is appropriate that none of  Judge
    Wilson's findings should be preserved.


                                                                      Signed

                                                                Andrew Grubb

                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                                             3 February 2021



