
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/11417/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons           |
|                                              |Promulgated:                 |
|On 7 December 2018                            |On 21 December 2018          |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY


                                   Between

                                     DF
                             (Anonymity directed)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Sills       (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety     (Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    This is the claimant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal, brought with the
permission of a Judge of the Upper Tribunal, from a decision of the  First-
tier Tribunal  (the  tribunal)  which  it  made  following  a  hearing  of
16 January 2018 and which it sent to the parties on 24 January 2018.  In
making its decision the tribunal dismissed the claimant's  appeal  from  the
Secretary of State's decision of 20 October 2017  refusing  to  grant  him
international protection.

2.    The claimant is an Iranian national.  He was born  on  20 June 1977.
He claims to have entered the United Kingdom on 28 April 2017 and  it  is
recorded that he claimed asylum on that date.  The basis of  his  claim  was
that he  had  converted  from  Islam  to  Christianity  in  Iran,  that  the
authorities had found out, and that they would persecute him as a result.

3.    The Secretary of State did not  believe  the  claimant's  account  and
that is why his  claim  to  be  entitled  to  international  protection  was
rejected. His appeal  was  dismissed  largely  for  the  same  reasons.  But
permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was both sought and granted.

4.    The primary challenge in the  grounds  was  to  the  effect  that  the
tribunal had erred through refusing  to  grant  an  adjournment  application
which had been made on  the  claimant's  behalf  by  his  solicitor  on  the
morning of the hearing.  The background to that application and the  reasons
for refusing it appear at paragraphs 7 and 8  of  the  tribunal's  written
reasons.  This is what the tribunal said:

      "     7.   Mr Boyle started the hearing by making an application  for
      an adjournment on the grounds that the Appellant's  Dorodian  witness,
      Reverend Briggs, was unavailable to attend this rearranged hearing and
      submitted that it was essential that a member of  the  church  vouched
      for the Appellant. I note that this matter was originally set down  to
      be heard on 17 January but,  due  the  lack  of  judicial  resources,
      Mr Boyle was contacted by the tribunal on 11 January and was given the
      choice of having the matter heard today, or  for  the  hearing  to  be
      postponed to a later date instead.  Mr Boyle tells me that  he  chose
      not to have this hearing postponed as he thought it would look  as  if
      he was being unhelpful, so he agreed for it to be heard today  and  he
      contacted  the  Appellant  and  asked  him  to  make  the  appropriate
      arrangements with the  church,  as  is  his  firm's  normal  practice.
      Mr Boyle says that he was only informed this morning by the Appellant
      that no one from the church would be attending.  The Appellant says he
      knew on Saturday that Reverend Briggs would not be attending  but  he
      was told at the last minute that no one else was available  to  attend
      in his place.

            8.   I note that this matter is ready to be heard,  the  bundles
      have been exchanged  and  the  Appellant  is  present  today  to  give
      evidence.  Keeping in mind the overriding objective to deal with cases
      justly and fairly, I  refused  that  Appellant's  application  for  an
      adjournment, particularly  as  the  letter  from  Reverend Briggs  at
      page 10 of the Appellant's bundle provides a  telephone  number,  fax
      number and email address but Mr Boyle made no attempt to contact  the
      church to secure the attendance of the relevant witness, but left  all
      the arrangements to the Appellant  who  is  not  conversant  with  the
      Tribunal's procedure for dealing with postponement requests in advance
      of hearings, or the English language, which is not in keeping with the
      requirement that the parties must help the  Tribunal  to  further  the
      overriding objective (Rule 2(4) of the Tribunal Procedure Rules 2014).
       In making my decision not  to  grant  the  adjournment  I  take  into
      account Mr Stainthorpe's submission that he does not intend  to  look
      behind the letter from Reverend Briggs  at  page 10  as  it  clearly
      expresses his personal belief at the time of writing the letter.  I am
      also  mindful  that  the  Appellant's  claim  is  about  his   alleged
      introduction to Christianity whilst living in Iran and the reasons  he
      fled Iran, to which Reverend Briggs would not be able to speak."

5.    Pausing there, Mr Boyle is the claimant's solicitor.  Mr Stainthorpe
is the Presenting Officer who represented the Secretary of State before the
tribunal.  Reverend Briggs is an Associate Rector at a  church  which  the
claimant attends.

6.    The tribunal returned to the theme  of  the  adjournment  at  a  later
point in its written reasons.  At paragraph 60 it said this:

      "     60   Mr Boyle has threatened on several occasions to appeal the
      findings of  this  Tribunal  for  failing  to  allow  him  to  produce
      Reverend Briggs as a witness.  Notwithstanding my comments  above  on
      the application for an adjournment, I note that the Appellant has  not
      said in his witness statement,  signed  on  10 January 2018,  or  in
      evidence   in   chief   or   in   re-examination   that   he   attends
      St Georges church more than the minimum of once a week or that he is
      involved in any kind of activities through the church or out of church
      with the church members.  Nor has he  given  any  account  of  how  he
      practices his claimed new faith in the UK.  Therefore, it is difficult
      to see what Reverend Briggs could  possibly  add  to  his  letter  at
      page 10 of the Appellant's  bundle  to  corroborate  the  Appellant's
      evidence when he himself has given no evidence at all of  his  alleged
      Christian activities in the UK.   Mr Boyle  had  the  opportunity  to
      adduce evidence in chief and ask questions in re-examination but chose
      to do neither.  Whilst Reverend Briggs has expressed his belief in the
      genuineness of the Appellant's faith in his letter at page 10 on  his
      observations, I have assessed the matter in the round in light of  all
      the evidence from the Appellant, the screening interview,  the  asylum
      interview and the documents in the bundles."

7.     I  have  concluded,  though  not  without   some   hesitation,   that
notwithstanding  its  otherwise  careful,  thorough   and   cogent   written
decision, the tribunal did err  in  its  consideration  of  the  adjournment
request.  I shall now explain why I have taken that view.

8.    The appeal had been listed for hearing on  17 January 2018.   It  is
unfortunate (and it is nobody's fault) that due  to  the  lack  of  judicial
resources, the appeal could not proceed on that day.   Reverend Briggs  was
available to attend on that day.  The tribunal had contacted the  claimant's
representative and he had agreed, I accept in  an  attempt  to  be  helpful,
that  the  matter  should  be  heard  on  16 January 2018  instead.   But
unfortunately, it seems he had made that  agreement  without  checking  with
Reverend Briggs whether he would be available.  As it turned  out,  he  was
not available on that date, and that is how the adjournment request came  to
be made.

9.    It would, it seems to me, have been very easy  for  a  check  to  have
been made with Reverend Briggs prior to agreeing a date for  the  relisting
of the appeal.  It would probably have been a matter of a simple  and  brief
telephone call. But that was never done.  In my view the tribunal was  right
to be concerned that that step had not been taken.  But, following what  was
said by the then President of the Upper Tribunal  (Immigration  and  Asylum
Chamber)  in  Nwaigwe  (Adjournment:   Fairness)  [2014]  UKUT 00418  (IAC)
fairness was the primary  consideration  with  respect  to  the  adjournment
application.  Notwithstanding what is subsequently said at paragraph 60  of
the  written  reasons,  it  seems  to  me  clear  from  what  was  said   at
paragraph 8, that the tribunal  attached  considerable  prominence  (as  is
demonstrated by its use of the word "particularly" within  paragraph 8)  to
what it perceived (I think probably rightly) as a failure  on  the  part  of
the claimant's representative to check the availability of Reverend Briggs.
 Such might have  been  relevant  as  a  peripheral  consideration  but  the
tribunal's primary focus  had  to  be  upon  whether  or  not,  without  the
presence of and oral evidence of Reverend Briggs,  he  would  have  a  fair
hearing.  That seems not to have been the primary focus of the tribunal.

10.   I did wonder whether, in fact, it might be thought that  the  presence
of Reverend Briggs would have made no difference.  That,  in  a  sense,  is
what the tribunal was suggesting at paragraph 60 of  its  written  reasons.
Reverend Briggs had provided a brief undated letter appearing at page 10 of
a bundle of documents filed on behalf of the claimant.  It may  be  inferred
from the content of that brief letter that he had taken the  view  that  the
claimant is a genuine Christian convert.  But the  letter  does  not  really
explain why he had taken such a view.  There was no witness  statement  from
him which might be surprising given the importance Mr Sills  argued  should
be attached to what are described as "Darodian witnesses".  I was  given  no
explanation at all as to why a statement had not been  provided.  It  seemed
to me entirely possible that, if Reverend Briggs had attended the appeal in
these circumstances, he would have just been  invited  in  evidence-in-chief
to confirm the content of his letter and  he  might  not  have  been  cross-
examined upon it at all given the paucity of detail it  contains.   If  that
were the case then, of course, the presence of Reverend  Briggs  would  have
taken matters no further forward.

11.   Having said all the above, though, it is  really  quite  difficult  to
predict what a witness who did not give oral evidence might  have  said  had
he/she done so. I cannot dismiss the possibility that Reverend Briggs would
have been asked questions by  way  of  examination-in-chief  and  in  cross-
examination, which would have led to his  explaining  in  a  way  which  the
tribunal might have found to be persuasive, why it was that he believed  the
claimant was a genuine convert to Christianity.  Such  evidence  might  have
impacted upon the tribunal's view of that  matter.   That  might,  in  turn,
have impacted upon  its  view  as  to  whether  the  claimant  had  in  fact
converted  whilst  in  Iran  and,  if  so,  whether  that  had  led  to  his
experiencing problems  there.   The  tribunal  had  resolved  all  of  those
matters against the claimant.  So, I  have  concluded  that  the  tribunal's
decision to refuse the adjournment request did lead to the  claimant  having
a hearing which was not a fair one.  That is not, however, to  be  construed
as a criticism of the tribunal.  But, nevertheless, its decision has  to  be
set aside.  I would, though, wish to make it  clear  that  whilst  Mr Sills
also sought to argue that the tribunal had failed to give  adequate  reasons
for its decision, I would not have set aside its decision on that  basis  or
even come close to doing so.  As I have  already  said,  its  reasoning  was
thorough and cogent on the basis of the material which was  before  it.   It
is simply that its conclusion might have been different had  it  heard  from
Reverend Briggs.

12.   Having decided to set aside the decision of the tribunal I  have  also
decided to remit.  There will, therefore, be a  complete  rehearing  of  the
appeal before a differently constituted First-tier Tribunal.  Nothing shall
be preserved from the tribunal's decision and  the  tribunal  rehearing  the
appeal must consider all matters raised by the appeal, both  fact  and  law,
entirely afresh.

13.   Accordingly, I direct that  there  be  a  complete  rehearing  of  the
appeal before a differently constituted First-tier Tribunal.  I shall leave
any other  directions  to  the  First-tier Tribunal  to  issue.   I  would,
however, strongly suggest that if Reverend Briggs is going to give evidence
at the rehearing,  his  availability  should  be  carefully  checked  and  a
witness statement, sufficiently  detailed  to  stand  as  evidence-in-chief,
should be provided.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error  of
law and is set aside.  Further, the case is remitted for rehearing before  a
differently constituted First-tier Tribunal.

The claimant was granted anonymity by the First-tier Tribunal.  I  continue
that grant pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper Tribunal)
Rules 2008.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  name  or  otherwise
identify the claimant or any member of his family.  This  direction  applies
to all parties to the proceedings.  Any failure  to  comply  could  lead  to
contempt of court proceedings.


Signed:                      Date: 13 December 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway

