
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11055/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 19 March 2019                     |On 22 March 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                     NNY
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Barnfield, instructed by Halliday Reeves
For the Respondent:    Mr Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant was born in 1997 and is a male citizen  of  Ethiopia.  In
    June 2012, the appellant came to London to carry the Olympic  torch  on
    behalf of Ethiopia. It was intended that he would return  to  Ethiopian
    the following day. He did not do so but instead absconded  and  claimed
    asylum. His application was refused by the  Secretary  of  State  by  a
    decision dated 31 October 2013 and a  subsequent  appeal  before  Judge
    Garratt  was  dismissed.  The  appellant   made   further   submissions
    supported, in particular, by an expert  report  prepared  by  Mr  David
    Seddon. The Secretary of State refused this fresh claim for  asylum  by
    decision dated 9 October 2017. The appellant appealed to the First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge O'Hagan) which, in a decision promulgated on 1 December
    2017, dismissed the appeal. The appellant now appeals, with permission,
    to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The appeal turns on the judge's treatment of the expert  report.  In  a
    thorough and lucid analysis, the judge concluded [23] that the expert's
    analysis and conclusions were:

         "... so fundamentally flawed that no reliance can  be  placed  upon
         them. It is not open to me to disregard those experts of his report
         which specifically canvass the possibility that Judge Garratt might
         be wrong last relying on the remainder it is clear that the  belief
         that this might be so infests the report as a whole,  permeates  it
         to such a degree that it cannot be relied upon. In  short,  he  has
         failed in his duty as an expert to respect judicial findings."

    That conclusion of the judge lies  at  the  very  heart  of  the  issue
    between the parties before the Upper Tribunal.

 3. What most  concerned  the  judge  regarding  the  expert's  report,  as
    mentioned in the passage quoted  above,  was  the  willingness  of  the
    expert to disagree with and to disregard the  findings  of  a  judicial
    decision-maker. It is not  in  dispute  that  the  expert  did,  as  Mr
    Barnfield, who appeared for the appellant, accepted 'overstep the mark'
    in his report at 7.6 and 7.8. The expert posits the suggestion that the
    'asylum determination' and Home Office refusal letter might  be  wrong,
    that the appellant was not, as the judge found, an economic migrant but
    'someone who genuinely and with good reason feared that he would be  at
    risk because of his imputed political beliefs and his association  with
    his  father's  political  activities'  thereby  directly  contradicting
    findings by the Tribunal (which had not been successfully challenged on
    appeal), namely that the appellant had fabricated his  claim  regarding
    his father's political opinions and that the  appellant  himself  would
    have no opposition political opinions imputed to him.

 4. I agree with many of the judge's  criticisms  of  the  expert  for  the
    reasons that he has given. I agree that the expert has, quite  wrongly,
    treated the views of the Secretary of State expressed  in  the  refusal
    letter and the judicial findings of the First-tier Tribunal as if  they
    carry the same weight.  The  question  is  whether  the  flaws  in  the
    expert's report entitled the  judge  to  reject  everything  which  the
    expert  said.  In  other  words,  were  the  various  observations  and
    conclusions of the expert severable and discrete or did  the  flaws  in
    the report inevitably corrupt the reliability of the entire report.

 5. In my opinion, expert evidence can be distinguished  from  evidence  of
    fact in this regard. A witness of fact  who  is  found  to  have  given
    untruthful or inaccurate evidence may well find the judge  cannot  rely
    in consequence upon anything which he or she may say. The same  is  not
    necessarily true of an expert witness who is giving opinion evidence. I
    acknowledge that sometimes an expert report may be so  partisan  as  to
    forfeit any claim to objectivity.  However,  it  does  not  necessarily
    follow that, simply because a judge rejects an expert's opinion on  one
    matter, an entire report is  rendered  unreliable.  In  part,  this  is
    because of differing motivation; an expert witness is unlikely to  have
    any reason to tell deliberate lies whilst a witness of fact may seek to
    gain by doing so. In part, it is because of the  different  natures  of
    factual and opinion evidence. For  example,  an  expert  may  offer  an
    opinion on the matter outside the limits of his or  her  expertise.  By
    doing so, it does not follow that matters within an expert's  expertise
    should also be rejected. A good example of that principle occurs in  Dr
    Seddon's report at 7.11 and 7.12:

         "7.11 From this we see that it is not only  political  leaders  and
         high profile opposition activists but also supporters of opposition
         parties that are arrested, detained and allegedly  ill-treated;  we
         also see the family members and friends of those suspected of being
         involved in political opposition activities at home and abroad  are
         kept under surveillance and the 'government also regularly monitors
         and records  telephone  calls,  particularly  international  calls,
         among family members and friends.' N has kept in contact  with  his
         parents in Ethiopian by telephone and it is entirely plausible that
         these conversations have been monitored, given his defection (about
         which the Determination seemed convinced the Ethiopian  authorities
         would  have  been  aware)  and  his  father's   alleged   political
         activities.

         7.12 It seems to be highly likely that N will be questioned on  his
         return by the Ethiopian authorities  as  to  the  reasons  for  his
         having left the country, claimed asylum abroad and having been sent
         back as this is known  to  be  routine  practice.  It  is  entirely
         plausible (given that he would presumably be travelling on his  own
         passport issued in 2012 with the assistance of UNICEF) that he will
         be identified -either before he arrives on his return-as the  high-
         profile  young  man  sent  in  2012  to  represent  Ethiopia  is  a
         torchbearer in the pre-Olympic games relay, who  defected  the  day
         after he ran."

 6. At 7.11, the expert repeats his disagreement with Judge Garratt  as  to
    the genuineness of the appellant's claim that his father  was  involved
    in opposition politics in Ethiopia. In consequence, it is not 'entirely
    plausible' that conversations between  the  appellant  and  his  family
    would have been monitored. Here, the expert's opinion is indeed tainted
    and rendered unreliable by his unwillingness to  accept  the  facts  as
    found by Judge Garratt. At 7.12, however, the expert offers an  opinion
    which is not only untainted but is consistent with the findings made by
    the Judge O'Hagan. It is helpful, for example, for  the  expert  to  be
    able to use his knowledge of Ethiopia to indicate that  questioning  of
    returnees is a routine practice. In my view, Judge O'Hagan went too far
    at [23] in finding that the entire report of the expert was  so  flawed
    that no reliance could be placed upon it.

 7. The question which remains is whether the judge's conclusions  at  [29-
    30] survive his error in rejecting the entirety of the  expert  report.
    In summary, the judge considered that it was 'realistic to suppose that
    the  appellant's  activities  would   be   known   to   the   Ethiopian
    authorities.' He acknowledges that  the  Olympic  Games  were  a  high-
    profile event that the appellant's personal role and his  disappearance
    also attracted publicity. Further, the judge found that 'the  appellant
    would have to return to Ethiopia using the passport  that  he  used  to
    enter the United Kingdom. He would have to pass through border control.
    His name might be on a stop list  or  might  be  remembered  by  border
    officials. There must, at the least, be  a  real  possibility  that  he
    would be stopped and questioned.' The judge goes on to  find  that  the
    appellant would be likely to lie and  dissemble  'as  freely  with  the
    authorities in Ethiopian  as  he  has  with  the  authorities  in  this
    country.'  Given  that  the  appellant's  claimed  political  views  of
    fabricated, he could be expected to  be  'less  than  frank'  with  the
    Ethiopian authorities, to use the  expression  used  in  TM  (Zimbabwe)
    [2010] EWCA Civ 916, an authority upon  which  the  judge  relies.  The
    judge went on to find that the opportunistic nature of the  appellant's
    conduct in the United  Kingdom  would  be  apparent  to  the  Ethiopian
    authorities. The appellant's defection was, the judge found,  'a  high-
    profile act, but not a political  one.'  The  judge  found  that,  'the
    evidence, including the country guidance, does not  support  a  finding
    that the government would view [his defection] as a  political  act  as
    opposed to one undertaken for economic reasons.'

 8. In my view, the  judge's  conclusions  can  be  reconciled  with  those
    opinions of the expert which are severable from his disagreements  with
    the previous Tribunal  decision.  Whilst  the  expert  found  that  the
    Ethiopian authorities would regard the appellant's conduct as a  slight
    to Ethiopia, the judge concludes that, whilst  those  same  authorities
    would be well aware what the appellant had done, they would be  equally
    aware that his actions were not political but  opportunistic  and  most
    likely economically motivated.  When  one  removes  from  the  expert's
    conclusions his incorrect view that the appellant (and his father) have
    political profiles in Ethiopia, then his conclusions  at  7.12  can  be
    reconciled with the judge's assessment of risk on return. In so far  as
    the views of the judge and the expert differ, I find that it was  open,
    on all the evidence and by reference to the findings  of  the  previous
    Tribunal, for the judge to reach  the  conclusion  that  the  appellant
    would not be at real risk on return.  Consequently,  I  find  that  any
    legal error into which the judge has fallen by rejecting  the  entirety
    of the expert report is not material to the outcome of the appeal.



Notice of Decision

 9. This appeal is dismissed.


Signed                              Date 20 March 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

