
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: PA/11771/2016
     PA/11793/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 28 November 2017                           |On 7 December 2017            |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE

                                   Between

                                     r x
                                     r x
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr Bahja instructed by Duncan Lewis & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs Fijiwala, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants, RX and RX, who  are  brothers,  are  male  citizens  of
    Albania and were born in 1999 and 2004 respectively.   Both  appellants
    claimed asylum in August 2015.  The appellants' claims for asylum  were
    refused by the Secretary of State by decisions dated 12 and 13  October
    2016.  The appellants appealed to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  J
    Bartlett) which, in a decision promulgated on 2  June  2017,  dismissed
    the appeal.  The appellants now appeal, with permission, to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

 2. The appellants claim that they cannot return to  Albania  because  they
    are the subject of a blood feud.  The judge concluded that the evidence
    of the appellants was not reliable and found at [23] that:

         the appellants face no risk of harm as a result of a blood feud  in
         Albania.  I find that the appellants are not  subject  to  a  blood
         feud in Albania.  I do not accept the appellants have been in  self
         confinement or would  need  to  be  in  self  confinement  if  they
         returned to Albania.

 3. In addition, the appellants claim that  their  father  was  abusive  to
    them.  The judge observed that the appellants had had no  contact  with
    their father for a number of years.  She found that the  father  "poses
    no risk to the appellants as he has made no threats and no contact with
    them and evinced no intention to have  any  contact  with  them  for  a
    number of years.  I find that even if he could  locate  the  appellants
    and sought to contact them as they would not live in the same household
    as him he poses no real threat to them."

 4. The judge then went on [26] to state as follows:

         Even taking the appellants' case at its highest which is that there
         is a blood feud and they feared harm from the M family  I  consider
         they would be able to return to Albania as they would  be  able  to
         internally relocate and there was sufficient protection in  Albania
         for the following reasons.

 5. The  judge  concluded  [27]  that  there  would  be  a  sufficiency  of
    protection available from the Albanian state.  At [28], the judge  then
    considered the principles  of  Januzi  [2006]  UKHL  5  applying  those
    principles to the facts of the appellants as she had found  them.   The
    judge found that the appellants would  return  to  Albania  with  their
    mother.  The judge was unaware of  the  immigration  status  which  the
    mother may have in the United Kingdom.  She considered it reasonable to
    assume, therefore, that the mother would also leave  the  country  with
    the appellants.  On the appellants' own account, they  had  a  maternal
    uncle in Albania who had assisted them in leaving the country  and  the
    judge found that the uncle would  be  able  to  provide  practical  and
    financial assistance to them and  the  mother  when  they  returned  to
    Albania.  Throughout the decision, the judge  has  made  it  abundantly
    clear that she is aware that these appellants are minors  but  she  did
    observe that they are "not very young  children"  and  she  found  that
    there was no reason why the mother could not obtain work in Albania  to
    support the  family.   She  concluded  by  finding  that  "In  all  the
    circumstances I consider that internal relocation is not  unduly  harsh
    or unreasonable for the appellants."

 6. The main problem for these appellants in the appeal  before  the  Upper
    Tribunal is that although Mr Bahja made forceful submissions  on  their
    behalf, the grounds of appeal are silent as  regards  the  question  of
    internal flight.  The question of  internal  flight,  of  course,  only
    arises in the event that the appellants may be at risk  in  their  home
    area of Albania.  All  of  the  grounds  of  appeal  are,  in  essence,
    challenges  to  the  judge's  findings  on  the  credibility   of   the
    appellants' account of a blood feud and abuse from their  father.   The
    internal flight analysis properly starts from  the  position  that  the
    appellants' account is accepted and risk on return  to  the  home  area
    proved but the internal flight  alternative  may  defeat  a  claim  for
    asylum if it cannot be shown that it would  be  unduly  harsh  for  the
    appellant to relocate.  Such is  a  trite  law  but  it  has  not  been
    addressed by these appellants or Mr Bahja.  Judge  Bartlett  has  given
    careful and thorough reasons for finding that, even if she is wrong  as
    regards the credibility of the blood feud  account,  it  would  not  be
    unduly harsh to expect these appellants with their mother and with  the
    assistance of other family members to  relocate  within  Albania  where
    they would enjoy a sufficiency of protection  by  the  Albanian  state.
    Somewhat belatedly in his skeleton  argument,  Mr  Bahja  at  [18]  has
    touched on the question of internal flight as regards which the grounds
    of appeal had been silent.  However, those grounds of  appeal  seek  to
    rely upon a European Asylum Support Office  (EASO)  country  of  origin
    report which was not before Judge Bartlett.  In any event, that  report
    concerns possible difficulties within the Albanian judicial system  and
    I cannot see that it in any way undermines the judge's findings on  the
    sufficiency of protection available in Albania.   Somewhat  oddly,  the
    skeleton argument remarks, "It is clear that the judge's  rejection  of
    Counsel's submission to the effect that the M family  were  a  powerful
    family and had connections with the authorities was based on  objective
    evidence and she failed to take into account this evidence."  I  cannot
    see that the judge erred by basing her findings on  objective  material
    and, as I have recorded above, she could  not  have  taken  account  of
    evidence which was not before her.

 7. It follows that the appeals must be dismissed.  The judge  has  reached
    sound and sustainable findings on internal flight which have  not  been
    challenged.  Even if the judge had  accepted  the  credibility  of  the
    accounts of the appellants, the availability of internal flight  within
    Albania defeats these appeals.

 8. I shall deal briefly with the remaining grounds.  I have to say I  find
    that those grounds, save for one (see [9]  below),  amount  to  nothing
    more than a disagreement with findings  available  to  the  judge.   Mr
    Bahja, in his oral submissions, repeatedly referred to the evidence  as
    giving rise to "reasonable inferences".  He suggested  such  inferences
    were more appropriate than "mere speculation," the expression  used  by
    the judge to describe the evidence in several parts  of  the  decision.
    The fact remains that the appellants claim that, for example,  a  motor
    vehicle suffered damage which they believe had been inflicted by the  M
    family; the judge describes that evidence  as  "mere  speculation"  and
    gives good reasons for doing so whilst Mr  Bahja  characterises  it  as
    "reasonable inference".  This descent into semantics indicates that the
    judge's findings of fact were plainly available  to  her  and  that  Mr
    Bahja has been unable to show that the findings  are  legally  unsound.
    The fact remains that there was no very clear evidence before the judge
    which might have compelled the conclusion  that  these  appellants  had
    been the subject of a blood feud.

 9. I shall deal with the issue upon which Judge Osborne gave permission to
    appeal.  I shall do so even though it is nugatory given my findings  on
    internal flight.  The appellants' mother did  not  attend  the  hearing
    before the First-tier Tribunal.  Mr Bahja, who  appeared  before  Judge
    Bartlett, told the judge that he had no idea why  the  mother  had  not
    attended.  At [16], the judge again stresses the appellants' youth  but
    found that their evidence was "extremely  superficial".   She  went  on
    [18] to observe that more information was likely to have been available
    from the appellants' mother and, relying on TK  (Burundi)  [2009]  EWCA
    Civ 40, she found that  "the  failure  of  the  appellants'  mother  to
    provide a witness statement or attend the hearing is a  strong  pointer
    that the account given by  the  appellants  is  not  true."   Mr  Bahja
    complains that the judge's intention  to  cite  TK  (Burundi)  was  not
    indicated at  the  hearing  and  he  was  unable  to  make  submissions
    accordingly.  Had he realised that the absence of the mother  concerned
    the judge, then he may have applied for an adjournment.  I reject  that
    submission.  It was not for the judge of her own motion to adjourn  the
    hearing; the appellants were professionally represented  and,  if  they
    and Mr Bahja considered it necessary to have the mother  present,  then
    they would not doubt have applied for an adjournment.  They did not  do
    so.  I agree with Mrs Fijiwala that it was for the appellants to  prove
    their case and it was open to the judge to apply relevant jurisprudence
    (viz. TK (Burundi). I also agree with Mrs Fijiwala that the mother must
    have known of the hearing date because the second appellant  is  living
    with her in the United Kingdom.  Mr Bahja  sought  to  distinguish  the
    facts of TK (Burundi) from those of the  instant  appeal  but  that  is
    wholly  inappropriate;  the  Tribunal  is  concerned  only   with   the
    principles of legal authorities and is not concerned to adopt or reject
    authorities on the basis of a similarity  or  disparity  of  a  factual
    matrix.  The appellants and their representatives should have been well
    aware of the likely importance of the mother to the appeals of her  two
    sons and they should not have been surprised that  he  judge  expressed
    concern that she had failed to give oral  evidence.  I  find  that  the
    judge did not err by assessing the credibility of the evidence  in  the
    light of the fact that the appellants'  mother  had  not  attended  the
    hearing.

10. For the reasons I have given above, the appeals are dismissed.

Notice of Decision

11. These appeals are dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                              Date 6 December 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane
TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The  appeals  have  been  dismissed  and  therefore  there  can  be  no  fee
repayable.






Signed                              Date 6 December 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Lane
