
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11975/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Heard at Manchester    Decision & Reasons Promulgated
On 18th February 2019  On 29th March 2019


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY JUDGE UPPER TRIBUNAL FARRELLY


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                                    R M K
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr Bates, Senior Presenting Officer
For the respondent:    Mr Cole of Parker Rhodes Hickmotts,Solicitors.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

    1. In these  proceedings  the  Secretary  of  State  is  the  appellant.
       However, for convenience I will continue  to  refer  to  the  parties
       hereinafter as in the First-tier Tribunal.

    2. The appellant is a Kurdish national of Iraq from Kirkuk. She was born
       in July 1972. She came  to  the  United  Kingdom  in  December  2007.
       Thereafter, there have been a number of unsuccessful applications for
       protection. Tribunals in December 2009 and March 2017 found  her  not
       to be credible. Then, on 27 September 2018 she made a  further  claim
       which was refused by the respondent.  This  was  the  subject  of  an
       appeal to First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Atkinson  at  Bradford  on  12
       November 2018. Mr Cole appeared for the appellant  then  as  he  does
       now. In a decision promulgated on 29 November  2018  her  appeal  was
       allowed on 15 C grounds and on the basis of article 3.

    3. The judge was prepared to treat the appellant as a vulnerable witness
       on the basis she and mental health issues. She claimed  not  to  have
       any documentation and that contact with her family  was  limited  and
       her  attempt  to  obtain  documentation  through  the  Consulate  was
       unsuccessful.

    4. The judge noted the previous decisions in which the appellant had not
       been found credible and that she was not considered to be  a  witness
       of truth. Mr Cole accepted these adverse findings and did not seek to
       advance the claim   on her account of events  .  Instead,  he  argued
       that Kirkuk  remained  a  contested  area.  The  refusal  letter  had
       suggested that because the changes in the country the guidance in  AA
       (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG [2015] UKUT 00544 (IAC) should no longer be
       followed.

    5. At paragraph 40 the judge concluded that her account  of  her  family
       circumstances in Iraq were not as claimed. The judge went on to  find
       in the following paragraph that it was reasonably  likely  she  could
       obtain documentation with the assistance of family members  in  Iraq.
       Consequently the judge concluded that she was returnable in terms  of
       documentation.

    6. The judge followed the guidance of AA and concluded  that  she  could
       not return to Kirkuk because there remained a 15 C risk. The previous
       had judge accepted the respondent's contention in relation to Kirkuk.

    7. The judge then considered the possibility of relocation  to  the  IKR
       and concluded as a lone woman with  no  family  support  and  limited
       employment experience this was not viable.

The Upper Tribunal

    8. Permission to appeal was sought for  a  number  of  related  reasons.
       Permission was granted on the basis it was arguable the judge  failed
       to give adequate  reasons  why  she  could  not   return  to  Kirkuk,
       particularly as the earlier Tribunal had  concluded  she  could.  The
       grounds also questioned the conclusion she could not relocate to  the
       IKR.

    9. Mr Bates referred to the Devaseelan principal and  argued  the  judge
       did not explain why he was departing from  the  earlier  decision  in
       relation to the  general  security  situation  in  Kirkuk.  Regarding
       relocation to the IKR, he referred to the judge's  finding  that  she
       had family in Iraq and submitted that even if they were  not  in  the
       IKR they could still support her there.

   10. Mr Cole relied upon the rule 24 response dated 13 February 2019. This
       challenges specific aspects of the grounds relating to  documentation
       as being inaccurate. In relation to the situation in  Kirkuk  it  was
       contended that the judge  correctly  followed  the  relevant  country
       guidance case law and that the Devaseelan principal did not apply  in
       this situation. Insofar as Devaseelan  applied,  the  judge  followed
       this  by  adopting  the  negative  credibility  findings.   Regarding
       relocation to the IKR the appellant has no family support  there  and
       the judge had followed AAH (Iraqi Kurds - internal  relocation)  Iraq
       CG UKUT 00212 (IAC) given that the appellant would be a lone woman in
       a most disadvantaged position in terms of seeking  accommodation  and
       employment. He also referred to her mental health.

Conclusion

   11. I am in agreement with Mr Cole that the question of return to  Kirkuk
       was not a  Devaseelan situation. An earlier tribunal had decided  not
       to follow the extant country guidance on this issue. It was argued in
       the  refusal  letter  that  the  country   situation   had   changed.
       Notwithstanding  the  earlier  decision  First-tier  Tribunal   Judge
       Atkinson needed strong grounds supported by cogent evidence to depart
       from the country guidance case. The judge clearly appreciate this and
       invited submissions on this. At paragraphs 44 to 46 gave reasons  for
       continuing to follow the country guidance case.

   12. Devaseelan gives guidance in relation to findings of fact personal to
       the appellant in an earlier appeal. Devaseelan  distinguishes factual
       findings going beyond the individual, such as country conditions  and
       advocates a more open approach. The earlier judge had  departed  from
       the country guidance. However , First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Atkinson
       was not required to follow that finding in the same way had  it  been
       something specific to the appellant. In this situation it was for the
       judge to decide if there were sufficient evidence not to  follow  the
       guidance. The judge did  correctly apply the Devaseelan principal  in
       relation to previous finding specific to the appellant,  namely,  the
       negative credibility findings and documentation and  family  support.
       Consequently, I see no error here.

   13.  The  next  challenge  related  to  how  the  judge  dealt  with  the
       possibility of relocation to the IKR.The decision is not to  be  read
       in a vacuum. The judge had previous determinations and  a  bundle  on
       behalf of the appellant. This included information about  her  mental
       health. At paragraph  49  the  judge  dealt  with  the  viability  of
       relocation and accepts the difficulty she  would  have  in  obtaining
       accommodation and concluded from the background information that  was
       not reasonably likely she would be able to gain access to the refugee
       camps. Consequently, the judge concluded  she  would  be  reduced  to
       living in unfinished or abandoned structures. The judge  then  refers
       to her personal circumstances at paragraph 51  and  acknowledges  her
       mental health issues. I find this entirely  in  accordance  with  AAH
       (Iraqi Kurds - internal relocation) Iraq CG  UKUT  00212  (IAC)  .The
       headnote is that if a person has family members  living  in  the  IKR
       cultural norms would require that family to accommodate them  and  so
       they would, in general,  have  sufficient  assistance.  The  decision
       maker is required to assess the extent  of  any  assistance.  In  the
       present case there was no finding that she had family in the IKR  but
       rather that she had family in her  home  area  of  Kirkuk.  Mr  Bates
       submitted that they could send  her  remittances.  However,  this  is
       quite different from having a presence on  the  ground.  The  country
       guidance decision concluded that for those without the assistance  of
       family in the IKR the accommodation options are limited. The decision
       specifically states that lone women are very unlikely to be  able  to
       secure legitimate employment. Consequently, I find no material  error
       of  law  established  in  relation  to  how  the  judge  dealt   with
       relocation.

   14. The arguments advanced in  the  grounds  of  appeal  in  relation  to
       documentation are be misconceived. The judge had found the  appellant
       could obtain documentation.

   15. Generally this to be a succinct  decision  where  the  law  has  been
       correctly applied and findings made which are sustainable.

Decision

The Secretary of State's appeal is dismissed. No material error of  law  has
been established. Consequently, the decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
Atkinson allowing the appeal shall stand.


Francis J Farrelly
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge.    Date: 28 March 2019

