
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11379/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham CJC                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On April 3, 2019                             |On April 23, 2019             |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

                                  MR B K-P
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs Bachu, Counsel, instructed by Tan Law Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Howells, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
Interpreter:  Ms Leschen


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. On June 25, 2017 the appellant, a national of the Democratic Republic
    of Congo, entered the United Kingdom as a visitor having been issued
    with a visa enabling entry clearance until September 29, 2017. His wife
    had similarly been issued with a visit visa until the same date. He
    claimed asylum for them both on July 17, 2017. The respondent refused
    his application on September 12, 2018.

 2. The appellant appealed this decision under section 82(1) of the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 on September 26, 2018. His
    appeal came before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Graham on November
    29, 2018 and in a decision promulgated on January 14, 2019, the Judge
    dismissed his appeal on protection and human rights grounds.

 3. The appellant appealed the dismissal of his protection claim/article 3
    claim on January 28, 2019 arguing the Judge had materially erred by
    failing to have regard to all the documents when making findings on
    credibility. In granting permission to appeal on February 13, 2019
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Keane gave permission on all grounds
    but identified two areas, in particular, namely the possible failure of
    the Judge to take into account (a) information given to the Immigration
    Officer by the appellant during his interview and (b) the appellant's
    explanation provided in the witness statement about the ACHDF (Congo
    Alliance for the Defence of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms).

 4. Pursuant to Rule 14(1) of  the  Tribunal  Procedures  (Upper  Tribunal)
    Rules 2008 (the UT Procedure Rules) I make  an  order  prohibiting  the
    disclosure  or  publication  of  specified  documents  or   information
    relating to the proceedings or of any matter likely to lead members  of
    the public to identify any person whom  the  Upper  Tribunal  considers
    should not be identified.  The effect of such an  anonymity  order  may
    therefore be to prohibit anyone not merely the parties in the case from
    disclosing  relevant  information.   Breach  of  this  order   may   be
    punishable as a contempt of court.

    SUBMISSIONS

 5. Ms Bachu adopted both the grounds of appeal and her skeleton  argument.
    She submitted the Judge had firstly, failed to assess all the  evidence
    and this was unfair and secondly, the Judge  did  not  assess  risk  on
    return based on accepted evidence.

 6. Ms Bachu referred to AM (Fair Hearing) [2015] UKUT 656 and paragraph 30
    of SB (Sri Lanka) v SSHD [2019] EWCA Civ in which the Court  of  Appeal
    identified what the Tribunal should be  considering  when  assessing  a
    protection claim.

 7. At paragraph 38, the  Judge  found  the  appellant  had  not  addressed
    whether the ACDHF existed in  the  DRC.  Whilst  the  Home  Office  had
    referred to a country information report no such report  was  included.
    The appellant had produced  evidence  (a  letter  at  page  26  in  the
    appellant's bundle) to show the party did  exist  and  this  undermined
    paragraph 39 of  the  respondent's  decision  letter  and  the  Judge's
    finding on this issue. Ms Bachu submitted the letter was neither  taken
    into account nor analysed by the  Judge  and  the  Judge  did  not  put
    disputed issues to the appellant.  The  Judge  also  did  not  consider
    accepted evidence (see pages 55-90 of the appellant's  bundle  and  the
    respondent's letter) that people who belonged to this group  or  had  a
    political profile were at risk. The Judge failed to  make  findings  on
    this despite the respondent having  accepted  the  appellant  held  the
    position of a government minister.

 8. Mr Howells referred to paragraphs 38 to 39 of the Judge's  findings  on
    whether the group existed and submitted the Judge had  concluded  there
    was no reliable evidence. At paragraph 40 she found that  even  if  the
    group had  existed  then  there  was  no  evidence  the  appellant  was
    connected to it. The Judge made adverse findings in paragraph 38  which
    she held against the appellant. Although the Judge may  have  erred  in
    paragraph 39 the Judge dealt with the minutes and membership  card  and
    gave reasons for no reliance being placed on them  and  those  findings
    had not been challenged. Any error was not material.

 9. The Judge went on to make credibility  findings  from  paragraph  41-51
    which led the Judge to find he was not at risk. At  paragraph  52,  the
    Judge rejected his  claim  to  be  president  or  in  the  alternative,
    considered the argument the organisation  did  exist.  The  grounds  of
    appeal did not challenge those other findings.

10. He submitted that BM and others (returnees-criminal  and  non-criminal)
    DRC CG [2015] UKUT 00293 only dealt with Apareco and did not deal  with
    the group the appellant claimed to be connected with.

11. In response, Ms Bachu submitted the Judge had erred in paragraph 39 and
    the grounds did challenge other areas.  The  Judge's  failure  to  make
    findings infected other findings.

12. Whilst the decision of BM did  not  deal  with  his  group,  the  Judge
    accepted he was a member of the MLC and became a government minister as
    claimed. There had been no analysis of whether this would place him  at
    risk on return and this amounted to an error in law.

    FINDINGS

13. The grounds of appeal lodged in this case and expanded on by Mrs  Bachu
    challenge firstly,  the  Judge's  consideration  of  the  evidence  and
    secondly, the application of BM and others.

14. Dealing with the second ground first Mrs Bachu argued  that  any  high-
    profile political figure would be at risk  of  persecution.  The  Judge
    referred to BM  and  others  in  paragraph  33  (when  summarising  the
    respondent's case) but made no finding on risk to persons  who  held  a
    position of authority.

15. The Upper Tribunal in giving guidance stated:


      1. A national of the Democratic Republic  of  Congo  ("DRC")  who  has
         acquired the status of foreign  national  offender  in  the  United
         Kingdom is not, simply by virtue of such status, exposed to a  real
         risk of persecution or serious  harm  or  treatment  proscribed  by
         Article 3 ECHR in the event of enforced return to the DRC.


      2. A national of the DRC whose attempts to acquire refugee  status  in
         the United Kingdom have been unsuccessful  is  not,  without  more,
         exposed to a real risk of persecution or serious harm or proscribed
         treatment contrary to Article 3  ECHR  in  the  event  of  enforced
         return to DRC.

      3. A national of the DRC who has a  significant  and  visible  profile
         within APARECO (UK) is, in the event of returning to his country of
         origin, at real risk of persecution  for  a  Convention  reason  or
         serious harm or treatment proscribed by Article 3 ECHR by virtue of
         falling within one of the risk categories identified by  the  Upper
         Tribunal in MM (UDPS Members - Risk on Return) Democratic  Republic
         of Congo CG [2007] UKAIT 00023.  Those belonging to  this  category
         include persons who are, or are perceived to  be,  leaders,  office
         bearers or spokespersons.  As a general rule, mere  rank  and  file
         members are unlikely to fall within this  category.  However,  each
         case will be fact sensitive, with particular attention directed  to
         the likely knowledge and perceptions of DRC state agents.

      4. The DRC authorities have an interest in certain types of  convicted
         or suspected offenders, namely those  who  have  unexecuted  prison
         sentences in the DRC or in respect of  whom  there  are  unexecuted
         arrest warrants in the DRC or who allegedly committed  an  offence,
         such as document fraud, when departing the DRC.  Such  persons  are
         at real risk of imprisonment for lengthy  periods  and,  hence,  of
         treatment proscribed by Article 3 ECHR.

16. In MM (UDPS Members - Risk on Return) Democratic Republic of  Congo  CG
    [2007] UKAIT 00023 the Tribunal identified risk categories  as  persons
    having or being perceived to have a military or  political  profile  in
    opposition to the government.

17. The appellant's claim was that he became President of the Alliance  for
    the Defence of Human Rights (ACDHF) which  was  in  conflict  with  the
    Kabala regime and this led to his arrest and detention in 2014 and 2016
    and his removal from his home in 2017. The respondent  did  not  accept
    this aspect of his claim although accepted he had been a member of  the
    Movement for the Liberation  of  the  Congo  (MLC)  and  had  become  a
    government minister.

18. Applying the country guidance, I find  nothing  to  support  a  general
    submission that any person who held a political post of some importance
    was at risk. The fact the appellant had been a member of the MLC and  a
    government minister did not mean he was at  risk  of  persecution.  The
    country guidance decisions clearly identified those persons at risk and
    in paragraph 33 the Judge did give reasons for rejecting this aspect of
    his claim. I do not accept the Judge erred when deciding this issue.

19. The other issue for me to consider is whether the Judge  erred  in  his
    assessment of the evidence put forward to support the appellant's claim
    that he had been detained as claimed.

20. The Judge set out both the appellant's and respondent's claims and  the
    grounds argue the Judge failed to consider all the evidence when making
    his findings. Mr  Howells  argued  that  the  Judge  did  consider  the
    appellant's claim and gave reasons for rejecting it  in  paragraphs  38
    and 39 of his decision.

21. The grounds of appeal challenged the Judge's approach, particularly  in
    paragraphs 34-41, but I am satisfied that reading  the  decision  as  a
    whole, the Judge has considered  various  aspects  of  the  appellant's
    claim and made a number of adverse findings. The general findings  made
    in paragraphs 35-36 were not the reason for the  Judge  rejecting  this
    appeal but were additional factors that the Judge concluded  undermined
    the appellant's credibility.

22. Between paragraphs 38 and 41 the Judge  considered  the  evidence.  Mrs
    Bachu criticised the Judge's approach, but the Judge made it  clear  in
    paragraph 6 that he would have regard to  the  appellant's  bundle  and
    referred to this evidence in  paragraph  39.  The  Judge  made  adverse
    findings that  he  felt  undermined  the  appellant's  credibility  and
    addressed other aspects of his evidence in paragraph 40.

23. Having rejected his claim to have been President, the  Judge  proceeded
    to look at his appeal in the alternative namely  that  his  account  of
    being President was plausible. The finding at paragraph 41 was  clearly
    open  to  him  as  were  the  subsequent  findings  about  his  alleged
    detentions and subsequent releases. In paragraph 51 the Judge concluded
    that the appellant's oral evidence was  materially  different  to  that
    given in  his  witness  statements  and  ultimately,  he  concluded  at
    paragraph 52 the appellant was not credible.

24. Mrs Bachu argued the Judge did not follow  the  approach  in  AM  (Fair
    Hearing) and SB (Sri Lanka) v SSHD but this was a detailed decision  in
    which the Judge made a number of adverse findings for which he gave his
    reasons.

    DECISION

25. I find there was no error of law and I uphold the original decision.



Signed                              Date     10/04/2019

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I do not make a fee award because I have dismissed the appeal.

Signed                              Date     10/04/2019

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
