
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11576/2019 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided Without a Hearing under Rule |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|34                                   |                                     |
|On 22 September 2020                 |On 28 September 2020                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                                    N F M
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Lifeline Options CIC
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
                    (written submissions)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008  (SI  2008/2698)  I  make  an  anonymity  order  prohibiting   the
    disclosure or publication of any matter likely to lead  to  members  of
    the public identifying the appellant.  A failure to  comply  with  this
    direction could lead to Contempt of Court proceedings.



Introduction

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Iraq who was born in 1982.  He is Kurdish
    and comes from Kirkuk City.

 3. The appellant claims to have left Iraq on 29 April  2008  and  to  have
    entered the United Kingdom on  27  June  2008.   He  initially  claimed
    asylum on that day.  His claim was refused and his subsequent appeal to
    the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Ford)   was   dismissed.    He   was
    subsequently refused permission to appeal and he became  appeal  rights
    exhausted on 17 May 2010.

 4. Subsequently, the  appellant  made  a  number  of  further  submissions
    culminating in submissions made on 13 September 2019.

 5. On 12 November 2019, the Secretary of  State  refused  the  appellant's
    claims for asylum, humanitarian protection and under the ECHR.

 6. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In a  determination
    sent on 20 February 2020 (Judge Perry) dismissed the appellant's appeal
    on all grounds.

 7. The appellant did not pursue his asylum claim  before  the  judge  but,
    instead, relied upon Art 15(c) of the Qualification Directive  (Council
    Directive 2004/83/EC).  Judge Perry did not accept that  the  appellant
    had established that he would face a real  risk  of  suffering  serious
    harm as a result of indiscriminate violence if he returned to his  home
    area of Kirkuk.  Further, the judge found that the appellant  would  be
    able to obtain his CSID from the UK  which  he  had  left  with  family
    members in Kirkuk and so could safely travel to  Kirkuk  on  return  to
    Iraq.  The judge also found  that  the  appellant's  return  would  not
    breach Art 8 of the ECHR.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 8. The appellant sought permission to appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  on
    three grounds.

 9. First, he contended  that  the  judge  failed  properly  to  apply  the
    relevant country guidance  case  of  SMO  and  Others  (Article  15(c);
    identity documents) Iraq CG [2019] UKUT 00400  (IAC)  in  applying  the
    'sliding  scale'  in  assessing  whether  he  would  face  a  risk   of
    indiscriminate violence contrary to Art 15(c) in Kirkuk.   The  grounds
    contend that the judge wrongly found that there was not a  "significant
    presence and control by Shia militia in Kirkuk" which was  contrary  to
    the evidence in SMO and Others at [26], [31] and [32].  That issue  was
    relevant to the risk to the appellant as a Kurd.

10. Secondly, the judge also erred in applying SMO and Others  by  omitting
    to take into account that the appellant was an army deserter which  was
    a risk factor falling within the category of "humanitarian  or  medical
    staff and those  associated  with  Western  organisations  or  security
    forces".

11. Thirdly,  the  judge  wrongly  approached  the  issue  of  whether  the
    appellant would have a CSID on return and had  departed  from  SMO  and
    Others in that regard.  Following SMO and Others, it was  necessary  to
    consider, first whether the appellant has or could obtain the necessary
    information to obtain a replacement  CSID  in  the  UK;  and  secondly,
    whether the appellant has or can obtain the  necessary  information  to
    obtain a replacement CSID on return to Iraq.

12. Permission to appeal was initially refused by the  First-tier  Tribunal
    but, on a renewed application to the UT,  on  19  May  2020  the  Upper
    Tribunal (UTJ Finch) granted the appellant permission to appeal.

13. In the light of the COVID-19 crisis,  the  UT  (UTJ  Kopieczek)  issued
    directions stating the provisional view that it would be appropriate to
    determine the error of law issue without a hearing  and  inviting  both
    parties to make submissions on that issue and also on the substance  of
    the appeal.

14. In response, the Secretary of State made submissions dated 27 July 2020
    seeking to uphold the judge's decision.

15. No submissions were made on behalf of the appellant.  That remained the
    case when I caused a check to be  made  on  the  UT's  database  on  22
    September 2020.

16. Having taken into account all the submissions, and in  the  absence  of
    any objection from either  party,  I  consider  it  just  and  fair  to
    determine the error of law issue without a hearing and the rule  34  of
    the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules  2008  (SI  2008/2698  as
    amended) and para 4 of the Senior  President's  Amended  General  Pilot
    Practice Direction: Contingency Arrangements in the First-tier Tribunal
    and Upper Tribunal (14 September 2020).

The Judge's Decision

17. The appellant's case before Judge Perry was not founded on the  Refugee
    Convention (see para 43 of the determination).  Instead, the  appellant
    relied upon Art 15(c) and claimed that he was at risk of  serious  harm
    arising from indiscriminate violence in his home area of Kirkuk City.

18. At paras 39-40, the judge summarised the position after SMO and  Others
    as follows:

         "39.     In SMO the UT concluded (Headnote/A1)  that  whilst  there
             continued to be an internal armed conflict in certain parts of
             Iraq, involving government forces,  various  militia  and  the
             remnants of ISIL the intensity of that conflict  is  not  such
             that, as a general matter, there are substantial  grounds  for
             believing that  any  civilian  returned  to  Iraq,  solely  on
             account of his presence there, faces  a  real  risk  of  being
             subjected to indiscriminate violence amounting to serious harm
             within the scope of Article 15(c)  QD.   Notwithstanding  that
             the circumstances require  individualised  assessment  in  the
             context of the conditions of the area in question.

         40.  Based on SMO [Headnote/D18] the general conditions within  the
             Formerly Contested Areas do not engage Article 15(c) (at least
             as to the areas that concern me) but the ethnic and  political
             composition of the home area (and if applicable the  place  of
             relocation)  will  still  be   particularly   relevant).    In
             particular,  an  individual  who  lived  in  a   former   ISIL
             stronghold for some time may fall under suspicion in  a  place
             of relocation.  Tribal and  ethnic  differences  may  preclude
             such a relocation, given the significant presence and  control
             of largely Shia militia in these areas.  Even where it is safe
             for an individual to relocate within  the  Formerly  Contested
             Areas, however, it  is  unlikely  to  be  either  feasible  or
             reasonable without  a  prior  connection  to,  and  a  support
             structure within, the area in question."

19. That self-direction  is  entirely  in  accord  with  the  UT's  country
    guidance in SMO and Others.  The appellant could not succeed under  Art
    15(c) merely on the basis that he was a returning  civilian  to  Kirkuk
    City.

20. The  appellant's  claim  was  based,  instead,  upon  a  fact-sensitive
    application of the "sliding scale" assessment approved by the UT in SMO
    and Others (see paras (3)-(5) of the headnote).  The  judge  recognised
    this in para 42 when he said:

         "I am thus required to undertake a fact-sensitive  'sliding  scale'
         assessment and in doing so the matters outlined in [Headnote/A4 and
         A5] are particularly relevant.  Amongst them the  appellant  relays
         no detail of an actual or perceived association with ISIL, nor does
         he refer me to any specific ongoing ISIL activity in his home area,
         Kirkuk, beyond that identified in SMO,  instead  he  indicates  his
         concern is that his home area is controlled by  an  Iranian  backed
         militia and that he is a Kurd."

21. Then at para 43, the judge set out the way  in  which  the  appellant's
    Counsel put his appeal namely that:

         "When  assessing  eligibility   for   subsidiary   protection   the
         appellant's Kurdish ethnicity enhanced his risk under Article 15(c)
         (even though it is insufficient in itself to  entitle  him  to  the
         protection on the basis of asylum pursuant to the 1951 Convention),
         a potential argument discussed by the court in SMO at [295]."

22. Then, at para 44, the judge referred to some evidence relied on by  the
    appellant which postdated SMO and Others:

         "Of the objective evidence the  two  documents  that  postdate  the
         hearing in SMO (24 - 26 June 2019] are a Gardaworld report [A/42  -
         47] (a separate report of rockets being launched [A/48] is undated)
         and about hiring practices being ethnically motivated [A/49 -  51].
         The former appears to relay threats to military forces and  western
         personnel and assets but does not identify as such  an  Art.  15(c)
         beyond that in SMO.  The latter does not demonstrate in Art.  15(c)
         risk."

23. The judge then went on in paras 45-49, to consider  the  risk  factors,
    based upon SMO and Others, upon which the appellant placed reliance.

24. At para 45, he dealt with the risk to  religious  and  minority  ethnic
    groups as discussed in SMO and Others:

         "45. Whilst SMO identifies [300] that whilst members  of  religious
             and minority ethnic groups are considered by the UNHCR  to  be
             likely to be in need of international  refugee  protection  in
             areas where ISIL retains a presence with respect to the UNHCR,
             the UT considered it too simplistic to state that religious or
             ethnic minorities are likely to be at increased risk in  areas
             in which ISIL retains a presence and that whilst membership of
             an ethnic or religious minority may increase the risks  to  an
             individual a contextual evaluation rather than  a  presumption
             is required with reference to the composition of the  area  in
             question, the local balance of power and the  extent  of  ISIL
             activity in the area in question."

25. At para 46, the judge dealt with  the  evidence  referred  to  SMO  and
    Others  concerning  ISIL  and  its  present  and   impact   in   Kirkuk
    Governorate:

         "46.     The UT found in SMO [252 -  275]  that  ISIL  controls  no
             territory as such in Kirkuk governorate but it  was  certainly
             present and active.  They identified the statistics recorded a
             sharp fall in the number of civilians  killed  (the  intensity
             falling from 62.9 civilians deaths per 100,000  population  in
             2017 to 18.3 in 2018) and that ISIL's main focus in Kirkuk was
             to attack specific targets, where usually authority figures or
             those associated with the security services and whilst it  was
             common ground across all commentators that ISIL was attempting
             to regain control of rural areas in this governorate  and  the
             UT determined there was a security vacuum in the  rural  parts
             of the governorate it went on to conclude that  the  level  of
             risks to  an  ordinary  civilian  purely  on  account  of  his
             presence in Kirkuk, or any part of it, is  [not]  such  as  to
             cross the Article 15(c) threshold [SMO/257]."

26. I have inserted the word "not" in the final  sentence  to  reflect  the
    clear sense of the judge's conclusion there.

27. At para 47, the judge considered the issue of Shia militia in Kirkuk:

         "The UT in SMO did not find that there was a  significant  presence
         and control by Shia militia in  Kirkuk.   Nor  does  the  objective
         evidence the appellant relies upon."

28. Then at paras 48-49, the judge considered the  risk,  if  any,  arising
    from the appellant's former membership of the Iraqi Army and  that,  as
    Judge Ford had previously found, he  had  deserted  together  with  the
    appellant's Kurdish background:

         "48. The other factor of those  listed  in  [Headnote/A5]  that  Mr
             Forbes  drew  to  my  attention  was  the  appellant's  former
             membership of the Iraqi Army.  His former links to  the  Iraqi
             Army were addressed by Judge  Ford  in  her  decision  as  not
             giving rise to protection  issues.   The  appellant  does  not
             relay in evidence how he is of  prominence  such  that  he  is
             likely to be at an enhanced risk  nor  any  links  to  western
             forces, personnel and assets.  Nor did the appellant  relay  a
             current association with local or national government  or  the
             security apparatus [SMO/313].

         49.  The appellant is a Kurd and his principal language is  Kurdish
             Sorani (followed by English and then  Arabic  (submissions  11
             January 2019 p.3)).  I found he has family in the Kirkuk  area
             and comes from there despite having been in the UK since 2008.
              They have helped him before and are likely to do so  again  I
             find he has a support structure within the area in question."

29. Having set out those findings, the judge concluded at para 50 that  the
    appellant had failed to establish that there  was  substantial  grounds
    for believing that there was a real risk of him suffering serious  harm
    as a result of indiscriminate violence.

Discussion

30. Grounds 1 and 2 contend that the judge misapplied SMO and Others.

31. First, in para 47 the judge erred in finding that Shia militia did  not
    have a "significant presence"  or  were  not  in  "control"  in  Kirkuk
    (Ground 1).  Secondly, the judge failed in para 48 to  have  regard  to
    the fact that the appellant, as a former member of the Iraqi Army and a
    deserter, fell within the risk category  of  "humanitarian  or  medical
    staff and those  associated  with  Western  organisations  or  security
    forces" (Ground 2).

32. The judge undoubtedly  approached  the  application  of  Art  15(c)  in
    accordance with SMO and Others.   First,  he  correctly  noted  that  a
    civilian, merely by returning to Iraq, could not establish a real  risk
    of being subject to indiscriminate violence; at least apart from return
    to small geographical areas not relevant to this appeal  (see  headnote
    paras (1) and (2) of SMO and Others).  Secondly,  the  judge  correctly
    identified that in determining whether an Art  15(c)  risk  existed  in
    relation to a particular individual, a  "fact-sensitive"  approach  was
    required applying the well-known "sliding  scale"  assessment  (derived
    from  the  Strasbourg  decision  in  Elgafaji  v  Staatssecretaris  van
    Justitie (C-465/07) [2009] 1 WLR 2100 at [39]) (see  para  (3)  of  the
    headnote in SMO and Others).  Thirdly, the judge correctly  identified,
    following SMO and Others, that certain personal characteristics must be
    carefully assessed with particular reference to the extent  of  ongoing
    ISIL activity and the behaviour of security actors in "control" of  the
    appellant's home area.  Those personal characteristics, which  must  be
    considered individually and cumulatively in the sliding scale analysis,
    are set out in para (5) of the headnote in SMO  and  Others.   The  two
    relevant ones in this appeal are: "Membership of a national, ethnic  or
    religious group which  is  either  in  the  minority  in  the  area  in
    question, or not in de facto control of that area"; and the second  is:
    "Humanitarian or  medical  staff  and  those  associated  with  Western
    organisations or security forces".

33. The judge, applying SMO and Others, concluded (at [47]) that there  was
    not a "significant presence and control by  Shia  militia  in  Kirkuk".
    That issue arises because of the appellant's contention that as a  Kurd
    he was at an enhanced risk from Shia militia.  The evidence in SMO  and
    Others was that Kirkuk (and in particular  for  the  purposes  of  this
    appeal Kirkuk City) was in the control of the "ISF, with a  significant
    presence of PMU militia" (see [251] of SMO and Others).  The  "ISF"  is
    the Iraqi Security Forces, namely government forces.  The "PMF" is  the
    Popular Mobilisation Forces.  In his evidence before the  Tribunal,  Dr
    Fatah explained who the PMF or its sub-units the PMU were.  At [19]  of
    SMO and Others, Dr Fatah's evidence is recorded as referring to the PMF
    and PMU as "Shia militia".  However, it is also clear from  Dr  Fatah's
    evidence (at [29] of SMO and Others) that the PMF is not an exclusively
    Shia militia.  There, albeit in relation to Hawija he referred to  that
    being under the control of "Sunni Arab armed groups affiliated with the
    Popular Mobilisation Forces".

34. At [256] of SMO and Others, the  UT,  again  referring  to  Dr  Fatah's
    evidence, said this about the PMU in Kirkuk:

         "There is a security vacuum in the rural parts of the  governorate,
         left by the departure of the Peshmerga in late 2017.  ISIL has some
         support in the region and has been able to move freely  and  expand
         its operations in the region as a result of  that  vacuum.   It  is
         regarded as one of the core areas for ISIL's rebuilding  effort  by
         Joel Wing and other respected contributors.   We  also  accept  the
         evidence given by Dr Fatah about the effect of the  PMU  in  Kirkuk
         governorate.  Whilst they  lessen  the  threat  from  ISIL  in  the
         region, they have  also  brought  renewed  sectarian  tension,  for
         instance by renaming Sunni sites with Shia names.   The  fact  that
         Kirkuk  remains  a  Disputed  Territory  also  contributes  to  the
         uncertainty experienced by residents of the Governorate."

35. Having gone on to consider the evidence  concerning  ISIL  activity  in
    Kirkuk, the UT at [257] went on to conclude:

         "We take account of indirect forms of violence, as required by  HM2
         and as described above but we do not consider  that  the  level  of
         risk to an ordinary civilian purely on account of his  presence  in
         Kirkuk, or any part of it, is such as to cross  the  Article  15(c)
         threshold.  The existence  and  actions  of  permanently  operating
         attacks cells, the coercion brought to  bear  on  sections  of  the
         rural population by ISIL and the other forms of  indirect  violence
         from ISIL and other  groups  (including  the  PMU)  are  not  at  a
         sufficiently high level to cross the threshold when considered as a
         whole."

36. As will be apparent, there the UT took into account  indirect  violence
    not only emanating from ISIL but also from the PMU.

37. As regards the specific risk factor of being  from  a  minority  group,
    namely being a Kurd, the UT dealt with this at [300] of its decision as
    follows:

         "Members of religious and minority ethnic groups are considered  by
         the UNHCR to be likely to  be  in  need  of  international  refugee
         protection in areas where ISIL retains  a  presence.   As  we  have
         underlined throughout this decision, we emphasise our  appreciation
         of the UNHCR's unique  position  and  expertise  in  such  matters.
         There is some danger in applying too broad a  brush  in  trying  to
         describe this cohort, however.  The first danger is in the  use  of
         the word 'minority' in the context of Iraq.  As we have endeavoured
         to explain, the ethno-religious demography of  Iraq  is  varied  by
         region.  Whilst Sunni Arabs are in the minority across the  country
         as a whole, for example, there are areas in which they comprise the
         majority.  The same may also be said  in  respect  of  Kurds.   The
         second difficulty is to assume or potentially  to  assume  that  an
         ethnic group is at a disadvantage because it  is  statistically  in
         the minority in a particular area.  Whilst such an assumption might
         have been proper in the past, the proliferation  of  the  PMUs  has
         altered the balance of power in  particular  areas,  often  to  the
         detriment of the majority.  It was a familiar theme in  Dr  Fatah's
         written and oral evidence, for example, that the Shia  militia  had
         in certain areas renamed buildings and taken down Kurdish  symbols.
         The third danger is in treating the presence  or  absence  of  ISIL
         from an area as a binary concept.  As we have explained  at  length
         above, ISIL retains a presence in a number of areas  but  the  size
         and influence of that  presence,  and  ISIL's  level  of  activity,
         varies significantly.  Whenever it is submitted that an  individual
         is at enhanced risk on this basis, therefore, it  is  necessary  to
         evaluate the submission with particular care, with reference to the
         composition of the area in question, the local balance of power and
         the extent of ISIL activity in the area in question.  With  respect
         to a UNHCR, we consider it too simplistic to state  that  religious
         or ethnic minorities are likely to be at increased risk in areas in
         which  ISIL  retains  a  presence.   Membership  of  an  ethnic  or
         religious minority may increase that risk to an  individual  but  a
         contextual evaluation rather than a presumption is required."

38. Whilst I accept that the judge was wrong (at para 47) to  characterise,
    in effect, the PMF (though not mentioning them by name) as not being  a
    "Shia militia", based both upon SMO and  Others  and  the  evidence  to
    which  he  made  reference,  I  do  not  accept  that   any   risk   of
    indiscriminate violence to the appellant as a  Kurd  living  in  Kirkuk
    City  arising  from  the  actions  of  the  PMF  was  individually   or
    cumulatively sufficient, when applying the sliding-scale, to  establish
    that there were substantial grounds for believing that he was  at  real
    risk of serious harm arising from that indiscriminate violence.  Kirkuk
    City is under the control of the ISF albeit with a significant  PMF/PMU
    presence.  The evidence set out in [300] of SMO and  Others,  (and  the
    substance of which  is  cited  in  Ground  1  in  the  FTT  application
    permission), focused upon Shia militia having  "renamed  buildings  and
    taken down Kurdish symbols".  The UT's  consideration  of  the  "Kirkuk
    Governorate"  (at  [251]-[257]),  did  not  provide  a  sound  factual,
    evidential basis for concluding that a breach of  Art  15(c)  had  been
    established.  I, therefore, reject Ground 1.

39. Turning  now  to  Ground  2,  this  relies  upon  the  risk  factor  of
    "humanitarian  or  medical   staff   and   those   associated   Western
    organisations or security forces".  The argument, put in  the  grounds,
    is that the appellant's previous membership  of  the  Iraqi  Army  from
    which he deserted, when the Iraqi Army was "American-led during the two
    years of A's involvement as a security guard to  an  American-appointed
    Iraqi general" brought him within that risk factor.

40. At [310], the UT in SMO and Others  dealt  with  this  risk  factor  as
    follows:

         "310.    Perceived  collaborators  of  Western  organisations/armed
                forces.  This group  was  considered  in  BA  (Iraq)  to  be
                unlikely to be at risk in those parts  of  Iraq  which  were
                under  ISIL  control  or  had  a  high  level  of  insurgent
                activity.  The risk was thought  to  be  lower  in  Baghdad,
                although there was evidence at that time to show that groups
                including ISIL were  active  and  capable  of  carrying  out
                attacks there.  That assessment must be revisited because of
                several durable changes.  Firstly,  ISIL  is  no  longer  in
                control of the swathes  of  territory  in  Iraq.   Secondly,
                there is considerably  less  involvement  of  Western  armed
                forces in what is  accepted  by  the  respondent  to  be  an
                internal  armed  conflict  in  Iraq.   Thirdly,   there   is
                considerably less  evidence  of  ISIL  and  other  insurgent
                groups carrying out attacks in Baghdad.  We do not  consider
                that this group would be at an enhanced risk in  Baghdad  as
                there is insufficient recent  evidence  to  support  such  a
                conclusion.  In respect of the risk to such  individuals  in
                the Formerly  Contested  Areas,  the  situation  is  clearly
                different to that considered in BA (Iraq).  As noted at  1.9
                of the EASO report on Targeting of Individuals 'working  for
                the coalition was less sensitive  than  in  the  past.'   In
                areas where ISIL remains active, its primary target is those
                associated with central or local governance or the  security
                apparatus and there is little recent evidence to  show  that
                those with a current or  historical  connection  to  Western
                organisations or armed forces would be at enhanced  risk  on
                that account alone.   That  is  not  to  say  that  such  an
                association is irrelevant for the purposes  of  the  sliding
                scale analysis; were such an association to become known  at
                a fake checkpoint, for  example,  then  such  an  individual
                might well be at enhanced risk as  compared  to  a  civilian
                without such an association.  We accept,  therefore  that  a
                past or current association to  a  Western  organisation  or
                allied  forces  is  a  relevant  factor  in  Article   15(c)
                analysis, albeit one with less significance than before."

41. As the judge identified in his determination, correctly based upon  SMO
    and Others, ISIL has some activity in the Kirkuk Governorate  but  that
    is largely outside of Kirkuk City.   The  latter,  of  course,  is  the
    appellant's home area.  There is no real risk of a threat from ISIL  in
    Kirkuk City.  Even assuming that the appellant's past involvement  with
    the Iraqi Army was somehow to become known, the UT in  SMO  and  Others
    clearly considered that past association with Western armed  forces  is
    likely to be less significant than previously.   The  appellant's  past
    association is of course with the Iraqi Army itself.   The  appellant's
    assertion, in the grounds, that association with the Iraqi Army  is  to
    be associated with the Western allied forces  previously  operating  in
    Iraq is, in my judgment, unsupported by what is said in SMO and  Others
    in particular at [310].  The  contention  is,  in  effect,  that  every
    former member of the Iraqi Army is at enhanced risk because  they  will
    inevitably be associated with the allied forces  previously  active  in
    Iraq.  There is no  basis  for  that  conclusion  in  SMO  and  Others.
    However, any such risk is predicated on ISIL activity and knowledge  of
    the appellant's previous military history.   The  judge,  in  my  view,
    fully took into account the appellant's military history  in  assessing
    the risk to him on return under Art 15(c).  In addition, of course,  as
    the judge noted in  para  48  of  his  determination,  Judge  Ford  had
    previously determined that his asylum claim based upon risk due to  his
    military history was not well-founded.  For these reasons, therefore, I
    also reject Ground 2.

42. That, then, leaves Ground 3.  In my judgment, as set out in the initial
    grounds to the FTT, this ground is misconceived.  It appears to contend
    that the judge was wrong to approach  the  risk  to  the  appellant  on
    return on the basis that he would be able to obtain  a  CSID  from  his
    family prior to returning to Iraq and that the real issue  was  whether
    he had the information necessary to obtain a  replacement  CSID  either
    whilst in the UK or when in Iraq.

43. The difficulty with this ground is that the  judge  found,  based  upon
    Judge Ford's earlier decision, that the appellant's family in Iraq  had
    his existing CSID and that he would be able to contact them and  obtain
    it before he returned to Iraq.  He would therefore be a returning Iraqi
    citizen in possession of a CSID.  It was irrelevant, therefore, whether
    he could obtain a new CSID either whilst in the UK or on return to Iraq
    which, as is clear from paras (11)-(16) of  the  headnote  in  SMO  and
    Others  does  require  a  consideration  of,  not  least,  whether  the
    appellant has access to the relevant information in his family book  in
    order to seek a CSID whether in the UK or on return.

44. At paras 20-32, the judge  considered  Judge  Ford's  earlier  finding,
    rejecting the appellant's then evidence, that he had left his  CSID  in
    Kirkuk with his family.  The judge rejected the appellant's evidence in
    the present appeal that his family had left Kirkuk, not  least  because
    of the vagueness of his knowledge about that issue (see para  30).   At
    paras 31-32 the judge made the following finding:

         "31. I find that the appellant's paternal uncle and his cousin  are
             still in Iraq.  I find that the appellant's mother did, as the
             appellant stated, leave her family's CSIDs with  his  paternal
             uncle for safe keeping and I find in the absence  of  evidence
             to the contrary being brought forward,  on  balance  they  are
             still with him.

         32.  That is further supported in that when he needed documents  to
             be provided, albeit what Judge Ford found was the false arrest
             warrant, they were supplied to the appellant.  While that  was
             a decade ago my findings that his family are still [] in Iraq,
             hold his CSID and contrary to what he asserted, he was able to
             contact his family in Iraq as the arrest warrant demonstrates,
             lead me to conclude that documents, including the CSID,  could
             be sent to him in the UK."

45. The reference to the arrest warrant is  that  the  appellant  produced,
    before Judge Ford, an arrest warrant which  Judge  Ford  concluded  was
    fabricated but accepted had been sent to him by his family.   That  was
    the contact which the appellant claimed to have with his family at that
    time.

46. The grounds do not seek to challenge the judge's  factual  findings  in
    paras 31 and 32.  Although UTJ Finch, in  granting  permission,  raised
    the issue of whether that finding properly took into account events  in
    Kirkuk since his earlier asylum appeal in 2010, that did not arise from
    the grounds and, in the absence of further submissions, is not a matter
    upon which the appellant has  relied,  or  developed  any  argument  in
    relation to, either before the judge in this appeal or subsequently  in
    challenging  the  judge's  decision  in  the  Upper  Tribunal.   In  my
    judgment, the judge was entitled to reach his findings in  paras  31-32
    based upon Judge Ford's earlier findings and the judge's  consideration
    of the appellant's evidence in the present appeal at paras 20-30 of the
    determination.  For these reasons, therefore, I also reject Ground 3.

47. For all these reasons, therefore, the judge did not materially  err  in
    law in dismissing  the  appellant's  appeal  under  Art  15(c)  of  the
    Qualification Directive.

    Decision

48. The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  to  dismiss  the  appellant's
    appeal on all grounds did not involve the making of an error of law and
    that decision stands.

49. Accordingly, the appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.


                                                                      Signed

                                                                Andrew Grubb

                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                                           24 September 2020
