
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11108/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated          |
|On 23 October 2018                   |On 02 January 2019                      |


                                   Before

                     THE HONOURABLE MRS JUSTICE MAY DBE
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between

                                    N L S
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Miss G Mellon, Counsel instructed by Wilson
Solicitors LLP


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Anonymity Direction

The Upper Tribunal has made an anonymity direction pursuant to  Rule  14  of
the Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008:  unless  the  Upper
Tribunal or a Court directs otherwise, no report  of  these  proceedings  or
any form of publication  thereof  shall  identify  the  original  appellant,
whether directly or indirectly. This order applies to, amongst  others,  all
parties. Any failure to comply with this order could give rise  to  contempt
of court proceedings.

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against the decision of the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge allowing the appellant's appeal  against  the
    decision dated 14 October 2017 to make a  deportation  order  requiring
    his removal back to Mogadishu, Somalia.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Somalia where his area of  origin  is  in
    the province of Gaedo.  He was born in 1988 and is now  30  years  old.
    He came to the UK on 25 November 2013 and  immediately  sought  asylum.
    His application was refused on 3 November 2014 and he appealed.

The 2014 First-tier Tribunal decision

 3. The appellant's  protection  and  human  rights  appeal  was  heard  by
    Immigration Judge Fox on 29 December 2014.   In  a  decision  dated  31
    December 2014 Judge Fox dismissed the appeal on all grounds, but  found
    as a fact that the appellant was a member of the Ashraf minority  clan.



 4. The key issue in the protection decision was internal relocation:   the
    First-tier Judge found that it was reasonable to expect  the  appellant
    as a member of the Ashraf clan to relocate  internally  from  his  home
    area in Gaedo to the capital of Somalia, Mogadishu.

 5. There was an appeal to the Upper Tribunal from Judge Fox's decision but
    the appeal was dismissed on 3 July 2015.

The deportation order

 6. Thereafter it seems the appellant made arrangements to travel to Canada
    in order to seek asylum there.  He was arrested before leaving  the  UK
    and charged with possessing a  false  identity  document.   He  pleaded
    guilty before Lewes Crown Court on 28 March 2017 and was  sentenced  to
    twelve months immediate imprisonment.

 7. On 15 May 2017, the appellant was served with a notice  of  deportation
    and on  4  August  his  solicitors  submitted  representations  to  the
    Secretary of State to the effect that deporting him would be  a  breach
    of  Articles  3  and  8.   The  decision  to  deport  was  nevertheless
    maintained on 16 October 2017.

 8. The appellant's representatives lodged an appeal against that  decision
    which came before the First-tier Tribunal on 16 May 2018.

The FTT Decision on the Appeal

 9.  At  paragraph  17  of  her  decision  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    identified the issue  for  her  decision  on  the  appeal,  namely  the
    reasonableness of the appellant relocating to Mogadishu.  The Secretary
    of State accepted at the outset that the appellant  would  be  at  real
    risk in his home area in Gaedo.  There was no  question  of  his  being
    able to return there.

10. The judge referred to the case of Devaseelan and indicated that she had
    taken as her starting point the findings made by Immigration Judge  Fox
    when refusing the appellant's asylum and human rights claims  in  2014.
    She rightly identified at paragraph 45 of her decision the necessity of
    establishing whether there was now additional information which had not
    been before Judge Fox when he made his  decision,  which  could  put  a
    different  light  on  the  appellant's  situation  regarding   internal
    relocation to the capital.

11. The judge directed herself by reference to the guidance given in MOJ  v
    The Secretary of State for the Home Department [2014] UKUT 00442 (IAC).
     I will refer to this as "the Somalia country guidance".  She noted  in
    her decision at paragraph  55  that  both  sides'  representatives  had
    referred her to several passages in that country guidance.  She went on
    to evaluate the appellant's particular circumstances in  the  light  of
    further material now available, including in particular a report by  Mr
    Roger Middleton giving expert evidence about conditions in Somalia  and
    Mogadishu,  and  an  expert  psychiatric  report   dealing   with   the
    appellant's current mental health issues.  It was reported that he  has
    PTSD arising from the events surrounding his departure from Somalia  in
    2013.  The judge's conclusion at paragraph 62,  repeated  at  paragraph
    66, was that:-

         "...it would not be reasonable for this particular Appellant, given
         all the factors that have been presented to me and,  most  notably,
         the factors that have been highlighted since Immigration Judge  Fox
         reached his decision, that it  would  not  be  reasonable  for  the
         Appellant to go to Mogadishu now."

Arguments Raised on this Appeal

12. I have looked in vain for any Rule 24 response from the  respondent  as
    ordered by the Principal Resident Judge, nor  was  there  any  skeleton
    argument from either party  as  had  also  been  ordered.   I  find  it
    discourteous in the extreme, bordering on contempt, for  directions  to
    be ignored like this.

13. Moving to the Secretary of  State's  argument  set  out  in  a  section
    entitled "Reasons for appealing" in the form, it is said that the First-
    tier Judge made a material error of  law  in  her  determination.   The
    error she is said to have made is fourfold.  Firstly, it is said  there
    was a failure to follow the country guidance.

14. Secondly, a failure properly to take into account or consider financial
    circumstances and ability to find  work.   The  examples  given  are  a
    failure to take into account the money which had been used to  buy  the
    return ticket to Canada and the $US300 found on the  appellant  at  the
    time of his arrest, the financial assistance that there  was  available
    from friends in the UK, the facilitated return scheme  referred  to  in
    the country guidance at paragraph 423, and for the  fact  that  someone
    who can do agricultural labouring must also be able to find work  as  a
    manual labourer in the city.  In argument Mr Melvin described the First-
    tier Judge's decision that there would be no work in the city  for  the
    appellant as an agricultural labourer as "bordering on irrational".

15. Thirdly, it is said that there was a failure to  follow  the  Court  of
    Appeal's decision in the case of Said [2016]  Imm  AR  1084  where  the
    circumstances of the applicant in that case (AS) are said to have  been
    similar to those of  the  appellant  and  where  the  Court  of  Appeal
    overturned a First-tier Tribunal decision directing that  there  should
    be no return.

16. Fourthly and lastly, it is said that the Tribunal Judge erred in making
    findings contrary to the country guidance where an  economic  boom  was
    identified in  Mogadishu  specifically  advantaging  returnees  to  the
    country.

17. Miss Mellon's response to these  arguments  was  commendably  succinct.
    She contended that the judge had properly taken account of the  country
    guidance, the decision of Tribunal Judge Fox and the evidence which was
    before her.  Miss  Mellon  argued  that  the  Judge  came  to  findings
    properly reasoned which were open to her to  reach;  she  characterised
    the Secretary of State's appeal as no more than a disagreement with the
    judge's conclusions and  consequently  a  challenge  which  should  not
    succeed.  She referred us to the Court of Appeal decision in  a  recent
    case of FY [2017] EWCA Civ 1853.

Discussion and Conclusions

18. The Somalia country guidance sets out at paragraphs  407  and  408  the
    enquiry that the Tribunal must make in relation to cases where a person
    is to be relocated to Mogadishu:-

         "407.    ...

             f.   A person returning to Mogadishu after a period of absence
                  will look to his nuclear family, if he has one  living  in
                  the city, for assistance in  re-establishing  himself  and
                  securing a livelihood. Although a returnee may  also  seek
                  assistance  from  his  clan  members  who  are  not  close
                  relatives, such help is only likely to be forthcoming  for
                  majority clan members, as minority clans may  have  little
                  to offer.

             g.   The significance of  clan  membership  in  Mogadishu  has
                  changed. Clans now provide,  potentially,  social  support
                  mechanisms and  assistance  with  access  to  livelihoods,
                  performing less of a protection function than  previously.
                  There are no clan militias in Mogadishu, no clan violence,
                  and no  clan  based  discriminatory  treatment,  even  for
                  minority clan members.

             h.   If it is accepted  that  a  person  facing  a  return  to
                  Mogadishu after a period of absence has no nuclear  family
                  or close relatives in  the  city  to  assist  him  in  re-
                  establishing himself on return, there will need  to  be  a
                  careful assessment of  all  of  the  circumstances.  These
                  considerations will include, but are not limited to:

                  (i)  circumstances in Mogadishu before departure;

                  (ii) length of absence from Mogadishu;

                  (iii)    family or  clan  associations  to  call  upon  in
                      Mogadishu;

                  (iv) access to financial resources;

                  (v)  prospects of securing a livelihood, whether  that  be
                      employment or self employment;

                  (vi) availability of remittances from abroad;

                  (vii)    means of support during the  time  spent  in  the
                      United Kingdom;

                  (viii)   why his ability to fund the journey to  the  West
                      no longer enables an appellant  to  secure  financial
                      support on return.  Put another way, it will  be  for
                      the person facing return to Mogadishu to explain  why
                      he  would  not  be  able  to  access   the   economic
                      opportunities  that  have  been   produced   by   the
                      'economic boom', especially as there is  evidence  to
                      the effect that returnees  are  taking  jobs  at  the
                      expense of those who have never been away.

         408.     It will, therefore, only be those with no clan  or  family
             support who will not be in receipt of remittances from  abroad
             and who  have  no  real  prospect  of  securing  access  to  a
             livelihood on return who will face the prospect of  living  in
             circumstances  falling  below  that  which  is  acceptable  in
             humanitarian protection terms."

19. No doubt these and  other  passages  from  the  country  guidance  were
    referred to the Tribunal Judge at  the  hearing.   As  I  have  already
    stated she records in her judgment having been taken to  various  parts
    of the guidance.  Mr Melvin sought to suggest that the  judge  had  not
    applied the principle that it was for the person returning  to  explain
    why he would not be able to access work  in  Mogadishu,  but  there  is
    nothing in the decision which bears out this  criticism.   It  is  true
    that the judge did not explicitly set out the contents of paragraph 408
    in her judgment, but we are quite satisfied that she  would  have  been
    referred to it and would have had it in mind.

20. So far as having particular financial circumstances  in  mind  for  the
    purposes for her decision the judge expressly referred to the  evidence
    on financial resources, going through it all at paragraphs 24 to 30  of
    her decision.   There  was  no  explicit  reference  to  the  financial
    referral scheme referred to at paragraph 423 of the  country  guidance,
    but this was hardly surprising as no argument  had  been  addressed  to
    this scheme and the possibility of the appellant benefitting from it at
    the hearing.  Mr Melvin pointed to the Secretary  of  State's  decision
    letter where the scheme was mentioned and relied on, but was unable  to
    assist  with  whether  the  appellant  would  have  been  eligible  for
    financial assistance under the scheme.  This may have been a reason why
    it was not raised specifically at the hearing.   Miss  Mellon  told  us
    today that he would not qualify.  We reach no concluded view on that as
    we do not have sufficient information.  We simply note that it was  not
    in issue at the hearing and is anyway a discretionary  scheme  even  if
    the appellant did qualify.

21. So far as the decision in Said is concerned  that  was  not  an  asylum
    case, and in any event the circumstances of the appellant in that  case
    were evidently dissimilar to those of the appellant.  The court in Said
    makes reference to the prospect of employment, to clan support and  the
    availability of remittances at paragraph 32 of  the  decision  directly
    contrary to the findings of fact made here.  As to the country guidance
    identification of an economic boom in  Somalia,  the  failure  to  have
    sufficient regard to this was the subject of criticism in the  case  of
    MA [2018] EWCA Civ 994 to which we were directed.  Mr Melvin invited us
    to find that the  judge  had  disregarded  the  economic  boom  in  the
    appellant's case.  However, as the Court of Appeal pointed out in FY at
    paragraph 21 the fact of an economic boom is not to be equated with all
    returnees being sure of obtaining employment regardless of suitability.



22. The First-tier Judge here  considered  the  country  guidance  and  the
    evidence relating to the appellant and concluded at paragraph 50 of her
    decision that there  were  no  opportunities  for  a  person  with  his
    background in agricultural labouring.  In our  view  this  was  not  an
    irrational conclusion, nor even one bordering on irrational.  It is one
    perhaps to which another court may not have arrived, but we cannot  say
    that it was not a finding which was open to the judge on the  evidence.
    It plainly was.  In our view Miss Mellon is right.  This appeal  is  no
    more than an attempt impermissibly to revisit findings of fact made  by
    an expert Tribunal which had heard all the  evidence.   The  First-tier
    Tribunal  Judge  addressed  the  right  question,  applied  the   right
    principles and gave a properly reasoned judgment making findings  which
    were open to her to arrive at.  There was no error.   It  follows  that
    the appeal must be dismissed.


Signed        Mrs Justice May           Date 20 December 2018

Mrs Justice May

