
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/11224/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated on:  |
|On 16 November 2018                   |On 6 December 2018                  |
|                                      |                                    |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY


                                   Between

                                     JMM

                            (Anonymity DIRECTED)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Holmes (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. This is the claimant's appeal to the Upper  Tribunal,  brought  with
       the permission of  a  judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  from  a
       decision of the First-tier Tribunal ("the tribunal") which  it  made
       after a hearing of 9 May 2018 and which it sent to the parties on 16
       May 2018; whereupon it dismissed her appeal against the Secretary of
       State's  decision  of  17  October  2017  refusing  to   grant   her
       international protection. For the reasons  set  out  below,  I  have
       decided to allow her appeal, to set aside  the  tribunal's  decision
       and to remit for a complete rehearing. I have also decided to  grant
       the claimant' anonymity. That had not been done  previously  but  it
       seems to me that there are aspects  of  the  claimant's  case  which
       involve issues of some sensitivity such that a grant is appropriate.

    2. Shorn of all but the  essentials,  the  claimant's  account  of  the
       events said to underpin her claim to be  entitled  to  international
       protection is as follows: She is a female citizen of Kenya  and  was
       born on 15 May 1965. She is a member of the Kamba tribe and, despite
       its no longer being lawful in Kenya,  that  tribe  practices  female
       genital mutilation (FGM). In 1998 she went to live in  Holland  with
       her then husband. However, the relationship did not stand  the  test
       of time and, after an unsuccessful attempt to obtain entitlement  to
       permanent residency in Holland notwithstanding the breakdown of  her
       marriage, she returned to Kenya in 2012. She  has,  she  says,  been
       experiencing mental health difficulties since 1999 when she had what
       has been described as "a complete mental breakdown". Having returned
       to Kenya she went to live in Nairobi. She  says  her  mental  health
       difficulties became apparent to others and the tribal elders  wished
       to perform FGM on  her  because  they  believed  her  mental  health
       problems were likely to have resulted from her not having  undergone
       that procedure before. She sought to evade the  elders  by  changing
       her living arrangements and  eventually,  in  2017,  leaving  Kenya.
       Having done that she entered the United Kingdom (UK) using  a  false
       identity and a passport to which she was not entitled, in May  2017.
       She was apprehended and claimed international protection.

    3. The Secretary of State refused her claim for reasons which  are  set
       out in a lengthy document of 17 October 2017. The Secretary of State
       thought the claimant's account of having been  threatened  with  FGM
       was inconsistent and unpersuasive, and disbelieved it. Further,  the
       Secretary of State thought that even if the account were  true,  the
       claimant would be able to  obtain  sufficient  protection  from  the
       Kenyan authorities and, even failing that, would  be  able  to  take
       advantage of an internal flight alternative within Kenya.

    4. As already noted, the claimant's appeal was heard by the tribunal on
       9 May 2018. She was unrepresented at that hearing and the  Secretary
       of State was represented by a Home Office  Presenting  Officer.  The
       tribunal,  in  its  written  reasons,  noted  that  FGM  is  usually
       performed upon females who belong to the Kamba tribe between the age
       of eight and twelve years. The tribunal referred to the claimed link
       between the claimant's mental health difficulties  and  the  claimed
       insistence of the tribal elders that she be  subjected  to  FGM,  at
       paragraph 20 of the written reasons. This is  what  it  said  as  to
       that:

         "20.     In her statement (1 May 2018) she said that her mother did
         not insist she had FGM. Her uncle contacted her to say  she  should
         visit the countryside having been told  by  her  cousin  about  the
         mental illness. The passport was genuine. She is  at  risk  of  FGM
         despite her age due to her tribe's attitude to mental illness.  She
         went to her relatives out of politeness and she did not think  they
         knew of her mental illness.  She  stayed  overnight  as  the  witch
         doctor was busy elsewhere. The police in Kenya rarely help  in  FGM
         cases and have no reach in rural  areas.  Her  health  deteriorated
         when she moved around and there is societal stigma everywhere about
         it. It is hard getting jobs in Kenya. Her family cannot financially
         or emotionally support her in Kenya".


    5. That part of the written reasons appears in a  section  setting  out
       the detail of the appellant's claim. At a  later  point,  under  the
       heading "Findings of Fact", the tribunal went on to say this:

         "38.     The appellant  has  however  failed  to  establish  it  is
         reasonably likely she will be the victim of FGM in  Kenya  for  the
         following reasons. Whilst I accept she is a member of a tribe  that
         performs FGM (the Kamba), she is well outside the age range when it
         is usually performed (she is fifty-two whereas the usual age  range
         is twelve to eighteen). She lived in Kenya until  she  was  thirty-
         four and it was not performed when she was a child or  subsequently
         which I am satisfied  was  because  her  mother  opposed  it.  That
         indicates that the elders do not  have  the  power  claimed.  I  am
         satisfied that the fact that she went to  see  them  when  she  had
         returned to Kenya was because she knew  they  had  no  interest  in
         subjecting her to FGM given her age, maternal opposition,  and  her
         own opposition to it. She has speculated as to an ongoing  interest
         in her and with regards to their "reach". Nigeria is a huge country
         and she was able to relocate for five years and  work  without  any
         problem as a lone woman. I accept that she had used  a  false  name
         for which there could be many reasons.


         39.      The appellant has therefore failed to establish she  would
         need to seek police protection or to internally relocate and  I  am
         satisfied that she would not have to go to a rural area  and  there
         is a functioning police force which tackles FGM".


    6. The claimant, by that stage aided by the Manuel Bravo Project, asked
       for and obtained permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal.  The
       central contention made in the grounds was  that  the  tribunal  had
       erred, in its rejection of her claim that she would be subjected  to
       FGM, through  failing  to  address  her  specific  contention  that,
       notwithstanding she was outside  the  usual  age  range,  there  was
       nevertheless a risk because of the belief of the  elders  concerning
       the link between  her  not  having  been  subject  to  FGM  and  her
       suffering  from  mental  illness.  Permission  having  been  granted
       largely for that reason (thought the grant  was  not  stated  to  be
       limited) there was a hearing before the Upper Tribunal  (before  me)
       for a consideration as to whether or not the tribunal had  erred  in
       law and, if so, what should flow from that. Representation  at  that
       hearing  was  as  stated  above  and   I   am   grateful   to   each
       representative. Mr Diwnycz did  not  seek  to  dissuade  me  from  a
       contention that the tribunal had erred in the way it was thought  it
       might have done when permission was granted.

7.    It is right to say that a central part  of  the  claimant's  case  was
that she was at risk of FGM wholly or substantially because it  was  thought
by the elders that her mental illness had been caused by her not having  had
that inflicted upon her before, such that there was a desire  to  impose  it
upon her now. She had, by way of example, made that particular and  discrete
claim in answering question 43 of her substantive asylum interview. She  had
made a similar claim in a handwritten statement of  12  September  2017.  It
appears she made a similar assertion, orally, at the  tribunal  hearing.  As
is apparent from what was said at paragraph 20 of the written  reasons,  the
tribunal was aware that she had made that contention. But during the  course
of its key reasoning as to why it was rejecting the appeal (I have  in  mind
in particular paragraph 38 of the written reasons) it did not  revisit  that
aspect of the claim. Had it done so  it  is  possible  that  it  might  have
regarded the link made by the tribal elders (if it believed  what  was  said
about that) as plausibly explaining  why  she  might  be  subjected  to  FGM
despite being outside the usual age range.  It is  possible  it  might  have
found that such was an explanation as to why the tribal  elders  would  wish
to have her subjected to the practice  now,  despite  its  not  having  been
performed upon her at an earlier stage. It may well be, I  think,  that  the
tribunal was simply disbelieving  the  claimant  about  the  village  elders
having made such a link at all. But, if that was so, the  tribunal  did  not
say so. In the circumstances I have concluded  that  the  tribunal  did  err
through failing to make a finding as to the veracity or  otherwise  of  what
the claimant was asserting to be the truth regarding  her  contention  about
the elders.

8.    I did wonder whether it might be argued (although  it  was  not)  that
what the tribunal went on to  say  at  paragraph  39  amounted  to  a  sound
alternative finding to the effect that since there is "a functioning  police
force" there would be a sufficiency of protection. However, if the  tribunal
was finding that, it was a finding which it made  without  reasons.  Indeed,
it seems clear, in context, that the tribunal was  really  taking  the  view
that it was not  required  to  evaluate  matters  regarding  sufficiency  of
protection or internal flight because, in  view  of  its  primary  findings,
such was simply not necessary. So, I have concluded that  the  tribunal  did
err in law and that it did so in a way which was capable of  impacting  upon
the outcome. I have decided, therefore, as I informed  the  parties  at  the
hearing, that its decision has to be set aside.

9.     There  was  then  a  brief  discussion   regarding   disposal.   Both
representatives were of the view that the most appropriate course of  action
would be remittal to the tribunal for a  complete  rehearing.  I  agree  and
that is what I have decided to do. As to that, I would  simply  direct  that
there  be  a  complete  rehearing  of  the  appeal,  before  a   differently
constituted tribunal, on a date  to  be  fixed.  I  shall  leave  any  other
directions for the appropriate Judge within the First-tier Tribunal.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  of
law and is set aside. Further,  the  case  is  remitted  to  the  First-tier
Tribunal for reconsideration by way of a complete rehearing.


M R Hemingway
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
3 December 2018




Anonymity

The claimant is granted anonymity under rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008. No report of these proceedings  shall  identify
the claimant or any member of her family. This grant  applies  to  both  the
claimant and the Secretary of State. Any breach  may  lead  to  contempt  of
court proceedings.


M R Hemingway
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
3 December 2018

