
                                    [pic]

Upper Tier Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11340/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House              |Decision and Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 1 April 2019                   |On 04 April 2019                       |
|                                              |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup


                                   Between

                                SUNNY KHURANA
                       [Anonymity direction not made]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr G Lee, instructed by Dean Mansons Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the appellant's  appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal  Judge  Moore  promulgated  31.10.18,  dismissing  his  appeal
    against the decision of the  Secretary  of  State,  dated  12.9.18,  to
    refuse his claim for international protection.

 2. The appellant claims to be at risk on return to  India  on  grounds  of
    religion. He asserts that having being raised as a Hindu in  India,  he
    became a convert to  Islam  in  the  UK  following  a  relationship  he
    established in 2013 with a married Muslim woman of British  nationality
    with three children. She introduced the appellant to  Islam  and  after
    several years' study in 2018  he  was  issued  with  a  certificate  of
    conversion. It  is  claimed  that  her  husband  found  out  about  the
    relationship in 2015 with the result that the appellant  was  attacked,
    sustaining serious injury.

 3. First-tier Tribunal Judge  Lambert  refused  permission  to  appeal  on
    3.12.18. However,  when  the  application  was  renewed  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal, Upper Tribunal Judge  Chalkley  granted  permission,  on  the
    basis that serious complaints have been made concerning the conduct  of
    the hearing by the First-tier Tribunal Judge (as to the  appearance  of
    bias and improper questioning of the appellant and his partner).  Judge
    Chalkley also issued a number of directions, putting the appellant  and
    his representatives on notice that complaints of  bias  against  judges
    are considered very serious and that they would be put to strict  proof
    of the allegations.

 4. I am satisfied that the appellant's representatives have done all  they
    can to comply with those directions and the tribunal  is  grateful  for
    the consolidated bundle comprising  38  pages  of  relevant  documents,
    lodged  in  good  time.  This  includes  witness  statements  from  the
    appellant, his partner, and their representative  at  the  hearing.  In
    addition, I have had regard to the refusal decision giving rise to  the
    appeal.

 5. Judge Moore has also been contacted for comment and his responses  have
    been incorporated in the bundle in the form  of  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    O'Connor's Memorandum, date 4.3.19. In summary,  Judge  Moore  entirely
    refutes the allegations made as to his conduct of the appeal hearing.

 6. Mr Tarlow explained that the Home Office was represented at the  First-
    tier Tribunal appeal hearing by Ms H Marshall of counsel,  rather  than
    by  a  Home  Office  Presenting   Officer.   Whilst   the   appellant's
    representatives wrote to the Home  Office  to  invite  Ms  Marshall  to
    provide  a  statement  of  truth,  as  suggested  in  Judge  Chalkley's
    directions, none has been forth coming. Mr Tarlow  was  unable  to  say
    whether Ms Marshall had been approached or not. He  also  indicated  in
    reply to my enquiry that there was no note in the Home Office case file
    from the hearing that referenced the issues raised as  to  the  judge's
    alleged conduct.

 7.  In  his  oral  submissions,  Mr  Lee  elaborated  on  the  grounds  of
    application for permission to appeal. He advanced  two  grounds,  first
    that the judge took impermissible  matters  into  account,  namely  the
    appellant's demeanour, and second, that the  way  in  which  the  judge
    conducted the hearing gave the impression of apparent bias.

 8. I was directed to [34] of the FTT decision where in  the  course  of  a
    very long paragraph, which would have been better broken down to two or
    three smaller paragraphs, the judge found the  appellant's  explanation
    of the differences between Islam and Hinduism  vague  and  limited.  In
    particular, the appellant's  responses  to  questions  about  the  Five
    Pillars of Islam was said to be poor, vague and limited. The judge went
    on to explain the reasons for this conclusion. The particular  sentence
    about which issue is taken is, "I found the appellant's evidence, which
    at times had long gaps, to be unreliable." The judge went  on  to  note
    the appellant's claimed explanation for taking some time to respond was
    that he was nervous. However, given the centrality  of  the  issue  the
    judge stated that he would have expected the answers to those questions
    to have been "almost immediate, or certainly within a reasonable period
    of time."

 9. Mr Lee relied on the recent decision of the  Court  of  Appeal  in  The
    Queen on the application of SS (Sri Lanka) v SSHD [2018] EWCA Civ 1391,
    where, in the course of addressing the primary  issue  about  delay  in
    promulgating a decision, from [33] onwards Lord  Justice  Leggatt  also
    addressed 'demeanour' as a reference to the appearance and behaviour of
    a witness in giving oral evidence, as opposed to  the  content  of  the
    evidence. At [36] it is stated that it has increasingly been recognised
    that it is usually unreliable and often dangerous to draw a  conclusion
    from a witness's demeanour as to the likelihood of that witness telling
    the truth. For example, it is queried whether the fact that  a  witness
    who speaks hesitantly is the mark of a cautious man,  whose  statements
    are for that reason to be respected, or is he taking time to fabricate?
    Further at [37]  it  was  stated  that  "the  reasons  for  distrusting
    reliance on demeanour are magnified where the witness is of a different
    nationality from the judge and is either speaking English as a  foreign
    language or is giving evidence through an  interpreter."  At  [41]  the
    Court of Appeal concluded, "No doubt  it  is  impossible,  and  perhaps
    undesirable,  to  ignore  altogether  the  impression  created  by  the
    demeanour of a witness giving evidence. But to attach  any  significant
    weight to  such  impressions  in  assessing  credibility  risks  making
    judgements which at best have no rational basis, and at  worse  reflect
    conscious or  unconscious  biases  and  prejudices.  One  of  the  most
    important qualities expected of a judge is that  they  will  strive  to
    avoid being influenced by  personal  biases  and  prejudices  in  their
    decision-making."

10. I have carefully considered the judge's remarks at [34] of the decision
    the light of Mr Lee's eloquent submissions to the effect that the judge
    took into account impermissible considerations  of  demeanour.  I  also
    note that in his response, the  Judge  confirmed  that  he  had  placed
    weight on the appellant's delay  and  hesitation  with  regard  to  the
    'Pillars,' but pointed  out  that  he  found  many  other  aspects  the
    appellant's  claim  to  lack  credibility  and  to  be  implausible  or
    unreliable. He then stated, "I do not accept that this singular concern
    has infected my decision so as to make it  unbiased.  As  I  stated  in
    paragraph [38] of my determination, it was as a result of  my  negative
    credibility findings [as a whole and not in any singular fashion]  that
    I was satisfied that  this  fundamentally  undermined  the  appellant's
    account, to the extent that I was unable to accept it."

11. On reflection, I cannot accept Mr Lee's submission on  this  point.  It
    was impossible for the judge to ignore the long gaps in the appellant's
    responses to questions in respect  of  a  central  tenet  of  Islam  in
    respect of which, given his claim to have  researched  Islam  for  some
    years, the judge considered he should have been able to make  immediate
    answer. I do not accept that the judge was  relying  generally  on  the
    appellant's demeanour in delay or hesitancy in answering  questions  as
    undermining  of  his  general  credibility,  but  it  was  relevant  in
    assessing the extent of his knowledge of a faith to which he claims  to
    have converted from  Hinduism  after  several  years'  study  that  the
    appellant's answers at times had long gaps  before  reply.  Within  the
    same paragraph, the judge makes allowance for the fact that  whilst  he
    was not able to give evidence about all the Five Pillars of  Islam,  he
    was able to respond in relation to most of them.

12. I am satisfied that the  judge  did  not  rely  the  demeanour  of  the
    appellant as indicative of a lack of credibility. No reference was made
    to such matters as eye contact, tone of  voice,  or  body  language  or
    anything of the sort. The key factor was the delay  in  responding.  As
    the judge's comments note, given the centrality of the Five Pillars  of
    Islam he expected a more immediate response to questions on that topic.



13. The second ground of complaint advanced by Mr Lee  related  to  whether
    the judge's conduct of the hearing  gave  rise  to  apparent  bias  and
    procedural unfairness. Noting that the judge refuted the allegation, Mr
    Lee distinguished apparent bias  from  actual  bias.  However,  it  was
    asserted that the judge entered  the  arena  and  questioned  both  the
    appellant and  his  partner  in  excessive  and  probing  intervention,
    raising  issues  not  raised  by  the  Home  Office's  representative's
    questions. It is suggested that the judge had a  closed  judicial  mind
    and acted more as the respondent than an impartial and fair judge.  For
    example, complaint is made  that  the  judge  unfairly  questioned  the
    appellant about the ending of  an  Islamic  prayer  and  used  his  own
    knowledge of Islam to effectively cross-examine the  appellant.  It  is
    clear that the judge relied on the apparent inability of the  appellant
    to recall how to verbally close the prayer by  stating  "May  peace  be
    upon you." However, at [34] it is recorded that the appellant stated he
    used the 'Learning to  Pray  Pocket  Guide'  to  assist  him  with  the
    important prayers of Islam. He said that whilst he prayed every morning
    and every night, because he was nervous he was not able to remember the
    prayer. In fact, the appellant produced the guide to the judge  at  the
    hearing and it appears that it was from the guide that the judge  asked
    the appellant how the prayer is concluded.  I  am  satisfied  that  the
    judge was not using or even trying to use his own knowledge of Islam on
    which to question the appellant. In the circumstances, the assertion in
    the appellant's statement that the judge used his own expert  knowledge
    and failed to remain impartial is not made out.

14. I have considered relevant case law on these  issues.  In  CD  (DRC)  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2011] EWCA  Civ  1425   the
    Court of Appeal said  that  the  test  of  bias  was  whether  all  the
    circumstances of  the  case  would  lead  a  fair-minded  and  informed
    observer to conclude  that  there  was  a  real  possibility  that  the
    Tribunal was biased: Porter v McGill [2001] UKHL 67 applied.

15. In Alubankudi (Appearance of bias) [2015] UKUT 00542 it was  held  that
    one of the important elements of apparent bias is that the hypothetical
    fair minded observer is properly informed and possessed of all material
    facts; and that the interface between the judiciary and society  is  of
    greater importance nowadays than it has ever been.   Judges  must  have
    their antennae tuned to the immediate and wider audiences, alert to the
    sensitivities and perceptions  of  others,  particularly  in  a  multi-
    cultural society.

16. In PA  (protection  claim:  respondent's  enquiries;  bias)  Bangladesh
    [2018] UKUT 337 it was held that : (1) An allegation of bias against  a
    judge is a serious matter and the  appellate  court  or  tribunal  will
    expect all proper steps to be taken by the person  making  it,  in  the
    light of a response from the judge; (2) The views of an  appellant  who
    cannot speak English and who has had no prior experience of  an  appeal
    hearing are unlikely to be  of  assistance,  insofar  as  they  concern
    verbal exchanges between the judge and representatives at  the  hearing
    of the appeal.  In  particular,  the  fact  that  the  judge  had  more
    questions  for  the  appellant's  counsel  than  for  the  respondent's
    presenting officer has no bearing  on  whether  the  judge  was  biased
    against the appellant; (3) It is wholly inappropriate for  an  official
    interpreter to have his or her private conversations with an  appellant
    put forward as evidence; (4) As a general matter, if Counsel  concludes
    during a hearing that a judge is behaving in an  inappropriate  manner,
    Counsel has a duty to raise this with the judge; (5) Although each case
    will turn on its own facts, an appellate court  or  tribunal  may  have
    regard to the fact that a complaint of this kind was not  made  at  the
    hearing or, at least, before receipt of the judge's decision.

17. Mr Lee drew  my  attention  to  the  witness  statement  of  the  legal
    representative at the appeal hearing, Mr Muzaffar  Mansoor,  solicitor.
    The statement asserts that during the hearing the  judge  made  several
    interventions during  the  examination  and  cross-examination  of  the
    witnesses. At [7] of the statement it is said that the judge  began  to
    ask some personal private questions to the appellant and  his  partner,
    "which she as a woman felt bad, shy and was reluctant to  respond."  Mr
    Mansoor considered that the questioning was "more sort of probing  than
    simply questioning." However, I note from the attached  contemporaneous
    notes of the hearing Mr Mansoor made no note  of  the  questioning  and
    evidently took no objection to it with the judge during the hearing. He
    did not attempt to stop or  challenge  the  judge's  questioning.  What
    appears to have happened is that  immediately  after  the  hearing  the
    appellant and his partner "expressed their serious concerns on the  way
    FTTJ probed them in relation to their  relations,  ex-husband,  meeting
    points and difference between Hindu and Islam  and  what  to  say  when
    prayer is finished or coming out of prayer.  They  said  FTTJ  was  too
    personal & acted as HO not independent."

18. It was unclear to me what was meant by the objection to  "personal  and
    private questioning." I invited Mr Lee to call evidence to clarify  the
    contention and the assertion of bias generally. Mr Mansoor adopted  his
    statement, referred to above, and was asked by Mr Lee what he meant  by
    personal, private questions. He said the  questions  were  directed  to
    their  relationship  and  that  he  the  partner  was  embarrassed  and
    reluctant to answer the questions. When I asked what was in  particular
    was inappropriate about the questions, Mr Mansoor said it was asking  a
    lady where she was meeting her partner and how her husband came to know
    about  the  relationship.  Asked  again  what  was  wrong  with   those
    questions, Mr Mansoor said 'because she didn't like to.' Asked a  third
    time what was inappropriate about the questions, he  said  it  was  the
    probing manner in  which  they  were  asked.  He  said  that  as  these
    questions had not been asked by the presenting officer,  he  felt  they
    shouldn't have been asked. He added that he  felt  the  way  they  were
    asked was more than mere fact-finding but  went  to  cross-examination.
    Asked what was wrong with the questions about religion, Mr Mansoor said
    that the appellant was naturally  slower  in  answering  questions.  He
    agreed that he had handed the prayer book to the judge  and  said  that
    with the book in hand the judge asked the appellant how  one  ends  the
    daily prayer, a question that had not  been  asked  by  the  presenting
    officer.

19. I invited Mr Lee to call further supporting evidence from the appellant
    and/or his partner. He decided that he would only call  the  appellant,
    who relied on his statement of 19.3.19. Asked by Mr Tarlow  about  what
    it was made him feel uneasy about the  line  of  questioning  which  he
    considered to be personal and private, the appellant said the questions
    asked of him were fine but the questions asked of his partner made  him
    feel uncomfortable. Asked to explain, he said these were questions such
    as where they met up with each other and that  she  felt  uncomfortable
    about them. Mr Tarlow suggested to him that the judge was doing no more
    than clarifying in his mind  the  facts  of  the  case,  to  which  the
    appellant responded that the judge had the right to ask those questions
    of him but repeated that the same questions put to his partner made him
    feel uncomfortable.

20. From the written and oral evidence adduced, I reach the conclusion that
    the basis of the complaint is that the appellant and  his  partner  are
    suggesting it was inappropriate to ask the partner, as a woman, details
    of their illicit relationship, such as where and when they met, and how
    her husband discovered her  infidelity,  because  those  were  personal
    matters and perhaps because of the  particular  feeling  that  a  woman
    should not be asked such delicate matters. It appears to have been  the
    embarrassment of the partner and certainly not that of the appellant at
    being asked such questions that is complained of; the appellant said he
    was fine with the judge asking him the same questions.  However,  I  am
    satisfied that the questions were material to the issues  in  the  case
    and the findings the judge had to make. Nothing in what  is  complained
    of suggests that the judge had closed his mind to the facts and  it  is
    not suggested that anything specifically said indicated the  judge  was
    biased against or prejudiced towards the  appellant  and  his  partner.
    Nothing Mr Mansoor said in evidence provided any further clarity as  to
    what could be regarded as inappropriate in the content of the question.
    From his contemporaneous note he appeared to have done little more than
    relay the concerns raised by the appellant and his partner.

21. Despite several opportunities being afforded, neither of the  witnesses
    nor Mr Lee has been able to articulate  what  in  particular  made  the
    questions or the way in which they were asked inappropriate. I reminded
    Mr Lee that as the finder of facts, the judge is  entitled  to  enquire
    into the facts and if it appears necessary  to  ask  questions  on  the
    relevant issues, even if the representative of the Home Office had  not
    done so. I am satisfied that  the  judge  was  entitled  to  ask  those
    questions, even if, and particularly if, they had not been asked by the
    Home Office presenting  officer  or  counsel.  Nothing  put  before  me
    suggests  that  the  way  in  which  the  questions  were   asked   was
    inappropriate or oppressive, or suggested a  'rigid'  approach  with  a
    mind made up, as has been suggested. I accept the point  that  to  some
    degree the issue of apparent bias must be viewed from the  eye  of  the
    informed observed. However, I am satisfied that the Judge was  properly
    looking for clarification of relevant factual issues and  was  entitled
    to ask the questions he did. He would perhaps have faced  criticism  if
    relevant questions to establish the facts  had  not  been  asked.  Even
    taking into account any cultural sensitivity,  that  the  appellant  or
    more probably his partner felt  somewhat  embarrassed  at  being  asked
    about the conduct of their illicit affair does not establish  even  the
    appearance of bias.

22. In the circumstances, I can find no material error in the  approach  or
    conduct of the judge in handling the appeal hearing in any of the  ways
    relied on in the grounds, or in any other way.

Decision

23. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law such that the decision  should
    be set aside.

     I do not set aside the decision.

                    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands  and  the
                    appeal remains dismissed.

     Signed   DMW Pickup

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated



Anonymity

I have  considered  whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  any
anonymity direction. No submissions were made on the issue.  The  First-tier
Tribunal did not make an order  pursuant  to  rule  13(1)  of  the  Tribunal
Procedure Rules 2014.
Given the circumstances, I make no anonymity order.




Fee Award         Note: this is not part of the determination.

I make no fee award.

Reasons: the appeal has been dismissed and therefore there  can  be  no  fee
award.


     Signed   DMW Pickup

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated


