
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11702/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On the 23rd February 2021                   |On the 29th June 2021           |
|                                            |                                |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                                     AJH
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER IN FORCE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Schwenk, Counsel instructed by Freedom
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms S Cunha, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules
       2008 I make an order prohibiting the disclosure or publication of
       any matter likely to lead members of the public to identify the
       appellant. Breach of this order can be punished as a contempt of
       court. I make this order because the appellant is an asylum seeker
       and is entitled to anonymity.

    2. This is an appeal by an Iranian Kurd against a decision of the
       respondent on 15 November 2019 refusing his protection claim.

    3. The First-tier Tribunal heard evidence and found that the appellant
       has been untruthful.  He claimed asylum on his arrival in the United
       Kingdom on 9 March 2018.  He said then that he was 17 years old,
       having been born in August 2000.  He was not believed by the local
       authority or by the judge although, as the judge noted at paragraph
       3, on any version of events the claimant was over 18 when he was
       interviewed about his claim on 14 June 2019.

    4. The claimant had no identity documents.  He said that he came from a
       border village near Iraq and was regularly involved in smuggling
       goods across the border.

    5. He said that he faced a real risk of persecution from the Iranian
       authorities because he is a supporter of the Komala Party and the
       authorities found items at his home near to the border with Iraq
       that he collected to pass on to his cousin who was a member of the
       Komala Party.

    6. The appellant claimed that his home was raided before the items were
       collected.  His father was beaten during the raid.  The appellant's
       brother-in-law was angry with the appellant for putting the family
       in danger but nevertheless helped him escape.

    7. The appellant has claimed to have attended three demonstrations
       against the Iranian regime outside the Iranian Embassy in London and
       to have posted photographs and comments on his Facebook page
       critical of the Iranian regime and its treatment of the Kurdish
       people.

    8. The judge did not believe the appellant's evidence about the home
       being raided and items being found there.  Neither did the judge
       believe the appellant's account of being "politicised by Kurdish
       politics, by his cousin or by anyone else."

    9. The judge noted the appellant relied on sur place activities which
       the judge described as "not extensive" but included attendance at
       three demonstrations outside the embassy.  There were photographs
       which the judge found did not show that the appellant aligned
       himself with a KDP group but the judge said:

  "I accept that he may have attended the embassy and turning away from the
  embassy held a photo of the Supreme leader with a red line across it.
  This Appellant has no adverse profile with the Iranian authorities.  I do
  not accept that the extent of his involvement with demonstrations outside
  the embassy can be viewed as sufficient to identify him or bring him to
  the adverse attention of the authorities before or after his return."

   10. The judge went on to say that there were only a limited number of
       Facebook posts covering only a short period of time mostly leading
       up to the hearing before her.  The judge found no way of knowing how
       long the pictures had been posted or if they had been placed and
       deleted immediately.

   11. Crucially, at paragraph 35 the judge said:

  "This Appellant has shown a propensity to lie when it is in his best
  interests.  I am not satisfied that he is genuinely committed to Kurdish
  politics.  I find that if questioned on his return about his Facebook
  account he will lie about it and he will ensure that any damaging
  materials have been removed from his Facebook account.  He is not
  politically driven and that will not be a betrayal of his conscience."

   12. However, the judge found that the claimant had left Iran illegally
       but was not satisfied that the post would expose him to real danger.

   13. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-
       Taylor, who, at paragraph 3 of his grounds, said:

  "I note that at [35] the judge found that if questioned on return about
  the Facebook account, the appellant would 'lie about it'.  This is
  arguably an erroneous view to have taken.  The point is covered by ground
  3."

   14. It is, I think, apt to remind myself that the decision that a person
       cannot be expected to lie about their loyalties and beliefs when
       confronted by the authorities is not some kind of urban myth but is
       based very firmly on a particularly authoritative decision of the
       Court of Appeal in RT (Zimbabwe) [2010] EWCA Civ 1285.  Clearly, it
       would substantially diminish the role of the role of the Refugee
       Convention in protecting people from persecution if their claims
       could be answered by telling them to go back to their country of
       nationality and deny the beliefs, opinions or characteristics that
       create the risk.  Any lurking doubt on this point was resolved by
       the Supreme Court in HJ (Iran) v SSHD [2010] UKSC 31.  However, that
       does not apply seamlessly to the case of someone who has pretended
       to have certain characteristics or professed certain beliefs but who
       would not be required to deny their true fundamental identity or
       opinions to avoid persecution because in truth they had never
       adopted such things.  The point was considered by the Court of
       Appeal in TM (Zimbabwe) v SSHD [2010] EWCA Civ 916.  The decision in
       TM (Zimbabwe) was scrutinised in RT (Zimbabwe).  At paragraph 33
       Carnwath LJ (as he then was) set out paragraph 41 of the judgment in
       TM (Zimbabwe) where Elias LJ said:

  "41.   On that analysis, there is a good case for saying that where the
  activity which would create the risk of persecution is the need to deny
  disloyalty to a political party by someone whose political interests or
  activities are of marginal interest to their lives, this engages only the
  margins of their human rights and the AIT would be entitled to conclude
  that they would in fact be, and could be expected to be, less than frank
  with the Zimbabwe authorities.  They would not be required to modify
  their beliefs or opinions in any real way.  It is one thing for a person
  to be compelled to deny a crucial aspect of his identity affecting his
  whole way of life, as in HJ.  Furthermore, the individual is then forced
  into a permanent state of denial.  The Supreme Court found it
  unacceptable that someone should have to live a lie in order to avoid
  persecution.  It does not necessarily follow that in no circumstances can
  someone be expected to tell a lie to avoid that consequence."

   15. This is exactly the approach adopted by the First-tier Tribunal
       Judge in this case.  The judge has found that the appellant is
       dishonest and that he would be dishonest with the authorities in
       Iran if they challenged him and would not be denying something
       fundamental to him by denying any support for or interest in
       Kurdistan separatism.

   16. It is an approach that was disapproved in RT (Zimbabwe).  I set out
       below paragraphs 35 and 36 of the judgment in RT (Zimbabwe).  The
       court said:

  "35.   In the present cases, whether or not the point was properly raised
  at the earlier stages, we think we should grapple with it, since it is of
  considerable practical importance to many people in a similar position to
  that of the appellants.  As we understand it, neither party objects to us
  doing so. Although we do not find the point an easy one, we have
  concluded that the distinction suggested by Elias LJ, and developed in Mr
  Payne's submissions, is not valid, nor supported by a proper reading of
  Sir John Dyson's comments.

  36.    It may be said that there is marked difference in seriousness
  between the impact of having to lie on isolated occasions about political
  opinions which one does not have, and the 'long-term deliberate
  concealment' of an 'immutable characteristic', involving denial to the
  members of the group their 'fundamental right to be what they are' (see
  per Lord Hope para 11, 21).  We are not persuaded, however, that this is
  a material distinction in this context. The question is not the
  seriousness of the prospective maltreatment (which is not in issue) but
  the reason for it.  If the reason is political opinion, or imputed
  political opinion, that is enough to bring it within the Convention.  In
  this case, we are concerned with the 'imputed' political opinions of
  those concerned, not their actual opinions (see para 4 above).
  Accordingly, the degree of their political commitment in fact, and
  whether political activity is of central or marginal importance to their
  lives, are beside the point.  The 'core' of the protected right is the
  right not to be persecuted for holding political views which they do not
  have.  There is nothing 'marginal' about the risk of being stopped by
  militia and persecuted because of that.  If they are forced to lie about
  their absence of political beliefs, solely in order to avoid persecution,
  that seems to us to be covered by the HJ (Iran) principle, and does not
  defeat their claims to asylum.

  37.    Accordingly we accept the thrust of Mr Norton-Taylor's second
  submission, if not the precise wording.  It is not a question of what the
  claimant is 'required' to do.  However, if the Tribunal finds that he or
  she would be willing to lie about political beliefs, or about the absence
  of political beliefs, but that the reason for lying is to avoid
  persecution, that does not defeat the claim."

   17. I have reminded myself of Ms Cunha's submissions and also the Rule
       24 notice signed by Ms Rhona Pettersen, Senior Home Office
       Presenting Officer, and dated 9 July 2020.  I incline to the view
       that it is not a material error for the judge to have referred to
       "KDP" when the judge should have referred to "Komala".  It is
       clearly a mistake that ought not to have happened but the judge's
       point lay in the sincerity of the opposition rather than the name of
       the party.

   18. I cannot follow the judge's reasoning at all about the possibility
       of the Facebook entries being deleted almost as soon as they had
       been posted.  There is evidence of some limited circulation and
       evidence of them being kept on the record at least from posting in
       August 2018 until the print-off in January 2020.  However, these
       things are peripheral.  What the judge has not considered properly
       is the risk generated by the appellant being interviewed in the
       event of his return.  It is almost certain that he would be
       interviewed.  He has been out of the country some time, he is a Kurd
       and he would be travelling from the United Kingdom.  In the guidance
       given in HB (Kurds) Iran CG [2018] UKUT 430 (IAC) the Tribunal was
       clear to emphasise how very low level involvement might create a
       risk and used the phrase "hair-trigger" to describe the attitude of
       the authorities.

   19. I have already indicated that it was not open to the judge to say
       that the applicant could defeat the claim by lying.  That was
       clearly a misdirection.

   20. I have no hesitation in saying the First-tier Tribunal erred in law
       and setting aside its decision.

   21. Further, after giving the matter considerable thought, I have
       decided that this is an appeal that has to be allowed on its own
       facts.  The appellant is a Kurd.  He will be returned in
       circumstances that attract attention.  He will be questioned.  He
       may very well be inclined to lie.  That has been established
       uncontroversially on the evidence.  However, it is equally plain
       that he is a rather bad liar because he has been identified as
       dishonest both by the Secretary of State and by the First-tier
       Tribunal.  There really is no reason to think that he would be any
       more successful in his efforts to deceive the immigration
       authorities in Iran.  He can be expected to be asked about any
       political activity in which he was involved and he will not know how
       much the Iranian authorities know.  There is no direct evidence that
       they have photographed him or otherwise recorded of him or any way
       of identifying him but the doubt must be there.  He risks a lot by
       making a flat denial of any political involvement and as I have
       already indicated, he cannot be expected to do that.  He is somebody
       who faces a real risk of being interrogated and that interrogation
       revealing political activity opposing the Iranian regime and
       promoting Kurdistan separatism albeit he says insincerely.

   22. The reaction of the authorities in the event of the appellant's
       return to Iran is hard to predict. They might be indifferent but if
       they are not then he risks severe consequences.

   23. I am quite satisfied that there is a real risk to this man being
       identified as a political opponent and persecuted in the event of
       his return, not because his circumstances are meritorious but
       because the Iranian regime has little patience or indulgence towards
       its opponents.

   24. I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal and I substitute
       a decision allowing the appeal.

Notice of Decision

   25. The First-tier Tribunal erred in law. I set aside its decision and I
       substitute a decision allowing his appeal.



                              Jonathan Perkins
|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 25 June 2021                   |




