
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Number:
PA/11629/2016
                                                                 Extempore
                                  judgement

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |       Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 22 May 2017                        |       On 25 May 2017                 |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM


                                   Between

                                     DM
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms P Yong, Counsel instructed by Wimbledon
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   DM is a citizen of Sri Lanka and his  date  of  birth  is  12  December
    2003. He was aged 13 at the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal.  He
    made application for asylum and this was refused by  the  Secretary  of
    State in a decision  of  7  October  2016.  He  appealed  against  that
    decision and his appeal  was  dismissed  by  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Malcolm, in a decision dated 6 March 2017, following a hearing
    at Hatton Cross on 7 February 2017.   Permission  was  granted  to  the
    Appellant by Designated Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Macdonald on 3
    April 2017. Thus the matter came before me.

2.   DM's evidence in a nutshell is that on 15 January 2016 his  father  was
    arrested and detained by the  authorities  as  a  result  of  his  LTTE
    (historic) involvement. Following this, approximately two weeks  later,
    the Appellant's mother was informed by neighbours  that  men  had  come
    looking  for  the  family.  She  was  scared  and  believes  that   the
    authorities want to now take her eldest son, DM. Arrangements were made
    for him to leave Sri Lanka.  The Appellant gave evidence at the hearing
    and relied on the witness statement of his mother.  The  judge  made  a
    number of findings. For the  purposes  of  this  decision  the  salient
    findings are those at paragraphs 90, 94 -111 which reads as follows:-

         "90. The evidence in this case is in  fairly  short  compass.   The
             relevant evidence is that the Appellant lived in  family  with
             his parents and three younger siblings until the arrest of his
             father in  January  2016.   Since  then  his  father  has  not
             returned home, it is his mother's  belief  that  he  has  been
             killed.
         ...


         94.  The appellant is very young and I  accepted  that  he  had  no
             further information  which  he  was  able  to  add  about  his
             father's involvement with the LTTE other than what he had been
             told by his mother.  The evidence of this was again relatively
             brief, the evidence being that his father and  mother  married
             in 2001, his father had been involved with  the  LTTE  between
             1995 and 2000 but there was no  detail  available  as  to  the
             level of his involvement.


         95.  The respondent has not accepted the evidence of the arrest and
             detention of the appellant's father.   The  only  evidence  of
             this is the information provided by  the  appellant  (being  a
             reporting of the information of facts giving (sic) to  him  by
             his mother) as  now  supplemented  by  the  witness  statement
             provided by the appellant's mother.


         96.  I have taken into  account  the  age  of  the  appellant  when
             assessing his evidence.  I accept the appellant's evidence  as
             being entirely consistent.  The evidence which is relevant  to
             his asylum claim (his father's involvement with the  LTTE)  is
             based on information provided to him by his mother.


         97.  The evidence which  the  appellant  is  able  to  give  direct
             evidence about is of his contact  with  his  mother.   In  his
             statement it is stated that he speaks to  his  mother  once  a
             week however at the tribunal it was his evidence that he spoke
             to her perhaps once a month or every two months.   It  may  be
             that there was a time when the appellant was speaking  to  his
             mother on a weekly basis but it is  now  less  frequent.   The
             appellant was also consistent that he did not have  a  contact
             number for his mother  and  that  his  mother  telephoned  his
             cousin's house, this was also corroborated by the evidence  of
             his cousin.


         98.  I accepted from the evidence  that  the  appellant  does  have
             contact with his mother when she contacts his cousin's house.


         99.  I considered it was also relevant however that the appellant's
             cousin was able to make contact with the appellant's mother by
             contacting  the  appellant's   grandmother.    I   accordingly
             considered it reasonable to assess that the applicant would be
             able to make contact with his mother.


         100. The appellant has however given evidence that he  has  had  no
             contact with his father since the arrest in 2016  and  viewing
             the evidence overall I accept that the appellant's father  did
             disappear in January 2016.


         101. I considered that it was highly relevant to establish  whether
             there was any ongoing interest.  In the  appellant's  mother's
             statement she has stated that some two weeks after her husband
             was arrested she was told by a neighbour that the  authorities
             had come to her house.  This was  the  only  evidence  of  any
             further visits with no  information  being  given  as  to  the
             reasons for these visits however  as  a  result  of  this  the
             appellant's mother has taken to moving to  various  relative's
             homes.  In addition various family members they also at  other
             occasions returned to their own home.  I  considered  that  if
             the appellant's mother was as fearful as claimed by  her  that
             she would not under any  circumstances  have  had  the  family
             return to the family home.


         102. I accept that the  appellant's  mother  and  grandfather  made
             arrangements for the appellant to leave Sri Lanka,  the  issue
             is whether the appellant is at risk.


         103. I have given consideration to the country guidance case of  GJ
             which sets out in paragraph 356(7) the risk categories.


         104. It is accepted that the  appellant  has  never  had  any  LTTE
             involvement.


         105. The basis of the claim is that  he  is  at  risk  due  to  his
             father's involvement.


         106. Arrangements were made for the appellant to  leave  Sri  Lanka
             with the assistance of an agent.  It was submitted by Ms  Yong
             that the very fact of the appellant returning to Sri Lanka  as
             a failed asylum seeker and as a minor would of itself  trigger
             adverse interest in him.


         107. Submissions were made on the  human  rights  position  in  Sri
             Lanka  and  the  treatment  of  children  however  I  was  not
             persuaded that I could ignore the country guidance case and do
             not find that the appellant  falls  within  any  of  the  risk
             categories in GJ.


         108. If the evidence is accepted at  its  highest  the  appellant's
             father was a member of the LTTE, he was  arrested  in  January
             2016 due to LTTE involvement and  has  not  been  seen  since.
             Thereafter authorities attended at the family home  and  since
             then the appellant's mother has moved from place to  place  to
             avoid contact with the authorities.


         109. The appellant's mother took the step of having  the  appellant
             removed from Sri Lanka as she perceived that he was in danger.


         110. I consider that the fear expressed by the  appellant's  mother
             is as suggested by Mr Olaobaju, speculative and  having  fully
             considered the case of GJ and the other background information
             provided by the appellant's representatives I  simply  do  not
             consider  that  the  country  guidance  case  of  GJ  can   be
             overridden and accordingly do  not  find  that  the  appellant
             falls within any of the risk categories.


         111. For these reasons I  consider  the  appellant's  asylum  claim
             cannot succeed."

3.   The grounds (particularly ground 1)  are  unnecessarily  protracted.  I
    intend to start with ground 2 which argues that  the  judge  failed  to
    make findings of fact pertinent to the Appellant's  claim.  I  conclude
    that the judge  made  an  error  of  law  because  there  is  no  clear
    unequivocal finding in relation to the core of the Appellant's  account
    which is that his father was a member of the LTTE and that this led  to
    his arrest in January 2016.  Although the judge accepts that his father
    disappeared, he does not make a proper finding about the cause of this.
    This is material to a finding in respect of interest by the authorities
    in the Appellant. Whilst, I do not accept that a finding was  not  made
    in respect of interest in the Appellant (it can be reasonably  inferred
    from paragraph 101 that the judge did not  accept  this),  the  problem
    with the judge's finding (at paragraph 101) is that  it  is  not  clear
    whether or not the judge considered ongoing interest in the context  of
    the Appellant's father having been arrested as an LTTE  member  or  not
    because there is no clear finding about this. The judge  has  not  made
    sufficient findings of fact on material matters.

4.   I have taken into account the  findings  at  paragraph  108  where  the
    judge sets out the Appellant's claim "at its highest", but in  my  view
    this does not rectify the problem because the  assessment  of  risk  on
    return conducted by the  judge  (which  simply  amounts  to  the  judge
    concluding that the Appellant does not  fall  within  a  risk  category
    identified  by  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  GJ),  does  not  engage  with
    perception of the Appellant by the authorities, if  indeed  his  father
    has been detained by the authorities as a result  of  involvement  with
    LTTE activities. To this extent, there is merit in ground 1.

Notice of Decision

5.   The errors are material. I set aside the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal to dismiss the appeal.  The matter needs to  be  heard  afresh
    and in my view the First-tier Tribunal is the appropriate venue because
    there needs to be an  extensive  fact-finding  assessment.  I  gave  an
    extempore judgement and Mr Whitwell indicated his agreement with me  in
    respect of venue. Ms Yong and the Appellant had decided not  to  remain
    in court.

6.      I remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal for the appeal  to  be
    reheard de novo.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                 Joanna McWilliam               Date 23 May 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam








