
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11318/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House via Skype for Business   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On Thursday 25 February 2021                  |On 18 March 2021              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                                   T E S G
                                                                   Appellant
                                    -and-

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms U Sood, Counsel acting on a direct access basis
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.

Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
An anonymity order was made by the  First-tier  Tribunal.   As  this  appeal
involves a protection claim, I consider it is appropriate to  continue  that
order.  Unless  and  until  a  Tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
Appellant is  granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.  This
direction applies, amongst others, to both parties. Failure to  comply  with
this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

BACKGROUND

1. The Appellant appeals against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
   O R Williams promulgated on 23 March 2020 ("the Decision"). By the
   Decision, the Judge dismissed the Appellant's appeal against the
   Respondent's decision dated 17 October 2019 refusing her protection and
   human rights claims but accepting those as fresh claims.  This is the
   second appeal brought by the Appellant.  Her first appeal was dismissed
   by the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Tynan) in July 2016 and upheld on
   onward appeal by the Upper Tribunal (Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle).
   The Appellant's two children are dependents on her claim.


2. The Appellant is a national of Egypt.  It is accepted that she is a
   Coptic Christian.  She claims that she and her family were targeted in
   Egypt by a Salafist preacher ("SG").  The Judge took as his starting
   point the previous appeal decision as he was bound to do.  He accepted
   that the Appellant is a Copt.  He also accepted that the Appellant would
   be at risk from SG if she chose to return to the district of Cairo where
   SG lived and where the Appellant had previously resided with her husband
   and children but concluded that the Appellant could safely and reasonably
   relocate within Egypt ([19] of the Decision).  He found that SG would not
   be able to trace the Appellant via the police in Egypt.  The Judge did
   not accept the Appellant's case that her husband (who remains in Egypt)
   has been attacked in order to obtain information about the Appellant and
   her children nor that he is in hiding in fear of Islamist groups.  The
   Judge did not accept as genuine documents purporting to show that the
   Appellant is wanted by the Muslim Brotherhood.  Whilst the Judge accepted
   that the Appellant's parents and sisters were recognised as refugees in
   the UK in 2012, he did not accept that this had any bearing on the
   Appellant's case.

3. The Judge treated the Appellant as a vulnerable witness.  The
   Appellant's daughter [C] also suffers from mental health problems.  The
   Judge dealt with the evidence in that regard at [27] to [30] of the
   Decision but did not accept that return to Egypt would breach Articles 3
   or 8 ECHR.  The appeal was dismissed on all grounds.

4. The grounds of appeal are discursive but may be summarised as follows:

   1) The Judge has ignored the Appellant's account that she has reported
      sensitive information to the police in the UK.  That information is
      said to be the identification of one of her attackers in Egypt from a
      YouTube video showing an attack on another Christian woman.
   2) The Judge has failed to take into account some of the medical evidence
      which attributes [C]'s mental health problems to fears for her father
      in Egypt and fears of what will happen to her on return rather than,
      as the Judge is said to have concluded, being based on separation from
      her father.  For that reason, it is said that the Judge has failed
      properly to assess the impact of return on [C]'s mental health.
   3) The Judge has failed properly to assess the relevance of the grant of
      asylum to the Appellant's parents and sister.
   4) The Judge has failed to consider an argument of risk generally to
      Copts.
   5) The Judge has failed to take into account the Respondent's failure to
      consider her section 55 duty to assess the best interests of the
      child.
   6) The Judge has failed to take into account the relationship between the
      Appellant's children and her sister.  It is said that her sister has
      been appointed as their "testamentary and spiritual guardian" and that
      this, coupled with the impact of the Appellant's inability to parent
      because of her mental health problems, has not been considered when
      looking at the position on return.
   7) The Judge has not considered any breach of Article 3 ECHR in relation
      to [C].

5. Permission to appeal was refused by First-tier Tribunal Judge Kelly on
   14 May 2020 in the following terms:


         "The grounds make little sense given that they complain that the
         Tribunal failed to engage with the many and varied legal
         submissions made by their author at the hearing whilst
         simultaneously purporting to be 'holding grounds' pending receipt
         of a legible copy of the Tribunal's decision.  It is not in any
         event arguable that the Tribunal failed to deal with those legal
         issues that were relevant and necessary for the just determination
         of an appeal against refusal of an international protection and
         human rights claim.  The complaint that the Tribunal failed to
         adjudicate upon the alleged failure of the respondent to consider
         the welfare of a child under section 55 of the 2009 Act is entirely
         misconceived given that (a) it is no longer a ground of appeal that
         the respondent's decision was 'not in accordance with the law' (see
         sections 82 and 84 of the 2002 Act as amended by sections 15 and 16
         of the Immigration Act 2014), (b) the authorities cited in support
         of this ground were decided in relation to appeals where this
         ground of appeal was still available (ie prior to the amendments
         referred to above) and (c) the Tribunal specifically considered
         section 55 for itself.  Permission to appeal is accordingly
         refused."


6. The application was renewed on the same grounds to this Tribunal.  The
   Appellant however raised an additional ground namely that the Judge "had
   omitted to evaluate the additional risk (raised as a preliminary issue at
   the hearing) from the Appellant's evidence recently identifying a
   perpetrator".   As I understand it from the footnote, this is the issue
   which I summarised as ground (1) above.


7. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor
   on 30 July 2020 as follows so far as relevant:

         "... 2.  With respect to the author of the grounds, they are not
         the easiest to follow. One element of them is what is said to be an
         'additional risk' in respect of the appellant's claimed
         identification of a 'perpetrator'.  If this matter was properly put
         before the judge, it is arguable that he has not dealt with it.
         Counsel will need to provide a copy of her notes of the hearing
         and/or a witness statement in respect of this proposed challenge.
         3.   On the face of it, there does not appear to be any great merit
         in the other grounds.  However, I am granting permission in respect
         of all of them."

   Although Judge Norton-Taylor provisionally indicated that the error of
   law hearing should proceed on a face-to-face basis, following submissions
   made on behalf of the Appellant, Upper Tribunal Judge Kekic directed on
   15 October 2020 that the hearing should proceed as a remote hearing.


8. So it is that the matter comes before me to determine whether the
   Decision contains an error of law and, if I so conclude, to either re-
   make the decision or remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal to do
   so.  The hearing before me was conducted via Skype for Business.  There
   were no major technical difficulties affecting the conduct of the
   hearing. In addition to the representatives, the Appellant also attended
   remotely but did not participate.  In addition to the Appellant's bundle
   to which I refer below as [AB/xx] I also had the Respondent's bundle, the
   Appellant's skeleton argument before Judge Williams and a skeleton
   argument produced by Ms Sood for the hearing before me.

DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS

9. As noted by Judge Norton-Taylor, the grounds are discursive.  Whilst I
   have attempted to summarise the grounds as pleaded at [4] above, it is
   most convenient to break down the issues into the order in which they
   were taken at the hearing which broadly separates them into the
   challenges to the Judge's consideration of the protection claim first and
   the human rights claim second.

PROTECTION GROUNDS


10. The first part of the Decision is concerned with the previous appeal
   decision which Judge Williams rightly notes at [15] of the Decision
   should be her starting point (per Devaseelan).  At [16] of the Decision,
   Judge Williams summarises the findings made by Judge Tynan in 2016.  At
   [17] of the Decision, Judge Williams sets out the salient passage from
   the decision of Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle, upholding Judge
   Tynan's decision.


11. Thereafter, from [18] to [23] of the Decision, Judge Williams focusses
   on the facts of the protection claim which have occurred since the
   earlier appeal.  It is convenient to set that passage out in full since
   the Appellant's grounds take issue with much of what is there said:


         "18. I do not accept the appellant's claim that since the previous
         determinations facts have happened which when taken into account by
         myself should lead me to a different conclusion for the following
         reasons [�19-23]:
         19.  It is reasonably likely that the appellant would be at real
         risk from [SG] (whom she has identified as still being alive after
         having seen him on a television report - she reported her concerns
         to the police in the United Kingdom (AB3-1) if she chose to return
         to the Shobra district of Cairo.  However, I see no reason to
         depart from Judge Tynan/Doyle's findings that the appellant would
         be able to internally relocate to reside in Alexandria or Tanta
         province or Nasr city.  Judge Tynan specifically quoted from
         country guidance information about the 'increased level of violence
         against Copts in the immediate aftermath of the ousting of
         President Morsi', and whilst this was the previous Country
         Information and Guidance - Egypt, Christians I note the current
         version from 2017 does not report such levels of risk/violence
         against Copts to lead me to conclude that there are 'very strong
         ground supported by cogent evidence' (SG (Iraq) v SSHD [2012] EWCA
         Civ 940 [2013] 1 WLR 41 such that I should depart from the country
         guidance case of MS regarding internal relocation.  Specifically
         (my emphasis):
         2.2.5    Following the case of MS, which relied on evidence up to
         the end of 2013, the political, security and social situation for
         Christians improved up to 2015.  However during 2016 and early 2017
         there has been an increase in nonstate sectarian violence against
         Christians (see State attitude and treatment and Societal attitudes
         and treatment).
         2.2.6    Whilst some laws reportedly discriminate against
         Christians - Copts appear more likely to face prosecution and
         conviction for blasphemy than Muslims - the Al Sisi Government has
         sought to improve law and order, and has taken several highly
         visible steps towards bettering state relations with, and to
         provide support for, the Coptic community.  Christians are not
         generally at risk of persecution or serious harm from the state
         (see Legal rights and State attitude and treatment).
         2.2.7    Christians continue, however, to face societal
         discrimination and some violence.  The number and severity of
         violent incidents targeting Copts and their property has increased
         since 2015.  This includes attacks by Daesh (aka Islamic State),
         which stated its intent to target Christians and claimed
         responsibility for high profile bombings in Cairo, Alexandria and
         Tanta in December 2016 and April 2017 resulting in scores of
         casualties (see Societal attitudes and treatment).
         2.2.8    Christians are in general not at risk of persecution or
         serious harm by nonstate actors in urban areas, including in Cairo
         and Alexandria.  However, Christians in some rural or poorer areas,
         particularly those with a strong extremist presence, where there
         have been recent attacks on churches and Christian properties,
         continue to face discrimination and ill-treatment by nonstate
         actors that may amount to persecution.
         20.  Furthermore, Dr Rebwar Fatah Expert's report dated 23rd
         October 2017 (the respondent's representative conceded that Dr
         Rebwar Fatah was an expert) does no more than confirming that
         Coptic Christians are increasingly being targeted as victims of
         violent attacks in Egypt - as also noted by Judge Tynan, '81.
         Coptic Christians have increasingly come under targeted violence in
         Egypt ...' but confirms the viability of internal relocation '138.
         Christians who were at risk of targeted violence relocated to
         Ismailia and elsewhere in Egypt in large numbers.'
         21.  I have given anxious scrutiny as to whether the appellant and
         the family would be specifically targeted by [SG]/ Salafi groups
         and conclude that they would not be.  I reach that conclusion as
         there is no evidence of [SG] having any influence outside of Cairo.
          Specifically Dr Rebwah Fatah makes no specific findings regarding
         [SG] but rather speculates (my emphasis), '142 If [SG] is an
         influential figure within the Sufi movement, it is possible that he
         could become aware of [the appellant's] location if she is a person
         of particular interest to him'.
         22.  I have given anxious scrutiny as to whether the appellant and
         the family would be specifically targeted by [SG] via the Salafi
         movement/ other agents and conclude they would not be.  I reach
         that conclusion as whilst Dr Rebwar Fatah opines '88. The Salafi
         movement is active through organisations' /94...prevalent within
         political, religious, and charitable spheres/102...has a network of
         hundreds of religious preachers' Dr Rebwar Fatah finds that the
         influence of Salafi groups is 'marginalised' with a 'licence to
         preach' limiting 'influence' (paragraphs 96-98) with Dr Rebwar
         Fatah opining that 'it is unlikely for [SG]to have influence within
         the security forces for his status alone'.
         23.  I have given anxious scrutiny as to whether the appellant and
         the family would be specifically targeted by [SG] via the police
         and conclude they would not be.  I reach that conclusion as Dr
         Rebwar Fatah's report is speculative 'While it is unlikely for [SG]
         to have influence within the security forces for his status alone,
         it may be possible for such a figure to have influence over an
         individual police officer if his personal beliefs are sympathetic
         to the Salafi ideology.' However, that finding is speculative since
         as discussed above, Dr Rebwar Fatah makes no specific findings
         regarding [SG] bur rather speculates (my emphasis), '142 If [SG] is
         an influential figure within the Sufi movement, it is possible that
         he could become aware of [the appellant's] location if she is a
         person of particular interest to him'.  Moreover, the central issue
         to this case is that the appellant could relocate to avoid coming
         into contact with [SG] and hence any potential problem from an
         individual corrupt police officer."


12. I begin with the ground which forms the focus of the grant of
   permission to appeal, namely the additional claim made that the Appellant
   would be at risk due to a report made to the Sussex police about the
   perpetrator of an attack on her whilst she was in Egypt.  It is said that
   she identified that perpetrator from the report of another attack on an
   unconnected individual which appears on YouTube.


13. There is no evidence from Ms Sood about the way in which this was
   raised with the Judge as Judge Norton-Taylor had envisaged when he
   granted permission.  I accept however that this was not necessary as the
   Decision does refer to this additional claim albeit obliquely.


14. Ms Sood's skeleton argument before Judge Williams says that the
   Appellant identified via this video "a suspect in one of the attacks on
   her family".  Ms Sood told me that the Appellant in fact identified an
   individual who had attacked her and not her family albeit the attacker is
   not said to be [SG].  The Appellant's updated witness statement dated 3
   February 2020 at [AB/1-26] in this regard says the following:


         "8.  Recent Risk Evidence An incident happened 2 weeks ago in Cairo
         which was reported in the media when a man attacked a Christian
         lady in the street and he tried to slaughter her but she survived
         and the accident appears on the street CCTV system.  When I saw the
         news and they showed the attacker's Egyptian ID with his photo, I
         realised that I recognised the man and he was one of the group who
         attacked me at home, and the media gave his name as [MR].  I spoke
         to my family and barrister and decided to let the local Sussex
         police in Brighton on 29th January know and pass the information on
         to the Egyptian police in case it helps.  They gave me a crime
         reference number: 0586, and will be in touch."


15. The only evidence about the report to the Sussex Police is a document
   dated 29 January 2020 at [AB/3-1] which gives a crime number.  It says
   nothing about the information given to the police.


16. Unfortunately, I was unable to view the YouTube video for myself as
   either the reference given in Ms Sood's skeleton argument is inaccurate
   or the video has been taken down.  Ms Sood told me that Judge Williams
   had been shown the video at the hearing.  There are no screenshots of the
   video.


17. Ms Sood informed me that the incident described in the Appellant's
   witness statement as shown on YouTube was a report of the man who the
   Appellant said attacked her being charged for another offence when he had
   held a knife to someone's throat.  I assume that is the reference to the
   attack on "a Christian lady" as the Appellant describes in her statement.
    If Ms Sood's description of the YouTube video is accurate and the report
   was of the man having been charged, that undermines rather than assists
   the Appellant as it would suggest that the authorities are willing and
   able to provide protection to Christians who are attacked by such
   individuals.


18. I recognise however that this is not something which is said by Judge
   Williams. Whether or not the video is suggestive of a sufficiency of
   protection, and notwithstanding the Judge's misunderstanding as to the
   identity of the individual recognised by the Appellant in what is said at
   [19] of the Decision (the Judge appears to have assumed it was [SG]), it
   cannot be said that the Judge ignored this aspect of the claim.  However,
   as with the Judge's findings more generally, the Judge did not need to go
   further than she did in relation to the incident because she found that
   the Appellant could be expected to internally relocate.  If the Judge was
   entitled to reach the conclusion she did regarding internal relocation,
   the "additional risk" is irrelevant.


19. Before I move on to the Appellant's criticism of the findings as to
   internal relocation, however, I make some additional observations about
   the incident on which the Appellant now relies.  First, as I have already
   pointed out above, there is no evidence other than the Appellant's
   witness statement about what was reported to the police.  There is no
   direct evidence from the Sussex police confirming the content of the
   report.  Ms Sood was unable to offer an update on any action taken by the
   Sussex Police.  Second, there was no evidence before Judge Williams at
   the previous hearing or before me now to show that the Sussex Police has
   taken any action in relation to the report and specifically to show that
   it has passed any information to the Egyptian authorities.  Third, even
   if the police has taken any action and has reported the matter to the
   Egyptian authorities, there is no evidence that it has or would have
   passed on the Appellant's name. Fourth, even if the matter was reported
   to them, there is no evidence that the Egyptian police has taken action
   based on that report.  Fifth, even if the Egyptian police has received
   the report and has utilised it in some way, there is no evidence that the
   Egyptian police has or would have informed the attacker of the
   Appellant's identity.  There is no suggestion that the Appellant has been
   approached by the Egyptian police to provide a statement or evidence in
   the charges against this attacker.  The risk said to arise to the
   Appellant from what she is said to have told the Sussex police is based
   on pure speculation.  There is no evidence from which a real risk could
   be found to exist.  The burden of proving a real risk lies with the
   Appellant even though that is only to the lower standard.  She has
   provided no evidence which could even conceivably show a real risk to her
   arising from the report.


20. Even if she were at risk, in any event, the Judge's finding at [19] of
   the Decision accepts that the Appellant is at risk from [SG].  That she
   may also be at risk from another individual in Cairo does not add
   anything to that finding, unless it is said that the other attacker is a
   more influential individual (as to which there is no evidence from Dr
   Fatah or otherwise and the evidence that the individual was being charged
   for another attack undermines any such suggestion).


21. The Judge's finding at [19] and following is therefore that the
   protection claim fails not due to lack of a risk to the Appellant but on
   the basis that she can internally relocate within Egypt.


22. In that regard, although Ms Sood initially sought to suggest that the
   Judge had ignored background material which the Appellant produced in
   evidence, she was constrained to accept that the only background evidence
   relied upon directly in her skeleton argument is the report of Dr Fatah.
   I begin with that report.  The criticism made at [10] of the grounds is
   that the Judge has unreasonably concluded that the Appellant can
   internally relocate given what is said at [81] and [102] to [106] of Dr
   Fatah's report about the increasing risk of targeting and violent attacks
   against Coptic Christians.


23. In relation to Dr Fatah's report, that is dated 23 October 2017 which
   is unsurprising since it was provided to the Respondent at that time.  It
   appears in the Respondent's bundle.  Notwithstanding suggestions on file
   that an adjournment or delay was sought in the course of this appeal to
   obtain an updated report, Ms Sood confirmed that there is no later
   report.  She said that this was because the Appellant could not afford to
   pay for one.  For that reason, though, Dr Fatah's consideration is
   limited to events occurring prior to October 2017 and therefore over
   three years ago (and over two years before the hearing before Judge
   Williams).


24. The Respondent's concession as to Dr Fatah's expertise may be somewhat
   generous given the description of his expertise which appears to concern
   mainly Afghanistan and Iraq.  As the Respondent notes in her decision
   letter, Dr Fatah has only recorded one visit to Egypt six years
   previously and he has carried out very few reports in relation to Egypt
   (and the content of those reports is not clear).  Whilst Judge Williams
   accepted Dr Fatah's expertise based on the Respondent's concession, it is
   notable that the information on which his report is based comes from
   published sources (rather than his own expertise).  Those sources, as I
   have already noted and appears from the footnotes, date from 2017 at the
   latest.   I also mention in passing (since it is raised in Ms Sood's
   skeleton argument before Judge Williams) that the unreported decision
   relied upon as showing that Dr Fatah has been accepted by the Tribunal as
   an expert in relation to Egypt does no such thing.  That decision which
   appears at [AB/1-5 to 1-7] merely records the Upper Tribunal's conclusion
   that where the expertise of Dr Fatah had apparently been accepted by the
   First-tier Tribunal Judge, his report ought to have been engaged with and
   findings made in relation to the report.


25. Judge Williams' starting point in this appeal was not only the 2016
   appeal decision but also the country guidance case of MS (Coptic
   Christians) Egypt CG [2013] UKUT 611 (IAC) ("MS").  That guidance remains
   extant.  It reads as follows:


         "Law
         In relation to a country which is in a state of emergency affecting
         the life of the nation and which takes measures  strictly  required
         by the exigencies of the situation, its ability to afford  adequacy
         of  protection  under  Directive  2004/83/EC   (the   Qualification
         Directive) is to be assessed by reference to its general securement
         of non-derogable rights as set out in the ECHR.
         Country guidance
         1.    Notwithstanding that there is inadequate state protection of
         Coptic Christians in Egypt, they are  not  at  a  general  risk  of
         persecution or ill-treatment contrary to Article 3, ECHR.
         2.    However, on current evidence  there  are  some  areas  where
         Coptic Christians will face a real  risk  of  persecution  or  ill-
         treatment contrary to Article 3. In general these will be (a) areas
         outside the large cities; (b) where radical Islamists have a strong
         foothold;  and  (c)  there  have  been  recent  attacks  on  Coptic
         Christians or their churches, businesses or properties.
         3.    On the evidence before the Upper Tribunal, the following are
         particular risk categories in the sense that those  falling  within
         them will generally be able to show a real risk of  persecution  or
         treatment contrary to Article 3, at least in their home area:
         (i)            converts to Coptic Christianity;
         (ii)          persons  who  are  involved  in   construction   or
         reconstruction/repair of churches that have been the target for  an
         attack or attacks;
         (iii)        those accused of proselytising where the accusation is
         serious and not casual;
         (iv)        those  accused  of  being  physically  or  emotionally
         involved  with  a  Muslim  woman,  where  the  accusation  is  made
         seriously and not casually.
         4.    Coptic Christian women in Egypt are not in general  at  real
         risk  of  persecution  or   ill-treatment,   although   they   face
         difficulties additional to other women, in the  form  of  sometimes
         being the target of disappearances,  forced  abduction  and  forced
         conversion.
         5.    However, depending on the particular  circumstances  of  the
         case, Coptic Christian women in Egypt aged between 14-25 years  who
         lack a male protector, may be at such risk.
         6.    If a claimant is able to establish that in their  home  area
         they fall within one or more of the risk categories identified in 3
         (i)-(iv) above or that they come  from  an  area  where  the  local
         Coptic population faces a real risk of  persecution,  it  will  not
         necessarily  follow  that  they   qualify   as   refugees   or   as
         beneficiaries  of  subsidiary  protection   or   Article   3   ECHR
         protection. That will depend on whether they can  show  they  would
         not have a viable internal relocation alternative.  In  such  cases
         there will be need for a fact-specific assessment but,  in  general
         terms, resettlement in an area where Islamists are not strong would
         appear to be a viable option.
         7.    None of the above necessarily precludes a Coptic Christian in
         Egypt from being able to establish a real risk  of  persecution  or
         ill-treatment in the particular circumstances of their  case,  e.g.
         if such an individual has been the target of attacks because he  or
         she is a Coptic Christian."


26. The guidance in MS was set out in the previous appeal decision of
   Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle.  The MS guidance is therefore
   incorporated at [17] of the Decision.  Based on the MS guidance, the
   Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge had previously found that "taking the
   appellant's claim at its very highest and accepting each strand of the
   appellant's evidence, the appellant establishes a genuine fear because
   she has been targeted by rogue Islamist due to her faith as a Coptic
   Christian" but that "[t]he appellant does not need international
   protection because she can safely live in a different part of Egypt."


27. The task for Judge Williams when considering the appeal on this second
   occasion was therefore, as she directed herself, to start from the
   previous appeal decision and in so doing take as a starting point the
   guidance in MS unless there were "very strong grounds supported by cogent
   evidence" which would lead her to depart from the MS guidance (see [19]
   of the Decision).  The consideration of the evidence following the
   decision of Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle is then set out at [19] to
   [23] of the Decision.


28. The Judge took into account the Respondent's 2017 Country Information
   Report. In so doing, she set out a passage which is in many respects in
   line with what is said by Dr Fatah about the risks to Copts from ISIS and
   the growth of the Salafist movement, albeit some of Dr Fatah's sources in
   the sections relied upon in the grounds are historic (dating between
   January 2013 and August 2014 and therefore prior to the previous appeal
   decision in this case).  Notwithstanding the reference to high profile
   bombings against Christian targets by ISIS, some discrimination by the
   Egyptian state and some violent attacks by other non-state agents, Judge
   Williams noted at [19] of the Decision that the background information
   remained that Christians were not generally at risk of persecution or
   serious harm by non-State actors in urban areas.    The Judge thereafter
   took into account the specific risk to the Appellant from [SG] and what
   was said by Dr Fatah about the potential reach of [SG] but concluded that
   Dr Fatah's reasoning was speculative.


29. Ms Sood's grounds refer to later background evidence which was not
   before me (the Country HO Policy and Information Note: Egypt Women dated
   June 2019).  More importantly, it was not part of the Appellant's
   evidence before Judge Williams.  In any event, it does not bear out the
   point which Ms Sood seeks to make.  As the title of that Note makes
   clear, it is concerned with the position of women and not with the
   treatment of Christians as such.  At [2.5.1] (the passage on which Ms
   Sood relies), the Note deals with discrimination and violence against
   women based on gender and police attitudes/ enforcement effectiveness
   when dealing with gender-based violence.  That has nothing to do with
   this Appellant's case.  She does not claim to have been subjected to
   violence because of her gender; she claims that it is her faith which
   puts her at risk.  In any event, the conclusions of Judge Williams are
   based not on availability of State protection but on the possibility of
   internal relocation.


30. I have for the sake of completeness on this issue, looked at the
   updated Home Office country information in relation to Christians in
   Egypt, issued in October 2020.  That is largely the same as that relied
   upon by Judge Williams.  If anything, it indicates a reduction in violent
   attacks in 2018 and 2019 ([2.4.8] of that report).


31. The Judge was entitled to form the conclusions she did about the
   availability of internal relocation on the material before her for the
   reasons she gave.  She did not fail to have regard to Dr Fatah's report
   and was entitled to have regard to other country information,
   particularly the Respondent's 2017 Country Information Report.  Based on
   that background evidence, she was entitled to reach the conclusion that
   she should not depart from the guidance in MS and that the report of Dr
   Fatah did not advance the Appellant's case as decided in the previous
   appeal.


32. There is an additional issue raised in the grounds which relates to the
   protection claim. That is outlined at [2] and [8] of the grounds.  It is
   based on the Appellant's parents and sister having been recognised as
   refugees when they came to the UK in 2012.  It is not clear from the
   evidence in the Appellant's bundle whether it was general country
   conditions or specific risk factors which led to the according of refugee
   status, but the Judge appears to have understood the grant to be based on
   specific risk factors as Coptic Christians (see below).  In fact, the
   evidence in the bundle as to the grant of leave is incomplete but Mr
   Walker was able to confirm by reference to electronic records that the
   Appellant's family were indeed granted leave based on their recognition
   as refugees.


33. That brings me on to the main submission made orally in this regard by
   Ms Sood.  This concerned Judge Williams' refusal to adjourn the hearing
   to permit the Respondent to provide evidence about the family's asylum
   claim.  The Judge dealt with that at [12] of the Decision as follows:


         "I considered whether the case should be adjourned, and in doing so
         had regard to the Tribunal Procedure Rules 2014, Rule 2 and 4.  The
         application for an adjournment was on the basis that the asylum
         grant minutes on for appellant's parents SG, and EB and sister, TG
         who left Cairo and claimed asylum successfully in the UK in
         February 2012, on the basis of being targeted and threatened by a
         neighbour/ Muslim Salafist ([EE]) and his group of followers, who
         tried to force them to convert to Islam.  The parents and sister
         were granted leave to remain on 14th February 2012.  However, it
         was conceded that there was no provable link between the two cases
         (the appellant's/ her relatives) and as such in my judgement there
         was no benefit to adjourning to obtain the Asylum Grant Minutes as
         they were not relevant to the factual matrix before me."


34. As I understood Ms Sood's submission it was that the Judge should have
   adjourned to allow the production of these documents as they might have
   advanced the Appellant's case if it could be shown that there was a link
   between the individual who threatened the Appellant's family before they
   left Egypt in 2012 and [SG] or another of the individuals who had
   threatened or attacked the Appellant and her own family.


35. Although, as I understood the position from Ms Sood, it appeared
   initially that Mr Walker was willing to concede that the Judge should
   have permitted this adjournment, he did not pursue that argument and he
   was right in my estimation not to do so for the following reasons.


36. First, I very much doubt that the files for the Appellant's parents and
   sister would still be in existence after all this time, particularly
   since they were granted indefinite leave to remain about eight years ago
   and, at least the Appellant's sister if not also her mother have since
   been naturalised (her father has sadly passed away).


37. Second, even assuming the files were still in existence, all they would
   show is the basis of the claim made and the individual(s) who the
   Appellant's parents and sister claimed had threatened or attacked them.
   That information is known to the Appellant's mother and sister and they
   could be expected to provide it.


38. Third, as I think Ms Sood accepted, it could not be the case that any
   such documents as still exist in relation to the 2012 claim would show a
   link between the individual(s) said to have threatened or attacked the
   Appellant's parents and sister and [SG] or the other individuals who the
   Appellant says have attacked her much more recently.  It would be for the
   Appellant to show that such link exists if it does.  As indicated by the
   Judge at [12] of the Decision, it was conceded that no such link can be
   demonstrated.  Although it is said at [2] of the grounds appealing the
   Decision that there was evidence from both the Appellant and her sister
   that "these cults could be linked", I was not shown any evidence to that
   effect.  The statement of the Appellant that she "always [has] a feeling
   that there could be a connection" does not establish such a link even to
   the lower standard.  The statement of the Appellant's sister does not
   mention any link.


39. Fourth, even if such a link could be shown, any risk arising from it
   would be overcome by the possibility of internal relocation unless the
   Appellant could show that the individuals concerned had influence
   elsewhere in Egypt.


40. Finally, the way in which the grounds raise this issue, is different
   from that advanced by Ms Sood orally.  Paragraph [8] of the grounds
   appealing the Decision suggest that "[t]he FTTJ has erred in not
   considering that specific evidence was needed of that grant" (ie the
   grant to the Appellant's parents and sister).  But why would such
   evidence be required?  The Appellant's sister gave evidence.  The Judge
   accepted that the Appellant's parents and sister were recognised as
   refugees because of their religion.  At [26] of the Decision, the Judge
   said this about the relevance of that fact:


         "Secondly, it was accepted by the respondent's representatives that
         the appellant's parents and sister claimed asylum and were granted
         leave to remain on the basis of the Refugee Convention in 2012
         based on persecution as Coptic Christians in Egypt.  However, I am
         satisfied that the grant of refugee status adds little to the
         appellant's claim since it merely reflected the specific conditions
         in relation to them as opposed to the appellant - as conceded by
         the appellant's representative there is no evidence that the
         persecution they suffered is directly linked with that which the
         appellant faced, in other words there are two separate incidents."


   There is no error in the way in which the Judge analysed the relevance of
   the grant of status to the Appellant's family members in 2012.


41. Finally, in relation to the appeal on protection grounds, I come on to
   an issue raised at [9] of the grounds appealing the Decision which is
   linked to the previous point regarding the Appellant's family's refugee
   status.  It is suggested that the Judge failed to rule on a submission
   that Copt Christians are "an endangered group".  That submission relies
   on the Court of Appeal's judgment in Secretary of State for the Home
   Department v MSM (Somalia) & Anor [2016] EWCA Civ 715 and what is said at
   [52] of that judgment.  I observe that the extract cited in the grounds
   is taken from the brief observations of Lord Justice Moore-Bick agreeing
   with the lead judgment.  It is worth noting that the extract cited is
   preceded by the words "[i]t may seem strange at first sight that a
   person..." even though the Court was driven to the conclusion reached in
   the lead judgment.  However, the judgment does not and did not need to be
   referred to as it simply has no bearing on this case.  What was under
   consideration in that case was the HJ (Iran) line of authority and the
   issue whether a person could be expected to act in such a way as to avoid
   a risk which would otherwise amount to a well-founded fear of
   persecution.  In this case, whilst the risk was accepted by Judge
   Williams to exist, it did not lead to a well-founded fear of persecution
   because of the availability of internal relocation.  It was not suggested
   (nor could it be) that the Appellant should cease to practise her
   religion in order to avoid that risk.  In any event, it cannot be
   suggested, based on the extant country guidance, that all Coptic
   Christians are at a generalised risk throughout Egypt which appears to be
   the point made in the grounds.


42. For all of the above reasons, the grounds do not disclose any errors of
   law in the Decision so far as concerns the protection grounds of the
   appeal.

HUMAN RIGHTS GROUNDS

43. The grounds of appeal challenging the Decision dealing with the human
   rights grounds are largely focussed on the mental health of the Appellant
   and that of her daughter [C].


44. The Judge deals with the medical evidence in relation to [C] and the
   Appellant at [27] and [28] of the Decision as follows:


         "27. I am satisfied that the appellant's daughter [C], as reflected
         in the medical and social work evidence before me has a 'history
         dysfunctional breathing with sudden onset secondary to huge anxiety
         of family separation' (AB3-32).  I also note that the appellant
         herself has palpitations of depression, low mood and occasional
         forgetfulness (AB 3-22/3).  [C] has undergone, counselling for the
         form of events she underwent in Egypt struggle to accept better
         father's absence is not her fault, she's highly anxious at the
         prospect of returning to Egypt' AB 3-36).  A Social Worker, Ranjit
         Soar's report describes the family's and in particular [C]'s
         subjective fear: 'They all [T and family] fear that they will be
         tortured and killed if returned to Egypt'. I have no reason to
         doubt that [C] has a history of severe short of breath attacks
         without physical cause with a diagnosis of Post-Traumatic Stress
         Disorder.  Dr Michail opined that [C] will need help and support
         through psychological intervention.  Ranjit Soar describes part of
         the cause of her ill health due to 'separation from her dad and her
         constant worries about safety' and finds that 'her condition will
         become worse.  If the family is forced to go back to region because
         of the ongoing religious persecution ...[C] believes that she will
         be kidnapped and forcefully converted to Islam and married to an
         older Muslim man.  This fear of being sent back to Egypt has had a
         marked impact on [C]'s mental and emotional well-being...[C] then
         told me that she is sad and that she can hear the voices and
         violence and sees her father being beaten up [which she witnessed
         when she was 7 years old].  She says she is afraid to go to bed as
         she becomes anxious and panicked.  She says she has difficulty
         sleeping and has frequent flashbacks and nightmares...[C] recently
         lost her grandfather whilst he was visiting his brother in Egypt
         ...helping people heal after trauma often focussed on providing
         them with a safe haven where healing could take place.'
         28.  However I am satisfied that the child's mental health (and
         indeed the appellant's) would not deteriorate on return to Egypt.
         I am satisfied that the medical/psychological opinions before me
         are made without the knowledge that there is a viable internal
         relocation option available which would mean that [C]/ her family
         could be relocated safely and be safely reunited with her father
         and so the anxiety and panic attacks caused by fear of return to
         Egypt/separation from a loved one would be allayed.  Moreover, I
         note that the reports were partly based on the premise of [C]
         having witnessed her father having been assaulted - which of course
         was specifically found not to have occurred by Judge Tynan/Doyle, I
         am satisfied that both the social worker/ psychiatrist have not had
         regard to the fact that there is a 'safe haven' available by
         internal relocation within Egypt here [C] would be able to go to
         church and school in safety.  I note that the family remain close,
         with family visits to Egypt; as such, I am satisfied that the
         guardianship appointments in favour of the maternal aunt could be
         maintained by regular visits to Egypt to see the child/ren."


45. I begin with the suggestion that the Judge failed to deal with Article
   3 ECHR based on the medical evidence (paragraph [14] of the grounds). The
   Judge referred at [29] of the Decision to the guidance given in AXB (Art
   3 health: obligations; suicide) Jamaica [2019] UKUT 397 ("AXB").
   Thereafter, the Judge concluded as follows:


         "30. The evidence before me does not establish a credible real risk
         of deterioration in the child's/appellant's health for the reasons
         given above.  Moreover, the respondent has clearly considered
         Article 3 at paragraph 116 of the refusal letter, providing details
         of the availability of Egyptian healthcare where the child can
         receive treatment (paragraphs 17-118) and going on in detail to
         consider the relevant case law concerning medical problems."


46. It cannot sensibly be suggested that the Judge failed to deal with this
   aspect.  Neither can it be said that the Judge has erred in her
   consideration of this issue.  Since the Decision, the Supreme Court has
   had cause to consider Article 3 ECHR in this context in AM (Zimbabwe) v
   Secretary of State for the Home Department [2020] UKSC 17.  The Court
   said the following about the standard and burden of proof in relation to
   an Article 3 health claim:


         "32.             The Grand Chamber's pronouncements in
         the Paposhvili case about the procedural requirements of article 3,
         summarised in para 23 above, can on no view be regarded as mere
         clarification of what the court had previously said; and we may
         expect that, when it gives judgment in the Savran case, the Grand
         Chamber will shed light on the extent of the requirements. Yet
         observations on them may even now be made with reasonable
         confidence. The basic principle is that, if you allege a breach of
         your rights, it is for you to establish it. But "Convention
         proceedings do not in all cases lend themselves to a rigorous
         application of [that] principle ...": DH v Czech Republic (2008) 47
         EHRR 3, para 179. It is clear that, in application to claims under
         article 3 to resist return by reference to ill-health, the Grand
         Chamber has indeed modified that principle. The threshold, set out
         in para 23(a) above, is for the applicant to adduce evidence
         "capable of demonstrating that there are substantial grounds for
         believing" that article 3 would be violated. It may make formidable
         intellectual demands on decision-makers who conclude that the
         evidence does not establish "substantial grounds" to have to
         proceed to consider whether nevertheless it is "capable of
         demonstrating" them. But, irrespective of the perhaps unnecessary
         complexity of the test, let no one imagine that it represents an
         undemanding threshold for an applicant to cross. For the requisite
         capacity of the evidence adduced by the applicant is to demonstrate
         "substantial" grounds for believing that it is a "very exceptional"
         case because of a "real" risk of subjection to "inhuman" treatment.
         All three parties accept that Sales LJ was correct, in para 16, to
         describe the threshold as an obligation on an applicant to raise a
         "prima facie case" of potential infringement of article 3. This
         means a case which, if not challenged or countered, would establish
         the infringement: see para 112 of a useful analysis in the
         Determination of the President of the Upper Tribunal and two of its
         senior judges in AXB v Secretary of State for the Home
         Department [2019] UKUT 397 (IAC). Indeed, as the tribunal proceeded
         to explain in para 123, the arrangements in the UK are such that
         the decisions whether the applicant has adduced evidence to the
         requisite standard and, if so, whether it has been successfully
         countered fall to be taken initially by the Secretary of State and,
         in the event of an appeal, again by the First-tier Tribunal."
         [my emphasis]


47. The Supreme Court's judgment was not handed down until after the
   Decision in this appeal and therefore is not referred to by Judge
   Williams.  However, AXB which was cited was referred to with approval by
   the Supreme Court as regards the burden and standard of proof in the
   extract to which I refer above.  It cannot be said that the Judge
   misdirected herself as to the test which applies.


48. The evidence about the impact of return on [C]'s mental health is dealt
   with in a report of Ranjit Soar, a retired social worker dated 29 January
   2020 ([AB/3-5 to 3-13]), a psychiatrist report dated 20 September 2017
   ([AB/3-28 to 3-29]), a GP report dated 23 May 2016 ([AB/3-30]) and
   various other medical documents and documents from [C]'s school.

49. Although Mr Soar says that the fear of return has "has had a marked
   impact on [C]'s mental and emotional well-being", it is not entirely
   clear on what that assessment is based given that Mr Soar does not
   purport to have any medical qualifications and was seemingly provided
   only with hospital and psychiatrist's letters.  The psychiatrist's report
   is dated 20 September 2017 and is written by Dr Milad Michail.  He is
   described as a consultant psychiatrist although his qualifications and
   experience are not set out.  [C] is said to be "terrified" of return.  Dr
   Michail expresses the view that [C]'s "condition will become worse if the
   family is forced to go back to Egypt because of the ongoing religious
   persecution".

50. Against that evidence, as Judge Williams noted at [30] of the Decision,
   the Respondent has provided evidence that there is healthcare available
   in Egypt to treat [C]'s mental health.  The availability of treatment is
   not dealt with in the expert evidence provided by the Appellant.  The
   Judge was therefore entitled to reach the conclusion she did in relation
   to Article 3 ECHR in the context of the medical claim.

51. It is suggested that the Judge has failed to consider the impact of
   return on [C] because she has focussed only on one part of the reason why
   [C] has mental health problems namely separation from her father.
   However, the extract from Mr Soar's report which is cited at [5] of the
   grounds is replicated at [27] of the Decision.  The Judge was clearly
   aware that [C]'s mental health problems were caused not simply by
   separation from her father and fears for her father's safety but fears of
   what would happen to her on return.

52. The reason the Judge gives for finding that the impact on [C] would not
   be as described by the health and other professionals is that those
   professionals were unaware that the fears expressed would not come to
   fruition because the family could move to another area of Egypt to avoid
   the risks which they foresaw.  The Appellant's husband and [C]'s father
   remains in Egypt.  The Judge did not accept that he was in hiding or had
   faced threats and attacks since the Appellant and the children had come
   to the UK ([24] to [25] of the Decision).  Those findings are not
   challenged by the Appellant.  As such, the Appellant and her children
   would be returning to Egypt to re-join their husband/father in
   circumstances where, based on the findings in relation to the protection
   claim which I have already upheld, they could find safety in another part
   of Egypt.   Even accepting the evidence as to [C]'s mental health
   problems and potential impact of return, therefore, the Judge was
   entitled to reach the conclusion she did because the healthcare
   professionals were unaware of (or did not deal with) the possibility that
   the claimed risks could be avoided by internal relocation.

53. It cannot be said that the Judge has failed to note the Appellant's own
   mental health problems.  Those are referred to at [27] of the Decision.
   The evidence in that regard is at [AB/3-22 to 3-27].  The Judge's summary
   of the symptoms "palpitations of depression, low mood and occasional
   forgetfulness" is a fair one.  It is suggested at [13] of the grounds
   that there was evidence of the Appellant "as having depression, which
   could make her less capable of effective parenting".  It is said that
   "this submission in the skeleton argument is also not dealt with".
   However, the Judge was not required to deal with unevidenced submissions.
    She was required to deal with the evidence.  There is no evidence that
   the Appellant's mental health problems had rendered her "less capable of
   effective parenting".  The closest one comes is a suggestion at [AB/3-27]
   that the Appellant would be referred to "the voices in exile service who
   can provide support and casework for [the Appellant and her children]
   with a focus on engaging in some meaningful daytime activity".  That does
   not however go so far as to call into question the Appellant's ability to
   parent.


54. That then brings me on to [12] of the grounds concerning the "legal
   implications of a testamentary and spiritual guardianship appointment" in
   favour of the Appellant's sister (the children's aunt).

55. Before I deal with the asserted "legal implications" it is necessary to
   look at the evidence in relation to this appointment.  The document which
   is signed by the Appellant and her sister appears in translated form at
   [AB/3-4].  It is undated.  It reads as follows (so far as relevant):

         "I [TESG] being the mother of [C] ...and [K]...appoint my sister
         [TG] ...to be the guardian of my children, in the event of my death
         or incapacity.  [TG] already acts as a spiritual guardian and
         godparent to my children.  She agrees to the said appointment, and
         we have both had legal advice about this document."


   As can be seen, the document says nothing about the nature of spiritual
   guardianship.  Testamentary guardianship is in the event of the parent's
   death or incapacity.  I have already referred to the [lack of] evidence
   about the Appellant's incapacity.


56. The Appellant's evidence in this regard is at [12] of her statement
   dated 2 February 2020 ([AB/1-27].  She says the following:

         "I have been so anxious about the future that my sister [TG] and I
         have decided she will be the testamentary guardian for my children
         if anything happens to me as life and health is so uncertain for
         us.  She is already close to the children as she has been their
         godparent, and guides them spiritually."


57. The Appellant's sister says this in her statement ([AB/1-30]):


         "11. After our father passed away, my sister [TESG] and I discussed
             how to safeguard her children if anything happens to her.  I
             am already their godmother, so I have agreed after legal
             advice, to be their testamentary guardian so there will be no
             concerns about them being looked after."


58. The submission made in Ms Sood's skeleton argument before Judge
   Williams is as follows:

             "12. Family and maternal concerns over the children's future
             has resulted in a testamentary and spiritual guardianship
             appointment in favour of the maternal Aunt as the testamentary
             guardian of the children.  She is also their spiritual
             guardian and helping the children to integrate.  As
             testamentary and spiritual guardians to children, she has a
             legal status through the role under Section 5, Children Act
             1989.  The document as to Testamentary Guardianship is thus
             legally compliant and welfare-centred (Re E-R (A Child) [2015]
             EWCA Civ 405)
              13. Moreover, the Spiritual Guardianship is also relevant
             under Articles 8 and 9 as affecting the spiritual needs of
             child welfare.
              There are established roots (between the Appellants and the
             wider maternal family including cousins and grandpatents [sic]
             in this country) since 2015, which inclusive of the
             guardianship document, have significant legal consequences
             pursuant to S55 and Article 8 and child welfare generally.


59. I can deal very shortly with what is said at [12] of the skeleton.  As
   the footnote in that paragraph of the skeleton argument makes clear the
   reference to the Children Act is in relation to the appointment of a
   guardian in the event of the death or incapacity of a parent.  Whilst the
   wishes of the Appellant and her sister to make provision for guardianship
   of the children is understandable given that the children's other parent
   remains in Egypt, the circumstances in which that would come into play
   have not arisen.  I return to the point that there is no evidence of the
   Appellant's inability to parent the children herself.


60. Turning then to the points made about the importance of spiritual
   guardianship, I repeat the point I made previously.  The Judge had to
   consider the evidence given by the witnesses and in the documents and not
   such evidence as Ms Sood might have wished to refer to had it been there.
    It is not for Counsel to provide evidence.  The evidence of the
   Appellant and her sister is that the Appellant's sister is the children's
   godparent and provides some spiritual guidance.  The importance of that
   for the children is not however dealt with in that evidence.


61. That brings me back to what is said by the Judge in this regard.  The
   Judge touches on the guardianship appointment in the final sentence at
   [28] of the Decision.  As I have already noted, the Appellant's sister
   was recognised as a refugee in the UK and it might therefore be thought
   to be an error for the Judge to suggest that she could visit the children
   in Egypt.  That reference is the reason I asked Mr Walker to check that
   the Appellant's sister was in fact granted leave based on her status as a
   refugee.  Having confirmed that to be the position, Mr Walker accepted
   that what is said about the Appellant's sister being able to visit Egypt
   might be an error but is not necessarily a sufficient error to require
   the Decision to be set aside either wholly or in part.


62. Whilst I accept that the Judge was perhaps wrong to assume that the
   children's aunt could visit them on return to Egypt, what is there said
   has to be considered in context.  I have referred to the Appellant's
   sister having been naturalised.  She is now a British citizen and does
   not have to rely for travel on a refugee travel document.  I have
   referred to the Appellant's father having sadly passed away.  What I have
   not previously mentioned is the evidence of the Appellant and her sister
   that their father passed away whilst in Egypt.  The Appellant says that
   she and her children could not go to the funeral which also took place in
   Egypt.  It is not entirely clear whether the Appellant's sister attended
   the funeral.  Judge Tynan (who heard the previous appeal of the
   Appellant) recorded at [25] of his decision that the Appellant's brother
   had also returned to Egypt in 2015 for a holiday with his family.
   Although he is not part of the family recognised as a refugee in 2012,
   the Appellant's father was so recognised and yet felt able to return to
   Egypt, presumably having been naturalised as a British citizen.


63. In any event, even if this is an error, it is not on the evidence one
   which has any material impact on the Decision.  As I have already noted,
   there is a lack of evidence about the importance of a spiritual guardian
   for the children let alone evidence pointing in the direction of this
   being a significant factor in favour of individual rights under Articles
   8 and 9 ECHR as the submission in the skeleton argument suggests.  Based
   on the very limited evidence on this issue, the error (if error it is)
   concerning the possibility of the Appellant's sister visiting the
   children in Egypt would not persuade me to set aside the Decision either
   wholly or in part.


64. Dealing finally then with the issue of links between the Appellant and
   her children on the one hand and the Appellant's mother and siblings on
   the other, those are dealt with in the context of Article 8 ECHR at [36]
   of the Decision and following.  The Judge there takes into account the
   children's best interests ([48] of the Decision).  As was pointed out by
   First-tier Tribunal Judge Kelly when refusing permission to appeal, the
   ground that the Judge failed to take into account the Respondent's
   failure to evaluate best interests is of no relevance.  There is no
   longer a ground of appeal based on the Respondent's decision being "not
   in accordance with the law".  In fact, the Respondent did consider those
   best interests ([106] to [109] of the decision letter) but in any event
   the Judge considers this issue for herself (as she was bound to do).  The
   Judge accepts that leaving the UK will lead to "inevitable initial
   disappointment, disruption and distress" but points out that this will be
   balanced against being reunited with their father.  The Judge also takes
   into account that the children have been educated in the UK ([43] of the
   Decision).  The Judge accepts at [43] of the Decision that "[t]he
   appellant has a strong and enduring relationship with her family in the
   United Kingdom such as her sister/family".

65. The Judge correctly directs herself in accordance with the relevant
   legal principles applying to Article 8 ECHR and carries out a balancing
   exercise between the rights of the Appellant and her children against the
   public interest as advocated by the Supreme Court in Hesham Ali v
   Secretary of State for the Home Department [2016] UKSC 60.   The Judge
   concluded that the Appellant was unable to meet the Immigration Rules in
   relation to her family and private life and that of her children ([37] to
   [39] of the Decision).  Having noted that the children's best interests
   must be a primary consideration at [42] of the Decision and weighing all
   competing factors, the Judge reached the conclusion at [49] of the
   Decision that "it would be proportionate to interfere with the
   appellant's family life by removing the family as a unit".  That was a
   conclusion which the Judge was entitled to reach based on the evidence
   before her.

66. For all of the above reasons, whilst it may be the case that the Judge
   should not have relied on the ability of the Appellant's sister to visit
   the children in Egypt at [28] of the Decision, that error (if error it
   is) does not impact on the outcome given the limited evidence about the
   importance of a spiritual guardian for the children's welfare.  The
   grounds do not disclose any material errors of law in the Decision so far
   as concerns the human rights grounds of the appeal.

67. For the foregoing reasons, I conclude that there is no error of law in
   the Decision such as to lead to the setting aside of the Decision and I
   uphold it.


   DECISION

   The Decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge O R Williams promulgated on 23
   March 2020 does not involve the making of a material error on a point of
   law. I therefore uphold the Decision with the consequence that the
   Appellant's appeal remains dismissed.


   Signed: L K Smith

   Upper Tribunal Judge Smith

   Dated: 10 March 2021

