
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                               Appeal
Number: PA/11660/2019 (P)



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Decided Under Rule 34 (P)                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 2 September 2020                           |On 7 September 2020           |


                                   Before


                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEKI?

                                   Between

                                     S H
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation (by way of written submissions)
For the appellant:     Mr P Draycott of Counsel instructed by Hoole and Co.
      Solicitors
For the respondent:    Ms H Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                                 DECISION AND REASONS

Background

       1. This appeal comes before me following the grant of  permission  to
          appeal to the appellant by First-tier Tribunal Judge Haria  on  17
          April 2020 against the determination of First-tier Tribunal  Judge
          Davidge, promulgated on 30 January 2020  following  a  hearing  at
          Newport on 23 January 2020.


       2. The appellant is an Afghan national born on 20  January  1995.  He
          entered the UK illegally in July 2018 and claimed asylum.   As  he
          had travelled through several  European  countries  where  he  had
          claimed to have spent lengthy periods of time and had been  finger
          printed in Slovenia and Italy, his removal to Italy  was  arranged
          in  February  2019  but  he  refused  to  board  the  flight.  The
          application was then considered by the UK authorities and  refused
          on  4  October  2019.  The  appellant's  claim  is  that  he  fled
          Afghanistan aged 13 because his father and brother had  been  shot
          and the Taliban forcibly tried  to  recruit  him.   Judge  Davidge
          heard oral evidence from the appellant and a  witness.  She  found
          that the evidence failed to establish to the lower  standard  that
          he was at risk in his home area. She  found  that  he  had  family
          there to whom he could return and, alternatively,  that  he  could
          safely return to Kabul if he preferred to do so. Accordingly,  she
          dismissed the appeal.


       3. The appellant's grounds and application to challenge the  decision
          were submitted six weeks late. Time was extended on the basis that
          the appellant's solicitors had only notified him of  the  decision
          after the time limit to challenge it had expired although  it  may
          be seen from the Tribunal file that the appellant  had  also  been
          sent a copy of the determination by the Tribunal.


       4. The grounds argue that  the  judge  unlawfully  speculated  and/or
          showed apparent bias. There is criticism of her finding  that  all
          unaccompanied asylum seeking children are  economic  migrants,  it
          being argued that there was no evidence to show that this was  the
          case. It is further maintained that the judge reached her  finding
          on purported evidence which neither party had relied  on  and  had
          not been disclosed by the judge at the hearing so that she entered
          into the arena and acted in a biased manner.


       5. The second ground is that the judge failed  to  determine  whether
          the appellant was a vulnerable witness on the basis  that  he  had
          sustained a head injury in Afghanistan and that he was depressed.


       6. Thirdly, it is argued that the judge dismissed the appeal  without
          carrying out any assessment of the  appellant's  risk  profile  on
          return. Additionally, it is argued that  she  failed  to  consider
          whether his home area was in a state of  internal  armed  conflict
          for the purposes of article 15(c).


       7. The fourth ground is that the judge did not properly consider  the
          issue of return to Kabul and undertook  no  proper  assessment  of
          whether it would be safe for him to go there.


       8. A large number of cases are relied on to support the grounds.

Covid-19 crisis

       9. Normally, the matter would have been listed for hearing after  the
          grant of permission, but due to the Covid-19 pandemic and need  to
          take precautions against its spread, this did not happen. Instead,
          directions were sent to the parties on 26  June  2020.  They  were
          asked to present any objections to the matter being dealt with  on
          the papers and to make any further submissions on the error of law
          issue within certain time limits.


      10. The Tribunal has received written submissions from  both  parties.
          I now proceed to consider the matter.


      11. In doing so  I  have  regard  to  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
          Tribunal) Rules 2008 (the UT Rules), the judgment of Osborn v  The
          Parole Board [2013] UKSC 61, the Presidential Guidance Note  No  1
          2020: Arrangements during the  Covid-19  pandemic  (PGN)  and  the
          Senior President's Pilot Practice Direction (PPD). I  have  regard
          to the overriding objective which is defined  in  rule  2  of  the
          Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 as being "to enable
          the Upper Tribunal to deal with cases fairly and justly". To  this
          end I have considered that dealing with a case fairly  and  justly
          includes: dealing with it in ways that are  proportionate  to  the
          importance of  the  case,  the  complexity  of  the  issues,  etc;
          avoiding unnecessary formality  and  seeking  flexibility  in  the
          proceedings; ensuring, so far as practicable, that the parties are
          able to participate fully in the proceedings;  using  any  special
          expertise of the Upper Tribunal effectively; and  avoiding  delay,
          so far as compatible with proper consideration of the issues (Rule
          2(2) UT rules and PGN:5).


      12. I have had careful regard to the submissions made and to  all  the
          evidence before me before deciding how to proceed. The  respondent
          raises no objection to the matter being considered on  the  papers
          but the appellant seeks a remote hearing to present his  arguments
          as he maintains that the appeal "raises  complicated  issues"  and
          there is an allegation that  the  determination  is  "procedurally
          unfair" and biased. It is submitted  that  no  bespoke  directions
          have been issued by the Tribunal to deal with the  allegations  of
          procedural unfairness. It is maintained that  as  the  application
          for permission to appeal raised an issue of procedural unfairness,
          it is inappropriate to determine the matter on the papers.  It  is
          maintained that the Upper Tribunal must have regard to  the  views
          of the parties when deciding whether to dispense  with  a  hearing
          and that  the  procedure  rules  provide  the  appellant  with  an
          entitlement to attend a hearing. It  is  maintained  that  if  the
          matter is, nevertheless, to be considered on the papers, then  the
          respondent should be directed to lodge "a  comprehensive  response
          to each of the appellant's grounds of  appeal"  rather  than  "the
          customarily terse reply which is normally  lodged"  and  that  the
          appellant thereafter be given the opportunity to reply.


      13. I am not persuaded that the issues to be decided  are  complicated
          as is claimed; indeed, they appear to me  to  be  straightforward.
          There are detailed arguments for the appellant on  file,  both  in
          the  grounds  for  permission  and  in  the  submissions  made  in
          compliance with the Upper Tribunal's  directions.   There  are  no
          matters arising from the papers which would require  clarification
          and so an oral hearing would not be needed for that  purpose.  The
          respondent has already been directed to provide her submissions on
          the matter and it is not for the Tribunal to dictate the form that
          the submissions should take. I note  further  that  the  appellant
          already has been given the opportunity to respond to the Secretary
          of State's submissions (by way of  the  directions  issued  on  26
          June) and has not availed himself of that opportunity even  though
          those submissions were received on 14 July 2020 and were served on
          the appellant's representatives the same day. There  is  provision
          in the rules for the Tribunal to determine an appeal on the papers
          and in this case I cannot see any basis  on  which  the  appellant
          would be disadvantaged by the lack of  an  oral  hearing.  I  have
          regard to the importance of the matter to him and consider that  a
          speedy determination of this matter is in his best interests. I am
          satisfied that I am able to  fairly  and  justly  deal  with  this
          matter on the papers before me and I now proceed to do so.


      Submissions


      14. The appellant's submissions are dated 10 July 2020. They only deal
          with the proposed disposal of the error of law  issue  and  future
          case management and make no submissions on  the  determination  of
          Judge Davidge other than  the  contention  that  this  is  a  more
          complex case than normal and involves allegations  as  to  whether
          there was evidence before the judge to support  the  finding  that
          Afghan Unaccompanied Asylum Seeking Children (UASC)  are  economic
          migrants and/or that this amounted to bias. Details are summarized
          at paragraph 12 above.


      15. The respondent's submissions are  dated  14  July  2020  and  were
          served on the Tribunal and  the  appellant's  representatives  the
          same day.


      16. The respondent opposes the appellant's appeal and submits that the
          judge directed herself appropriately. It is submitted  that  there
          was no indication that any  application  was  made  to  treat  the
          appellant as a vulnerable witness but that the judge  nevertheless
          ensured that the appellant understood the  interpreter,  reassured
          him that if there were any problems he should say so, and recorded
          that there were no apparent difficulties of  understanding  during
          the course of the hearing. It is submitted that in considering the
          appellant's claim, the judge reminded herself of  the  appellant's
          age at the  time  of  the  claimed  incidents  and  when  he  left
          Afghanistan and also reminded herself of the passage of time since
          the claimed incidents. It is  submitted  that  she  gave  adequate
          reasons for finding that the difficulties in his account could not
          be explained as age-related. The respondent submits that the judge
          gave adequate consideration to the  background  evidence  and  the
          oral and documentary  evidence  relied  upon.  She  gave  adequate
          reasons for finding there were discrepancies  and  inconsistencies
          in his account and that there were late  additions  to  it  in  an
          attempt to address issues raised in the  decision  letter.  It  is
          submitted that the judge gave adequate reasons  for  finding  that
          the evidence of the witness  did  not  assist  the  case  and  for
          concluding that the documentary evidence was not reliable.  It  is
          submitted that the determination is well  reasoned  and  that  the
          conclusion that the appellant would not be at  risk  in  his  home
          area and could safely return  there  or,  alternatively,  that  he
          could safely return to Kabul where he would have the assistance of
          his village chief was open to the judge to reach.  The  respondent
          maintains that the appellant's grounds of appeal  amount  to  mere
          disagreement with the  conclusions  of  the  judge  and  that  the
          determination discloses no material errors of law.


      17. The Upper Tribunal's directions provided  the  appellant  with  an
          opportunity to respond to the respondent's submissions but he  has
          not done so. The submissions are, indeed, detailed and address the
          appellant's grounds of appeal and are far from the  "terse  reply"
          which Mr Draycott expected. I am satisfied  that  the  submissions
          were properly served on the  appellant's  representatives  and  of
          course that the appellant and his representatives are  in  receipt
          of the earlier directions as they have  been  referred  to  in  Mr
          Draycott's arguments.


      Discussion and Conclusions


      18. I have considered all the evidence, the  grounds  for  permission,
          the First-tier Tribunal's determination and the  submissions  made
          by the parties.


      19.  The  appellant's  grounds  are   not   prepared   by   the   same
          representative who acted for him  at  the  hearing.  That  is  not
          necessarily a problem but in this  case  it  is,  as  Mr  Draycott
          criticizes the judge for failing  to  address  matters  that  were
          never argued before her. It may be that he would have chosen to do
          so had he represented the appellant but he did not and cannot  now
          complain about matters which did not form part of the  appellant's
          appeal.


      20. I can see nothing in the skeleton argument or  in  the  Record  of
          Proceedings  to  even  remotely  suggest  that   there   was   any
          application to treat the appellant as a  vulnerable  witness,  nor
          were there any submissions made which suggested that being hit  on
          the head 12 years ago or being depressed  would  have  any  impact
          upon his ability to give evidence (at 40). The  appellant's  reply
          to the IAC Notice of Hearing  which  has  a  specific  section  on
          vulnerabilities (at s.9) asks for any details of vulnerability but
          the appellant through his representatives replied in the  negative
          in December 2019. The appellant was aged 24 at  the  date  of  the
          hearing as the judge noted (at 2)  and  the  judge  was  satisfied
          there were no problems in comprehension during the course  of  the
          proceedings (at 10). Despite the  appellant's  failure  to  comply
          with directions, the judge was amenable to evidence being admitted
          at the hearing both in the form of documents  and  a  witness  for
          whom no statement of  evidence  had  been  provided  (at  9).  She
          assured the appellant  of  her  independence  and  took  steps  to
          reassure him as to his rights to comfort breaks and so on (at 10).
          She permitted the appellant's witness statement to be read to  him
          in full, with the help of the interpreter, a task that should have
          been undertaken by his representatives prior to  the  hearing  (at
          11). She also reminded herself of the appellant's young age at the
          time the claimed incidents occurred (at 15 and 43). I am satisfied
          that in the absence  of  any  request  for  the  appellant  to  be
          considered as vulnerable,  and  given  the  lack  of  any  medical
          evidence to suggest that he might be, the judge  did  not  err  in
          failing to address this point.


      21. The grounds begin by setting out matters  alleged  to  be  "common
          ground" (at 1). These differ from the undisputed facts set out  in
          the determination (at 16). There were issues  in  fact  about  the
          appellant's village identified by the judge (at 32). Further,  the
          respondent only accepted that the appellant was  Afghani  and  did
          not accept  that  he  had  established  which  part  he  was  from
          (determination: at 4, decision letter: at 24).  Additionally,  the
          judge noted that the first  reliable  evidence  of  the  appellant
          being outside Afghanistan was when he was in Slovenia aged 17  (at
          41). It was, however, accepted that the appellant was a  child  at
          the time of the claimed incidents in Afghanistan. I  do  not  read
          the extract from the decision letter cited at paragraph 2  of  the
          grounds as a concession by the respondent that the  appellant  had
          health issues. What the respondent says there is that she does not
          accept that there is evidence to warrant a grant of  discretionary
          leave on health grounds. In any  event,  these  matters  were  not
          determinative and do not form part of the appellant's grounds.


      22. Dealing with the main complaint of the determination which in  the
          subsequent  written  submissions  are  described   as   procedural
          unfairness, I  turn  to  what  the  judge  said  at  the  impugned
          paragraph 18  of  her  determination:  "In  summary,  the  country
          information I was taken to during the hearing tended to show  that
          the Taliban used child soldiers, but that forcible recruitment  is
          unlikely, the  practice  being  to  recruit  older  children  from
          Taliban aligned madrassahs by enthusing them to follow  willingly.
          Unaccompanied children leaving Afghanistan are often in their late
          teens, as economic migrants funded by their relatives. The cost of
          travel is significant, related to the length  and  destination  of
          the journey, Europe being considerably more expensive than Iran or
          Turkey. I have brought forward my  consideration  of  the  country
          information into my assessment of the appellant's  credibility  in
          the round".


      23. The first point to make is that this is a summary of  the  country
          information before the judge; it is not a 'finding' as the grounds
          allege. Secondly, at no point did the judge 'find', as  is  argued
          in paragraph 9 of the  grounds,  that  "all"  UASCs  are  economic
          migrants. Nothing in paragraph 18 supports that  contention  which
          is, therefore, a complete  misrepresentation  of  what  the  judge
          said.   This  misrepresentation  has  then  been  dressed  up   as
          procedural unfairness and bias which is wholly inappropriate.  Had
          the author of the grounds taken  the  time  and  trouble  to  look
          through the documentary evidence that was provided to the judge by
          the parties and was not, as the  grounds  contend,  evidence  that
          "neither party had relied on" and had "not been disclosed" by  the
          judge to the parties (at 11), he would have seen that the  judge's
          summary was fair and accurate.


      24. The EASO Country of Origin Information Report of February 2018 was
          submitted at the hearing (at 9) and includes a section  on  UASCs.
          The following sections support the judge's summary:  "To  send  an
          underage family member to Europe is an important network decision;
          it involves splitting up the family, a hazardous journey and it is
          hoped a large boost to family finances". "The  hope  is  that  the
          minor will be able to find a  job  and  help  support  the  family
          financially. A source pointed out that the sum of EUR30 to 50  per
          month can make  a  big  difference  to  a  family  in  the  Afghan
          countryside" (section 2.1 p. 17). "In an Afghan context an illegal
          journey to the West costs a considerable amount of money. In  2016
          the GDP  per  inhabitant  was  USD  561.  The  average  income  in
          Afghanistan   is   USD   80-120    per    month....Sources    from
          January/February 2017 indicate that the journey  to  Turkey  costs
          about USD 3000...while a journey with a visa to Germany  costs  at
          least USD 20,000" (2.1 at p. 18). "Not all young  Afghan  migrants
          are passive subjects of family decisions.  According  to  research
          conducted by the Afghanistan Analysts Network (AAN),  interviewing
          households with one or more members that migrated in 2015, in  the
          majority of the cases they surveyed, it was a  migrant  themselves
          that had initiated the  conversation  on  migration.  These  young
          migrants had to  convince  their  families  to  let  them  go  and
          justified their wish to migrate by pointing at  lack  of  economic
          and educational opportunities in Afghanistan" (at p.17).


      25. The judge's summary of the Taliban's recruitment process is  taken
          from the LandInfo report in the appellant's bundle (at 11, 15, 23-
          25).


      26. The judge has summarized  the  country  evidence  adduced  by  the
          parties. She was required to have  regard  to  it,  there  was  no
          necessity to disclose it to the parties as it came from them,  and
          she was obliged to consider the  claim  in  the  context  of  that
          evidence. To do so demonstrates no bias; indeed, had she not  done
          so she would have transgressed her duty. It is  difficult  to  see
          how her consideration of  the  evidence  adduced  by  the  parties
          themselves  can  be  presented  by  the  appellant's  Counsel   as
          procedural unfairness and bias. There is no  merit  whatsoever  in
          the complaints made and no error in the judge's  approach  to  the
          evidence. The allegations made are devoid  of  substance  and  are
          made without any support at all. As such, they should  never  have
          formed the basis of  a  grant  of  permission  by  the  First-tier
          Tribunal. I would further  add  that  the  judge's  approach,  for
          example, to the section 8 arguments made by the respondent further
          shows her  open  mindedness  as  she  did  not  hold  against  the
          appellant his failure to claim asylum in France, Greece  or  Italy
          (among all the other countries he passed through)  despite  having
          spent years in them (at 41).  Had  she  been  biased,  this  could
          easily  have  been  used  as  a  further  basis  for  a   negative
          credibility assessment.


      27. The grounds also complain that the  judge  did  not  consider  the
          appellant's risk profile on return. It is not specified what  this
          profile is considered to be but the judge rejected  the  claim  of
          forcible recruitment for  wholly  sustainable  reasons.  No  other
          basis for persecution was put forward.


      28. It is maintained that the  judge  did  not  consider  whether  the
          appellant's home area was in a state of armed  internal  conflict.
          This was not an argument made to  the  judge  by  the  appellant's
          Counsel at the hearing. It was not raised as part of the evidence,
          nor argued in submissions or  in  the  skeleton  argument  and  no
          country evidence to support such a contention was brought  to  the
          attention of the judge. Had it been considered that  there  was  a
          risk to the appellant on this basis, then  one  can  be  confident
          that Counsel would have raised  it  as  part  of  the  appellant's
          appeal. The judge cannot now be criticized for failing to consider
          a matter which was not argued for the appellant.


      29. The final complaint is that the appellant's  ability  to  relocate
          safely to Kabul was not properly considered. This was, it  has  to
          be said, briefly addressed at paragraph 44, however,  the  brevity
          of the consideration is not a material error because the judge had
          already found that the appellant could safely return to  his  home
          village where he still had family. Her concluding findings confirm
          that "the question of internal relocation to avoid a risk  in  the
          home area does not arise".


      30. For all the above reasons, the judge was entitled to conclude that
          the appellant would not be at risk of return to his home area.  No
          challenge has been made to her findings that there  were  numerous
          difficulties with his account, with the evidence of  the  witness,
          with the late submission of documents and  the  difficulties  with
          them, and the mention of matters that had  never  been  previously
          referred to either in the  asylum  interview  or  the  appellant's
          witness statement.


      31. No article 8 claim has been pursued.


          Decision

      32. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain an  error
          of law and it is upheld. The appeal is dismissed.


          Anonymity


      33. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
          Rules 2008 I continue the anonymity order made by  the  First-tier
          Tribunal to protect the identity of the appellant.



      34.  Unless the Upper  Tribunal  or  a  court  directs  otherwise,  no
          reports of these proceedings of any form  of  publication  thereof
          shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  the   appellant.   This
          direction applies  to,  amongst  others,  the  appellant  and  the
          respondent. Any failure to comply with this direction  could  give
          rise to contempt of court proceedings.

        Signed


              R. Keki?
              Upper Tribunal Judge

              Date: 2 September 2020




