
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal number:  PA/11331/2019 (V)



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard Remotely at Manchester CJC     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 13 November 2020                  |On 17 November 2020                  |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PICKUP



                                   Between

                                     PK

                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



For the appellant:     Mr M Mohzam, Alex James Solicitors

For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Senior Presenting Officer



                          DECISION AND REASONS (V)


This  has  been  a  remote  hearing  which  has   been   consented   to by
the parties. The form of remote hearing was video by Skype (V). A face to
face hearing was not held because it was  not  practicable  and  all  issues
could be determined in a remote hearing. At the conclusion of the hearing  I
indicated that I found no error of law but reserved  my  full  decision  and
reasons, which I now give. The order made is described at the end of these
reasons.

 1. The appellant, who is an Iraqi national of Kurdish ethnicity from Erbil
    within the IKR, and with date of birth given as 31.5.02,  has  appealed
    with permission to the Upper Tribunal against the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal promulgated 20.1.20 (Judge  Davies),  dismissing  on  all
    grounds his appeal against the decision  of  the  Secretary  of  State,
    dated 6.11.19, to refuse his claim for international protection made on
    10.7.18, on grounds of imputed political opinion.

 2. The appellant was a minor at the date of  his  arrival  in  the  UK  on
    22.6.18, being then just 16 years of age. He was 17 at the date of  the
    First-tier Tribunal appeal hearing and is now 18 years of age.

Preliminary Matters

 3. At the outset of the hearing, Mr Whitwell explained that he  had  taken
    over from Mr Tan at short notice and had been sent in error papers  for
    an entirely different case with a similar reference number. He  applied
    for an adjournment. I decided to hear  Mr  Mohzam's  submissions  first
    before deciding whether an adjournment of the hearing was necessary.

 4. I have carefully considered the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  in
    the light of  the  submissions  and  the  grounds  of  application  for
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  In the event, I  found  it
    was not necessary to adjourn the matter.

Relevant Background

 5. In essence, the appellant  claimed  to  have  a  well-founded  fear  of
    persecution on return to Iraq on the basis of imputed political opinion
    because he feared he would be killed by the Iraqi  authorities  because
    his father was spying for the Iranian  government.  His  father  was  a
    wholesaler importer of goods from Iran when the border  was  closed  on
    25.9.17 following the Iraqi referendum, so that his goods were stuck at
    the border. In order to have his goods released, the father  was  asked
    by an Iranian official to spy on the KDP Party in  Iraq  and  the  KDPI
    Party in Iran. It is alleged that the KDP and the Kurdish government in
    the IKR discovered this. The appellant was 15 years of age at the  time
    and does not know what, if any, spying activity his  father  undertook.
    The family relocated to Turkey in May 2018 and  he  believes  that  his
    father was subsequently arrested in Turkey.

 6. The appellant has no independent knowledge of these matters; he  claims
    that his mother told him that they had left Iraq because his father had
    problems with the government of the IKR and the  KDP  and  his  witness
    statement of 11.10.18 advances the account of his father being asked to
    become an Iranian spy against the KRG (IKR), the KDP and  the  KDPI  in
    Iran. His mother allegedly told him that in May  2018  his  father  was
    notified by a friend that the IKR government and both political parties
    had found out and accused him of being both a spy and trading in drugs.
    Despite that, no steps were taken to arrest him and the family was able
    to relocate to Turkey.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted by the First-tier Tribunal,  it  being
    considered arguable that the judge "failed to have sufficient regard to
    the appellant's age when assessing  credibility  and  failed  to  fully
    appreciate the appellant's case being that his father had been asked to
    spy for both Iraq and Iran upon which no finding arguably is made.  All
    grounds may be argued."

 8. The grounds are somewhat inaccurate  and  have  led  to  the  grant  of
    permission on a false premise. As drafted, in rather poor English,  the
    grounds at [2] assert that the judge, "failed to deal with core  aspect
    of the appellant's claim; that he was ask to spy for both Iraqi KDP and
    Iranian KDPI, which was a crucial aspect of the  appellant  claim.  The
    Judge failure to deal with this part taints the decision." In fact, the
    appellant's claim has never been that his father was asked to  spy  for
    either the KDP or the KDPI; he claims his father was asked  to  spy  on
    the KDP and KDPI.

 9. Permission was granted, at least in part, on the misunderstanding  that
    the judge failed to appreciate that the appellant's claim was that  his
    father had been asked to spy for both Iraq and Iran and that the  judge
    made no finding on this assertion. However, the  appellant's  case  has
    never been that his father was asked to spy for both Iraq and Iran; the
    claim is only that it was the Iranian authorities who asked him to spy.



Consideration of the Grounds

10. I am satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal Judge  accurately  set  out
    the appellant's case from [26] of the decision onwards. It is noted  at
    [26] that the claim rested on the account  that  in  exchange  for  the
    release of his goods he was asked to  spy  in  the  Kurdish  region  on
    behalf of the Iranian authorities, on both the KDP and KDPI. It is  not
    clear from the appellant's case whether his  father  ever  did  spy  or
    report back to the Iranian authorities.

11. At [30] onwards of the decision the judge considered the  issue  as  to
    when the Iran/Iraq border was closed but noted that  the  news  reports
    were to the effect that the border had been unilaterally closed by  the
    Iraqi and not the Iranian authorities and  concluded  that  this  would
    have been a short-term measure. There has been  no  challenge  to  this
    particular finding. The respondent's refusal decision had suggested  it
    was not credible that as an Iraqi citizen the  appellant's  father  had
    been asked to spy on a political party  wholly  located  in  Iran  (the
    KDPI).

12. The First-tier Tribunal disbelieved the appellant's account, completely
    rejecting the "central plank" of the claim, considering it  implausible
    and, ultimately, incredible that his father would enter  into  such  an
    arrangement in order to deal with a very short-term border  closure  by
    the Iranian authorities. If the border was closed by Iraq, it could not
    be the Iranian authorities who were  holding  back  the  goods  at  the
    border because of the closure. Nor does the  appellant's  account  make
    any sense that the agreement to spy arises out of the border closure by
    the Iraqi authorities. The judge noted the appellant's young age at the
    time and lack of knowledge of any details of  information  provided  to
    him not by his father but allegedly by his mother. He was not aware  of
    his father being a member of any political party or of  knowing  anyone
    in the IKR government, so that it is difficult to see how he  would  be
    in a position to spy for the Iranians. The judge considered  that  even
    if his father had spied, it was not credible that he had  not  arrested
    by the IKR authorities when they allegedly found out. At  [36]  of  the
    decision the judge concluded that the appellant failed  to  demonstrate
    to the lower standard of proof that his father was engaged in espionage
    for the Iranians as claimed. I am satisfied that  cogent  reasons  have
    been provided  for  that  conclusion,  so  that  no  error  of  law  is
    disclosed.

The Appellant as a Vulnerable Witness

13. Permission was also granted on the assertion in  the  grounds  that  in
    assessing credibility, the First-tier Tribunal  failed  to  accord  the
    appellant appropriate consideration given  that  he  was  a  minor  and
    therefore vulnerable at the date of the hearing. However, it  is  clear
    from a reading of the decision that the judge was very conscious of the
    appellant's young age. At [23] of the  decision,  the  judge  canvassed
    with the two representatives that the appellant was a  minor,  still  a
    few months from his 18th birthday. It was  agreed  that  he  should  be
    treated as a vulnerable witness and was assisted by a  support  worker.
    Questioning was limited and kept simple and  straightforward.  At  [24]
    the judge was satisfied that notwithstanding  his  age,  the  appellant
    understood the questions put to him and was fully able  to  participate
    in the hearing.

14. Mr Mohzam submitted that  the  case  authorities  required  a  "liberal
    application of the benefit of the doubt" when considering the  evidence
    of children. However, the assessment of credibility of the  appellant's
    claim did not turn on his evidence at the  appeal  hearing  or  on  his
    general reliability as a witness of the alleged facts. Neither did  the
    judge rely on any inconsistency or  contradiction  in  the  appellant's
    account. In assessing the credibility of the claim, the judge took into
    account, as he had to, the appellant's young age at  the  date  of  the
    events of his claim, and that he had no direct knowledge of any of  the
    events, allegedly reporting what his mother rather than his father told
    him. However, the credibility of the  claim  turned  on  the  claim  as
    advanced, the facts of  which  are  not  likely  to  vary  whether  the
    appellant was a vulnerable child or not. The judge was not  obliged  to
    accept the claim just because the appellant  was  young,  immature,  or
    vulnerable. It was not the manner in which the claim  was  advanced  or
    failure to satisfactorily answer questions which led to its  rejection;
    it was rejected as not credible on the facts taken at face  value,  for
    the cogent reasons set out in the decision.

15. In the circumstances, it is difficult to see  how  having  any  greater
    regard to the appellant's age could or would have made  any  difference
    to the credibility assessment. I am satisfied that no error of  law  is
    disclosed in this regard.

16. Having heard Mr Mohzan's oral submissions, I was satisfied that it  was
    not necessary to hear from Mr Whitwell and, therefore,  no  adjournment
    was necessary.

17. In the circumstances and for the reasons  set  out  above,  I  find  no
    material error of law in the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  so
    that it must be set aside.

Decision

    The appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands and the  appeal  remains
    dismissed on all grounds.

    I make no order for costs.


Signed: DMW Pickup

Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

Date:    13 November 2020




Anonymity Direction

I am satisfied, having had  regard  to  the  guidance  in  the  Presidential
Guidance Note No 1 of 2013: Anonymity Orders, that it would  be  appropriate
to make an order in accordance with  Rules  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 in the following terms:

    "Unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellant
    is granted anonymity. No report of these proceedings shall directly  or
    indirectly identify him or any member of  his  family.  This  direction
    applies to, amongst others, both  the  appellant  and  the  respondent.
    Failure to comply with this direction could lead to contempt  of  court
    proceedings."


Signed: DMW Pickup

Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

Date:    13 November 2020

