
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11647/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Fox Court                            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 12th February 2019                         |On 18 March 2019              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                 Shumon [A]
                       (ANONYMITY direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Bisson (Counsel), Mergul Law
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood (Senior HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge S L Farmer, promulgated on 9th November 2018, following a hearing
    at Hatton Cross on 1st November 2018.  In the determination, the  judge
    dismissed  the  appeal  of  the  Appellant,  whereupon  the   Appellant
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Bangladesh, and was born on  25th
    October 1984.  He appealed against the decision of the Respondent dated
    28th September 2018,  refusing  his  application  for  asylum  and  for
    humanitarian protection, pursuant to paragraph 339C of HC 395.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The Appellant's claim is that he is  a  homosexual.   He  was  born  in
    Beanibazar, Sylhet, in Bangladesh, where he lived until he came to  the
    UK in 2009.  He has his parents, a  brother  and  sister  remaining  in
    Bangladesh.  He first realised he was gay when he was  about  15  years
    old.  He never disclosed this to anyone in Bangladesh.  He did not have
    any relationships with either a male or female.  After he came  to  the
    UK he realised he could live an openly gay life  and  he  has  had  one
    relationship here in 2015 which lasted for some six  to  seven  months.
    In January 2018 he told his parents  about  his  sexuality.   They  had
    threatened to kill him if he returned to Bangladesh.  He has  not  been
    in touch with them since.   He  fears  his  family  if  he  returns  to
    Bangladesh.  He also fears  that  if  his  sexuality  was  detected  in
    Bangladesh, he would be killed or violence would be metered out to him.
     He would have to supress his sexuality.  He has abandoned  his  Muslim
    faith due to his sexuality.

The Judge's Findings

 4. In her conclusions, the judge at the outset stated that, "To succeed in
    a claim for asylum, an appellant must prove, to the necessary standard,
    that he has a well-founded  fear  of  being  persecuted  by  reason  of
    racial, religious, national, social or political  characteristics  that
    may be imputed." (Paragraph 19).  The criticism that  is  made  of  the
    judge in this appeal is that she has not set out what she means by "the
    necessary standard".  The judge had  also  earlier  stated,  under  the
    heading "Burden and standard of proof" that "The burden of proof is  on
    the  appellant  to  show  at  the  date  of  this  decision  there  are
    substantial  grounds  for  believing  that  the  appellant  meets   the
    requirements  of  the  Refugee  or  Person  in  need  of  International
    Protection (Qualification) Regulations  2006  ..."  (at  paragraph  8).
    However, the judge had only referred to the "burden of proof"  in  this
    regard, and had not explained what the  standard  of  proof  would  be.
    Against that background, the judge had proceeded to hold that Section 8
    of the 2004 Act applied in that the Appellant's account was  such  that
    it adversely affected the credibility of the account given by him.   He
    had not made his claim properly.  He had delayed making his  claim  for
    over eight years, having arrived in 2009,  and  not  making  the  claim
    until April 2018.  It was said that, "He had stated  that  he  did  not
    know he could claim asylum based on his  sexuality.   However,  he  did
    know people who claimed asylum and would have been  exposed  to  asylum
    claims within the Bangladeshi community ..." (paragraph 21).  In short,
    the  judge  found  that  the  Appellant  was  not  a  credible  witness
    (paragraph 23).

 5. Finally, there had  been  a  suggestion  by  the  Respondent  that  the
    Appellant had engaged  in  ETS  deception  by  using  a  proxy  English
    speaker.

 6. The appeal was dismissed.

Grounds of Application

 7. The grounds of application state that  the  judge  had  at  the  outset
    stated (paragraphs 7 to 8) the approach to be taken under  "burden  and
    standard of proof", but  had  then  made  no  mention  at  all  to  the
    "standard of proof" to be applied.  It was insufficient to say that the
    appeal was to be determined on the basis of "the necessary standard".

 8. Permission to appeal was granted on 28th December 2018,  on  the  basis
    that it could be inferred that the judge had conflated the  burden  and
    standard of proof.

Submissions

 9. At the hearing before me, the Appellant was represented by  Mr  Bisson.
    He relied upon the grounds of application.  He further  submitted  that
    the judge had reached an irrational conclusion in stating (at paragraph
    21) that the Appellant's claim that he was not aware about his right to
    claim  asylum  on  the  basis  of  homosexuality  until   eight   years
    thereafter, was not credible because he  would  have  been  exposed  to
    asylum claims within the Bangladeshi community.   However,  the  reason
    that the judge gives is that, "his witness had claimed asylum  in  2015
    (although not on sexuality grounds).  I therefore find that  this  does
    count against his credibility although it is not determinative  of  his
    claim and I bear this in mind when  considering  the  totality  of  the
    evidence." (Paragraph 21).  Mr Bisson submitted that the judge may have
    been able to hold  this  against  the  Appellant  if  the  witness  who
    appeared on his behalf had indeed claimed asylum on sexuality  grounds,
    because then it could properly be argued that the Appellant  could  not
    have been unaware of this being a viable ground  of  an  asylum  claim,
    because he would have been exposed to sexuality as a basis for a claim.
     However, the same could not be said in the converse, as the judge  had
    appeared to do.

10. For her part, Ms Isherwood submitted that, whereas it would  have  been
    altogether better for the judge  to  have  expressly  referred  to  the
    standard that she was applying namely, the lower standard of proof,  it
    is not the case that the judge had in fact applied any  other  standard
    but the lower standard of proof applicable in asylum claims.  One  only
    had to read, she submitted, the body of the determination as  a  whole,
    to realise that the correct standard of proof had been applied.

11. The judge states that,

         "I find that the appellant has not established the required  burden
         and standard of proof that he is a gay man  or  that  he  would  be
         perceived as a gay man in Bangladesh.  I  therefore  find  that  he
         does not satisfy the first limb of the test set out in  HJ  (Iran)"
         (paragraph 31).

12. This showed that the judge was actually applying the correct  standard.
    But more importantly, if one looks at what precedes that statement,  it
    is clear that the Appellant's  claim  is  that  he  has  "had  one  gay
    relationship" and that this was in  2015  and  "lasted  about  6  to  7
    months".




13. However, when he was asked about this  relationship  in  his  interview
    "his answers are vague and he did not  know  basic  details  about  his
    claimed partner."  The judge was concerned that the Appellant  did  not
    know the claimed partner's age, and whether he  had  siblings,  or  his
    parents' names, or the name of the restaurant where he worked.  He  did
    not know where he lived.  He did not know who he lived with.  The judge
    was clear that, "I find it not credible that the Appellant would  claim
    to have had this relationship and yet had very sparse information about
    this individual, even to not knowing where he  lived"  (paragraph  25).
    This being so, there was, in substance, no error on  the  part  of  the
    judge.

14. In reply, Mr Bisson submitted that  the  judge  had  failed  to  assess
    credibility using a structured approach adopted  by  the  Secretary  of
    State given the Secretary of State's own Home Office  guidance  in  the
    API.  This makes it clear (at paragraph 5.4) that a structured approach
    to credibility assessment should focus on the credibility of the  claim
    rather than the personal credibility of  the  Claimant.   It  makes  it
    clear that, if after looking at  all  the  evidence,  and  keeping  the
    relatively low standard of proof in mind, the Claimant's statements and
    other evidence about the facts being established can be accepted,  then
    the claim is a credible one.

15. Mr Bisson submitted that I should allow the appeal.

No Error of Law

16. I am satisfied that he making of the decision  by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law, such that it falls to
    be set aside (see Section 12(1) of TCEA 2007) and that I should  remake
    the decision. I come to this conclusion,  notwithstanding  Mr  Bisson's
    commendable efforts to persuade me otherwise.  Whilst it is indeed  the
    case that it would  have  been  altogether  better  if  the  judge  had
    expressly referred to the fact that in asylum claims the lower standard
    of  proof  is  to  be  applied,  upon  a  closer  examination  of   the
    determination as a whole, it is clear that the judge  has  not  applied
    the higher standard, and has not misdirected herself  in  this  regard.
    There are two reasons for this.

17. First, there is the Appellant's account itself.   The  judge  is  clear
    that the account, even in relation to the Appellant having had "one gay
    relationship" is one where the Appellant's answers during his interview
    "were vague and he did  not  know  basic  detailed  about  his  claimed
    partner", such that  the  information  he  provided  was  "very  sparse
    information about this individual", even though "he claims to have been
    in touch with him on a regular basis" (paragraph 25).  Given the nature
    of the claim, the judge was entitled to require  of  the  Appellant  to
    provide answers as to how he met with his partner, but,  as  the  judge
    explains, "I also find the appellant's answers about how  and  when  he
    socialises to be vague and lacking in detail.  He claimed to  go  to  a
    gay club and started going to G.A.Y in 2010.  However he brought no-one
    with him who goes to these clubs with him".   When  he  produced  three
    photographs of himself in front of a sign which appeared to say  G.A.Y,
    it remained the case that, "he could not say who took the  photographs"
    (paragraph 26).  The plain fact was that the judge found the  Appellant
    to be "not a credible witness" (paragraph 23).

18. Second, insofar as it is the case that it is being  asserted  that  the
    judge erred in failing to apply the Secretary of State's own API, it is
    clear that even under this structured approach  the  judge  would  have
    been entitled to conclude that the Appellant could not succeed  on  the
    basis of the credibility of the claim, which  was  a  matter  that  the
    caseworker should first focus on.  There are five matters set out  here
    that need to be considered.  These are:

          i) the sufficiency of detail and specificity;

         ii) the internal consistency and coherence of the claim;

        iii) the consistency with specific and general COI;

         iv) the consistency with the other evidence; and

          v) its plausibility.

    The API makes it clear that "all indicators must be  applied,  and  the
    credibility of the account examined in the  round".   However,  if  one
    looks at the way in which the judge assesses credibility (at paragraphs
    25 to 30) it is clear that the judge had approached this matter in  the
    round and there is therefore simply  no  error  of  law  and  that  the
    Appellant could not have succeeded on the basis that is being contended
    for.

19. No anonymity order is made.

20. This appeal is dismissed.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 13th March 2019

