
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number PA/11111/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Heard at Field House
             Decision and Reasons Promulgated
On 29th January 2019   On 5th February 2019



                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PARKES


                                   Between

                                 MARLYN [G]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant: Miss M Vidal (Counsel, Haris Ali Solicitors)
For the Respondent: Mr D Clarke (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. The Appellant's asylum claim, made arising from her having left her
   employers alleging significant ill-treatment, was rejected. Although the
   claims of ill-treatment were accepted along with the evidence relating to
   domestic servitude in the Philippines, the appeal was dismissed for the
   reasons given in the decision promulgated on the 8th of November 2018.

2. The grounds argue that the Judge had not assessed whether the
   Appellant's treatment amounted to persecution in the light of the
   positive findings that had been made at paragraph 27 of the decision.
   That was material as past persecution is probative of future risk. It is
   also argued that the Judge had failed to consider the risk to the
   Appellant on return as a victim of servitude, she was the sole
   breadwinner for the family.

3. At the hearing the Home Office accepted that from paragraph 13 of the
   skeleton argument before the First-tier Tribunal it had been argued that
   the Appellant would be at risk as a former slave and that there would be
   no effective state protection. It was further accepted that that was a
   material error and that the appropriate course of action would be for the
   decision to be set aside and for the appeal to be remitted to the First-
   tier Tribunal for re-hearing.

4. I raised whether the Appellant had been referred to NRM for
   investigation of her circumstances. It transpired that the referral had
   not been made until the end of the hearing before the First-tier
   Tribunal, it was not clear why there had been a delay but there is
   nothing to suggest that is not right. As matters stand there is no
   information on the progress of the Appellant's case.

5. In the circumstances it is appropriate to set the decision aside but
   preserving the findings made by First-tier Tribunal Judge Mace set out in
   paragraph 27 that the Appellant had been treated very badly by her
   employers and that she had been physically abused. It will be incumbent
   on the Judge hearing the case next to make a finding as to whether the
   treatment amounted to persecution but having regard to the findings made
   by the NRM.

6. Given that there are proceedings in the NRM it is appropriate that the
   case is listed for CMR at Hatton Cross and for the First-tier Tribunal to
   be informed of the progress of the NRM referral before listing
   instructions can be given. Directions are given separately.

CONCLUSIONS

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision, the appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal
for re-hearing with findings preserved as indicated above, not to be heard
by First-tier Tribunal Judge Mace.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of
the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 and I make no
order.

Fee Award

In remitting this appeal I make no fee award which remains a matter for the
First-tier Tribunal Judge at the conclusion of the renewed hearing.

Signed: [pic]

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal (IAC)

Dated: 29th January 2019


