
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11464/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Leeds                                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 17 January 2020                            |On 24 February 2020           |
|Decision given orally at hearing              |                              |


                                   Before

                     THE HON. MR JUSTICE LANE, PRESIDENT

                                   Between

                                     KNK
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S A Salam, instructed by Nido Legal Ltd
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Foster who, following a  hearing  in  Bradford  on  6  September  2019,
    dismissed the appellant's appeal against the refusal by the  respondent
    of the appellant's protection claim.  Permission  was  refused  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal but was granted by the Upper Tribunal.   The  judge
    who granted permission in the Upper Tribunal considered that there  was
    a possible tension in the First-tier  Tribunal  judge's  acceptance  of
    independent evidence that divorce carries great stigma in Pakistan  and
    that families feel a need for vengeance that can include  murder;  with
    his conclusion that the appellant's subjective fear of violence at  the
    hands of her  former  husband  or  close  relatives  is  not  justified
    objectively.

 2. The judge found that the appellant had come to the United Kingdom as  a
    result of her marriage to a British citizen of Pakistani origin  living
    in the United Kingdom.  That marriage was an arranged marriage.  It was
    not a successful marriage.  It ended in divorce.   The  judge  accepted
    the evidence of the appellant that there had been violence and threats,
    whilst the marriage was in being and whilst the  divorce  was  pending.
    That is plain from paragraphs 25 to 28 of the judge's decision.

 3. The judge at paragraph 35 held that the appellant's objective fear  was
    sound.  She feared that if she returned to  Pakistan  her  ex-husband's
    family would seek to do her harm.   However,  importantly,  the  judge,
    having found that the family was one of  some  influence  in  Pakistan,
    made this finding at paragraph 37:-

         "37. On the evidence the appellant's former husband's family and in
             particular her mother-in-law have known her whereabouts  since
             October 2017, first at her aunt's house and latterly with  her
             brother in Oldham.  They have made little attempt  to  contact
             her and no recent threats have been made  to  harm  her.   The
             appellant in her witness statement and in her oral evidence at
             the hearing gave few  examples  of  any  direct  threats  made
             against her.  Such threats were  made  in  the  midst  of  the
             breakdown of the marriage and have  not  been  repeated.   The
             appellant's former husband and his immediate family are in the
             UK and not in Pakistan.  I take account of the influence  that
             the family has in Pakistan but there is not  evidence  of  any
             intent on their part to do the  appellant  harm.   Taking  the
             evidence as a whole, I find that  the  appellant's  subjective
             fear of harm is not objectively based."

 4. There is, despite Mr Salam's submissions, nothing  wrong  in  law  with
    that finding.  The judge concluded that there had been no  violence  or
    threats of violence since the conclusion of  the  divorce  proceedings.
    That is entirely compatible with the findings at paragraphs  25  to  28
    that, at an earlier stage, there had been such threats.  The fact  that
    such threats had been made  was  plainly  a  relevant  matter  to  have
    considered in determining what might happen if the appellant were to go
    to Pakistan.  The fact is, however, that the judge on the basis of oral
    evidence has given a number of reasons for concluding that there  would
    be no real risk of harm to the appellant from the family  in  Pakistan.
    Given that finding, whether or not the family is one  of  influence  is
    immaterial.  There would, according to  the  judge,  be  no  reasonable
    likelihood of the family taking hostile action.

 5. The judge considered the position of lone women in Pakistan.  The judge
    concluded that the appellant would not be alone  because  she  had  her
    parents who could provide her with support.  At paragraph 48, the judge
    noted that this would nevertheless still result in the appellant  being
    in an irregular situation because she was a divorcee and she would face
    stigmatisation and social rejection. However, the judge  did  not  find
    that this would amount to a real risk of  serious  harm.   Again,  that
    finding was entirely open to the judge to make.   It  should  be  noted
    that, in making that finding, the judge was not in any sense suggesting
    that the elderly parents of the appellant would be able to protect  her
    against hostile acts carried  by  the  ex-husband's  family.   For  the
    reasons the judge had given at paragraph 37, there  would  be  no  real
    risk of such hostile acts.  The finding here  was  about  the  societal
    position of the appellant as a lone woman.

 6. The final ground of challenge brought  by  the  appellant  against  the
    judge's decision concerns Article 8 of the ECHR.  At paragraph  49  the
    judge said:-

         "49. The appellant did not make a case based on family and  private
             life grounds under article 8 and I find no reason  to  support
             such an application."

 7. Mr Salam submits that paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules,  which
    has an Article 8 component, should have been considered by  the  judge.
    But this point is, with respect, a bad one.  The judge's findings  were
    plainly that, if returned to Pakistan, there would be no real  risk  of
    harm to the appellant from the ex-husband's family and there would  not
    be any significant problem for her as a lone woman living in  Pakistan,
    albeit that she  would  suffer  some  societal  stigmatisation.   Those
    findings could not possibly lead to a successful result under paragraph
    276ADE or otherwise in relation to Article 8.  For these reasons, there
    is no material error of law in the judge's decision and I  dismiss  the
    appeal.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


                      Signed                     Date: 21 February 2020


                      The Hon. Mr Justice Lane
                      President of the Upper Tribunal
                      Immigration and Asylum Chamber


