

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11195/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|on 19 July 2019                      |on 2 August 2019                     |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                     KM
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr Moriarty instructed by M & K Solicitors.
For the Respondent: Miss Isherwood Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS

    1. The appellant  appeals  with  permission  a  decision  of  First-Tier
       Tribunal Judge Beach ('the Judge') promulgated on 5 May 2019 in which
       the Judge dismissed the appellant's appeal on  protection  and  human
       rights grounds.



Background

    2. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan  born  on  15  June  1991  who
       entered the United Kingdom lawfully as a  Tier  4  (General)  Student
       Migrant on 25 December 2011. On 10 October  2016  the  appellant  was
       recorded as an absconder. On  4  April  2017  the  appellant  claimed
       asylum which was refused on 19 October 2017.  The  challenge  to  the
       refusal was the appeal before the Judge.

    3. The Judge sets out findings of fact from [30] of the  decision  under
       challenge setting out primary findings between [31 - 40] and findings
       in the alternative between [41 - 45].

    4. At [40] the Judge writes:

           "40.   I find that the appellant did face problems in  2009  and
                2010 as a result of his relationship with MB but that  these
                problems ceased  at  the  end  of  2010.  I  find  that  the
                appellant no longer faces any threats from MB's husband  and
                family and that he was  able  to  live  safely  in  Pakistan
                between 2010 and December 2011 when he left Pakistan. I find
                that the  evidence  is  not  sufficient  to  show  that  the
                appellant has faced threats in the UK and that there was  no
                evidence to show that there is any  ongoing  threat  to  the
                appellant."

    5. The finding in the alternative was that even if the Judge  was  wrong
       in rejecting the claim at [40] there is a sufficiency  of  protection
       and viable internal relocation option available to the appellant.

    6. The appellant sought permission to  appeal  asserting  a  failure  to
       apply the Joint Presidential Guidance Note No. 2, 2010, that  adverse
       credibility findings are not adequately reasoned, and that the  Judge
       failed to give adequate reasons for findings on material matters,  as
       more fully set out in the grounds seeking permission to appeal.

    7. Permission to appeal was granted  by  another  judge  the  First-tier
       Tribunal on 18 June 2019, the relevant section of  which  is  in  the
       following terms:

           "3.    It is arguable that the Judge failed to direct himself in
                accordance with the Joint Presidential Guidance Note  No.  2
                of 2010 or to have regard to AM (Afghanistan) v SSHD  [2017]
                EWCA Civ 1123. The Appellant relied on a psychiatric  report
                at p3-16 of his supplementary bundle and had been  diagnosed
                with PTSD. It is arguable that this affected the findings on
                the Appellant's credibility."

Error of law

    8. Although a number of documents were provided late  and  there  is  no
       reference in the appellants  skeleton  argument  to  the  psychiatric
       report, precisely because that document was drafted before receipt of
       the  up-to-date  medical  evidence,  it  is  clear  that  psychiatric
       evidence was before the Judge.

    9. There is no dispute in the manner in which the appeal was  conducted;
       the challenge being to the  way  in  which  the  Judge  assessed  the
       evidence in light of the appellants accepted vulnerability.

   10. At [22] the Judge specifically refers  to  the  fact  the  Presenting
       Officer did not challenge the  diagnosis  rather  claiming  that  the
       account given in the report was  a  hearsay  account  of  events  and
       relied upon a number of other evidential matters of  concern  to  the
       respondent.

   11. Ground 1 of the Grounds of Appeal drafted by Mr Moriarty  is  in  the
       following terms:

           "8.    It is noted that FtTJ Beach's determination  confirms  at
                [22] that Mr Mavarantonis (who represented the SSHD) did not
                challenge the diagnosis in the  expert  psychiatric  report.
                Accordingly, there was no dispute that the Appellant  was  a
                vulnerable witness, as stated in the skeleton argument  that
                was submitted on his behalf.

           9. Notwithstanding the above, the  FTT  determination  makes  no
                mention at all of the Joint Presidential Guidance Note  No.2
                of 2010: or the case of AM (Afghanistan) v SSHD [2017]  EWCA
                Civ 1123, which confirms as follows:

                 a. given the gravity of the consequences of a  decision  on
                    asylum  and  the  accepted  inherent   difficulties   in
                    establishing the facts of the claim as  well  as  future
                    risks, there is a lower standard of proof, expressed  as
                    a  'reasonable   chance',   'substantial   grounds   for
                    thinking' or 'a serious possibility';

                 b. while an assessment of personal  credibility  may  be  a
                    critical aspect of  some  claims,  particularly  in  the
                    absence of independent supporting evidence, it is not an
                    end in itself or a substitute for the application of the
                    criteria for refugee status which must  be  holistically
                    assessed;

                 c. the findings of medical experts must be treated as  part
                    of the holistic assessment: they are not to  be  treated
                    as an 'add-on' and rejected as a result  of  an  adverse
                    credibility assessment or  finding  made  prior  to  and
                    without regard to the medical evidence;

                 d. expert medical evidence can  be  critical  in  providing
                    explanation for difficulties in giving  a  coherent  and
                    consistent account of past events  and  for  identifying
                    any relevant safeguards required to meet vulnerabilities
                    that can  lead  to  disadvantage  in  the  determination
                    process, for  example,  in  the  ability  to  give  oral
                    testimony and under what conditions  (see  the  Guidance
                    Note below and JL (medical reports - credibility)  China
                    [2013] UKUT 00145 (IAC), at [26] to [27]);

                 e. an appellant's account of  his  or  her  fears  and  the
                    assessment of an appellant's credibility  must  also  be
                    judged  in  the   context   of   the   known   objective
                    circumstances and practices of the state in question and
                    a failure to do so can constitute an error of law; and

                 f. in making asylum decisions,  the  highest  standards  of
                    procedural fairness are required.

           10.    In light of the fact that the above findings were  relied
                upon in A's skeleton argument, it  is  submitted  that  FtTJ
                Beach's failure to incorporate either Guidance Note No.2  of
                2010 or these fundamental principles in  her  assessment  of
                A's credibility of itself 'will most likely be an  error  of
                law', as confirmed in AM (Afghanistan) v SSHD [ibid] at [30]-
                [33]."

   12. In [30-33] of AM the Court of Appeal found:

           "30.   To assist parties  and  tribunals  a  Practice  Direction
                'First-tier and Upper Tribunal Child, Vulnerable  Adult  and
                Sensitive Witnesses', was issued by  the  Senior  President,
                Sir  Robert  Carnwath,  with  the  agreement  of  the   Lord
                Chancellor  on  30  October   2008.   In   addition,   joint
                Presidential Guidance Note No 2 of 2010 was  issued  by  the
                then President of UTIAC, Blake J and the acting President of
                the  FtT  (IAC),  Judge  Arfon-Jones.  The  directions   and
                guidance contained in them are to be followed  and  for  the
                convenience of  practitioners,  they  are  annexed  to  this
                judgment. Failure to follow  them  will  most  likely  be  a
                material error of law. They are to be found in the Annex  to
                this judgment.

           31.    The PD and the Guidance Note [Guidance] provide  detailed
                guidance on the approach to be adopted by the tribunal to an
                incapacitated or vulnerable person. I agree  with  the  Lord
                Chancellor's submission that there are five key features:

                    a. the early identification of issues  of  vulnerability
                    is  encouraged,  if  at   all   possible,   before   any
                    substantive hearing through the use of a  CMRH  or  pre-
                    hearing review (Guidance [4] and [5]);

                    b. a person who is incapacitated or vulnerable will only
                    need to attend as a witness to give oral evidence  where
                    the tribunal determines that "the evidence is  necessary
                    to enable the fair hearing of the case and their welfare
                    would not  be  prejudiced  by  doing  so"  (PD  [2]  and
                    Guidance [8] and [9]);

                    c. where an incapacitated or vulnerable person does give
                    oral evidence, detailed  provision  is  to  be  made  to
                    ensure their welfare is protected before and during  the
                    hearing (PD [6] and [7] and Guidance [10]);

                    d. it is necessary to give special consideration to  all
                    of the personal circumstances  of  an  incapacitated  or
                    vulnerable person in assessing their evidence  (Guidance
                    [10.2] to [15]); and

                    e.  relevant  additional   sources   of   guidance   are
                    identified in the Guidance including from  international
                    bodies (Guidance Annex A [22] to [27]).

           32.    In addition, the Guidance at [4] and [5] makes  it  clear
                that one of the purposes  of  the  early  identification  of
                issues of vulnerability is to minimise exposure to  harm  of
                vulnerable  individuals.  The  Guidance   at   [5.1]   warns
                representatives   that   they   may   fail   to    recognise
                vulnerability and they  might  consider  it  appropriate  to
                suggest  that  an  appropriate  adult   attends   with   the
                vulnerable witness to give him or her assistance. That said,
                the primary responsibility for  identifying  vulnerabilities
                must rest  with  the  appellant's  representatives  who  are
                better placed than the Secretary of State's  representatives
                to have access to private medical and personal  information.
                Appellant's  representatives  should  draw  the   tribunal's
                attention to the PD and Guidance and should make submissions
                about  the  appropriate  directions  and  measures   to   be
                considered  e.g.  whether  an  appellant  should  give  oral
                evidence or  the  special  measures  that  are  required  to
                protect his welfare or make effective his access to justice.
                The SRA practice note of 2 July 2015 entitled  'Meeting  the
                needs of vulnerable clients' sets out how solicitors  should
                identify and communicate with vulnerable  clients.  It  also
                sets out the professional duty on  a  solicitor  to  satisfy
                him/herself that the client either does  or  does  not  have
                capacity. I shall come back to the guidance to  be  followed
                in the most difficult cases where a  guardian,  intermediary
                or facilitator may be required.

           33.    Given the emphasis on the determination of credibility on
                the facts of this appeal, there is particular force  in  the
                Guidance at [13] to [15]:

                    "13.    The  weight  to  be  placed  upon   factors   of
                    vulnerability may differ depending on the  matter  under
                    appeal, the burden and standard of proof and whether the
                    individual is a witness or an appellant.

                    14.    Consider  the  evidence,  allowing  for  possible
                    different degrees  of  understanding  by  witnesses  and
                    appellant compared to those [who] are not vulnerable, in
                    the context of evidence from others associated with  the
                    appellant and the background evidence before you.  Where
                    there were clear discrepancies  in  the  oral  evidence,
                    consider the extent to which the age,  vulnerability  or
                    sensitivity of  the  witness  was  an  element  of  that
                    discrepancy or lack of clarity.

                    15.    The decision should record whether  the  Tribunal
                    has concluded the appellant (or a witness) is  a  child,
                    vulnerable  or  sensitive,  the  effect   the   Tribunal
                    considered the identified vulnerability had in assessing
                    the evidence before it and this whether the Tribunal was
                    satisfied whether the appellant had established  his  or
                    her case to the relevant standard of proof.   In  asylum
                    appeals, weight should be given to objective indications
                    of risk rather than necessarily to a state of mind.""

   13. The Judge is criticised for failing to set out in  the  determination
       an  explanation  for  how  the  appellant's  vulnerability  has  been
       factored into the weight to be given to the  appellant's  credibility
       or the weight to be given to the evidence.  It  is  also  argued  the
       Judge did not adequately consider the psychiatric issues.

   14. It is also noted that at [36] the Judge finds:

           "36.   Even if the appellant did not feel able at that  time  to
                tell Immigration (and I can see no reason why he should  not
                have been able to do so) about his problems in Pakistan,  he
                at  no  stage  thereafter  (until   April   2017)   informed
                Immigration of why he did not wish  to  return  to  Pakistan
                despite reporting for a number of months and knowing that he
                was at risk of removal from the UK having been  served  with
                documents which confirm this."

   15. There is no indication that in making such  an  adverse  finding  any
       regard  was  taken  the  appellant's  psychiatric  presentation   and
       inadequate or no reasoning is provided for why  the  Judge  concludes
       the appellant should not have been able to disclose  the  information
       at the relevant time.

   16. Mr Moriarty is correct when referring to the fact that  there  is  no
       reference in the decision to either the Presidential Guidance on  the
       assessment of evidence from vulnerable witnesses  or  mention  of  or
       specific application of the principles set out in the above case law.
       It is therefore not possible to ascertain whether the Judge did apply
       relevant guidance when assessing  the  weight  to  be  given  to  the
       appellants evidence or, even if the same was in the Judge's mind, how
       such weight was assessed in light of the appellant's vulnerability.

   17. As it is not clear an appropriate assessment of the evidence was made
       it  is  not  established  the  Judge's  findings   are   sustainable.
       Accordingly the determination shall be set aside  with  no  preserved
       findings and the appeal remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal  sitting
       at Taylor House to be considered afresh by a judge other  than  Judge
       Beach  who  shall  give  proper  consideration  to   the   appellants
       vulnerability.

Decision

   18. The First-tier Tribunal Judge materially erred in law.  I  set  aside
       the decision of the original Judge. I  remit  the  appeal  to  Taylor
       House to be heard afresh by a judge other than Judge Beach.




  Anonymity.

   19. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to  rule  45(4)(i)  of
       the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.

       I make such order pursuant to  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
       (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008


Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 29 July 2019

