
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/11683/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|on 12th July 2019                  |on 2nd August 2019                 |
|                                   |                                   |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DEANS


                                   Between

                                  NSONA [N]
                        (No anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr W Olabamiji, DMO Olabamiji, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This is an appeal against a decision by Judge of the First-tier
      Tribunal David Clapham dismissing an appeal on protection and human
      rights grounds.

   2. The appellant is a national of the Democratic Republic of Congo.  In
      1998 she and her husband left DRC and went to South Africa, where in
      2003 the appellant was granted refugee status.  The appellant's
      marriage broke down and the appellant states she last had contact with
      her husband in March 2015.  According to the appellant, in 2015 in
      South Africa she became active with the DRC opposition group UDPS, as
      a result of which she was harassed and persecuted by an agent of the
      DRC.  In November 2017 the appellant applied for a visa to travel to
      the UK as a visitor.  The appellant arrived in the UK on 10th January
      2018 and made a protection claim on 24th January 2018.  The
      appellant's two daughters (referred to herein as Q1 and Q2) reside
      with her in the UK as currently does her adult son (referred to as C).



   3. The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal did not believe the appellant's
      claim that she was at risk in South Africa from an agent of the DRC.
      Even supposing she was, the judge was not satisfied that she would not
      receive sufficient protection from the South African authorities.  The
      judge did not accept that there was a risk to the appellant in DRC.
      The judge concluded that the appellant's account given in evidence was
      not credible and that her claim for protection must fail.  The judge
      then stated that the appellant's human rights claim would stand or
      fall with the asylum claim.  The judge dismissed the appeal on human
      rights grounds as well as on protection grounds.

   4. Permission to appeal was granted by the Upper Tribunal on the sole
      ground that the judge arguably did not properly consider the rights of
      the appellant and her children under Article 8.

Error of law
   5. At the hearing before me it was pointed out that Article 8 was raised
      before the First-tier Tribunal both in the grounds of appeal and in a
      written submission for the appellant.  Mr Diwnycz very properly
      acknowledged that he was not able to argue that the Judge of the First-
      tier Tribunal did not err in law by not addressing Article 8 in his
      decision.

   6. Accordingly it was accepted by the parties that the Judge of the First-
      tier Tribunal erred in law by omitting to address Article 8.  This
      part of his decision, but only this part, was therefore set aside to
      be re-made on the basis of the evidence before the First-tier Tribunal
      and submissions made at the hearing before me.  In addition there was
      an Article 15(2A) application on behalf of the appellant to admit a
      bundle containing evidence about the appellant's adult son, C, who is
      now aged twenty-one.  As this evidence addresses the family's current
      circumstances and was not available at the time of the hearing before
      the First-tier Tribunal, I allowed it to be admitted.

Submissions
   7. Mr Olabamiji referred to the appellant's 13-year-old daughter, Q2, who
      has epilepsy.  The child was born in South Africa and speaks only
      English and not Lingala.  The other daughter, Q1, is aged 16 and was
      also born in South Africa.  The appellant is a single mother.  Her
      son, C, now has a mental illness, as evidenced by a psychiatric report
      in the latest appellant's bundle.  Mr Olabamiji submitted that C has
      not established independent family life but is part of the appellant's
      family unit.  He is visited by a community nurse and this is likely to
      continue for 2 years.  It would be unduly harsh to remove the
      appellant from the UK and not in the best interests of her children.

   8. For the respondent, Mr Diwnycz submitted that the appellant's son, C,
      is an adult.  In terms of Kugathas [2003] EWCA Civ 31, it had not been
      shown that he has family life with his mother.  He was convicted of
      two offences and medically assessed as suffering from psychosis.  The
      daughter Q1 was of an age when she would still be in full-time
      education.  There was no evidence that she was in need of medical
      treatment or had any special needs.

   9. Mr Diwnycz referred to a medical report on the daughter Q2
      (Appellant's bundle, p 153).  Her epilepsy was controlled by
      medication and she had had no seizures since 2017.  Although the
      children did not speak Lingala, French was an official language in DRC
      and even English might be used.

  10. In response, Mr Olabamiji asked me to consider the mental capacity of
      the appellant's son, C, and his relationship with the appellant, who
      is his primary carer.  It might not be possible for C to live a normal
      life without the appellant.  There was still a medical report awaited
      on whether C is capable of giving instructions in relation to an
      appeal arising from a protection claim made in his own right.
      Although C was discharged from hospital he might relapse.  Article 8
      was engaged and in all the circumstances it would be unduly harsh to
      remove the appellant and her daughters to DRC.

Discussion
  11. It has not been suggested that the appellant might qualify for leave
      under the Immigration Rules.  Her appeal depends upon succeeding
      outside the Rules under Article 8 on the basis of a very strong or
      compelling claim which outweighs the public interest in maintaining
      effective immigration controls, in terms of Agyarko [2017] UKSC 11.
      In other words, the appellant will succeed if removal would result in
      unjustifiably harsh consequences for her and her children amounting to
      a disproportionate interference with her private or family life.  In
      considering this I must have regard to section 117B of the
      Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (as amended).  Mr
      Olabamiji also referred me to ZH (Tanzania) [2011] UKSC 4 in relation
      to the best interests of the children, and to an unreported decision
      of the Upper Tribunal in SS-A (IA/29332/2013, 20th October 2015), to
      which Mr Diwnycz did not object.

  12. Neither of the appellant's daughters are "qualifying children" in
      terms of s 117B(6) of the 2002 Act.  They are neither British citizens
      nor have they lived here for a continuous period of 7 years or more.
      They were born in South Africa and have lived most of their lives
      there, having come to the UK as recently as January 2018.  Their best
      interests are a primary consideration of this appeal but in
      considering their best interests I will take as the starting point
      that it is in their best interests to remain in a family unit with
      their mother.

  13. The appellant's son, C, is aged 21.  Mr Olabamiji informed me that he
      now lives with his mother, following his discharge from hospital, but
      this was not always the case.  A social work report in the latest
      bundle for the appellant states that, according to C, he lived for
      several months in accommodation provided by the Home Office which he
      shared with a person from eastern Europe, before that in a hostel in
      Glasgow, and prior to that in Croydon.  It is not clear whether the
      appellant's mother and sisters were also in Croydon at that time.  A
      psychiatric report in the same bundle states that on moving to the UK,
      C initially lived in London but then lived with his mother and two
      siblings in Glasgow.  It seems that while sometimes C has lived with
      his mother, he has also lived away from his family for periods.

  14. In July 2018 C committed a sexual assault on a female shop worker and
      assaulted as community safety worker to his injury.  C pled guilty to
      both offences.  He was for a period in HMP Polmont and in April 2019,
      5 days after he was liberated, he was admitted to a psychiatric ward,
      from which he was discharged on 12 June 2019.  C has a psychotic
      illness and has responded well to medication but there is a high risk
      of relapse.  His consultant psychiatrist records that according to C's
      mother he has always required some assistance with daily living and
      the psychiatrist suggests this is in keeping with some learning
      disability.  The appellant is keen that C lives with her and she
      supervises his medication.

  15. While there is some evidence of dependency between C and the
      appellant, I am not satisfied this exhibits the strong ties to
      constitute family life as envisaged in Kugathas.  There has been some
      attempt by C to live independently.  This was brought to an end by his
      offending and the diagnosis of a psychotic illness.  Were the
      appellant not there to supervise C's medication and assist with his
      daily living then the community nurse and other health and social
      services might be called upon.  It is significant that C has his own
      application to stay in the UK and, according to his psychiatric
      report, this is at the appeal stage. It ought not to be assumed that C
      will continue to reside in the UK or that he will acquire any right to
      do so.

  16. Reference has already been made to the medical evidence for the
      appellant's younger daughter, Q2.  A letter of 26th September 2018
      from her GP (Appellant's bundle, p 153) states that her epilepsy is
      controlled by medication.  Her last seizure was at the start of 2017.
      There was some evidence in the respondent's bundle on the availability
      of treatment for epilepsy in South Africa and in DRC.  It appears from
      this that while treatment would be available in South Africa, health
      care in DRC is less well-organised and more difficult to access,
      particularly outside the main cities.  There is no evidence of any
      health problems or special needs in respect of the older daughter, Q1.

  17. I note that the appellant reported some health difficulties of her own
      to the respondent.  These included headaches, gastritis and cramps.  I
      was not referred to any medical evidence in relation to the appellant
      herself and her own health was not mentioned in the submissions made
      to me.


  18. In terms of s 117B(1) of the 2002 Act, the maintenance of effective
      immigration controls is in the public interest.  As far as knowledge
      of English is concerned, I note that when the appellant gave evidence
      before the First-tier Tribunal she did so through a Lingala
      interpreter.  This is despite having lived in South Africa for many
      years.  In relation to s 117B(2), it seems therefore that the
      appellant is not fluent in English, although I understand this to be
      the language used by her daughters.  In relation to s 117B(3), there
      was no evidence before me that the appellant is financially
      independent and would not be a burden on taxpayers.  Although the
      appellant entered the UK with a visa and then claimed protection, her
      stay here is precarious.  Little weight should therefore be given to
      any private life she has established in the UK, in terms of s 117B(5).


  19. In terms of s 117B there is little to put on the appellant's side in
      the balancing exercise under Article 8.  So far as family life is
      concerned, the appellant's daughters would be with her were she to be
      removed from the UK.  It would be in their best interests to remain
      with their mother.  While both daughters appear to be benefiting from
      attending school in the UK they have been here only since January
      2018.  They are teenagers who have spent most of their lives in South
      Africa.  The younger daughter, Q2, is receiving medication for
      epilepsy and with the benefit of this medication her condition is
      under control.  According to the respondent, treatment would be
      available in South Africa and there is no firm evidence that it would
      not be available in DRC.

  20. There is some limited evidence of dependency upon the appellant by her
      adult son, C, largely in consequence of his having developed a
      psychotic illness.  C has, however, no right to remain in the UK and
      is in the process of pursuing an appeal seeking to be allowed to stay.
       His status at present is precarious.  The assistance he is given by
      his mother with daily living and supervising his medication could be
      provided by other means.  C lived independently from his mother for a
      period following his arrival in the UK.  It seems reasonable to assume
      he could do so again.  C was discharged from hospital on 12th June
      2019 so it is only for a few weeks so far that the appellant has been
      assuming greater responsibility for him.

  21. Taking into account C's precarious immigration status and the short
      time that has elapsed since his diagnosis of medical illness, there is
      little evidence to show dependency amounting to family life between
      the appellant and C and unjustifiably harsh consequences arising from
      interference with such family life.  I accept that the appellant is
      able to help with the care of C and the supervision of his medication.
       Were she no longer able to do so I am not persuaded that the
      consequences would be unjustifiably harsh either for the appellant or
      for C.  Furthermore, if in due course C is not permitted to remain in
      the UK he may rejoin his mother outside the UK.
  22. In carrying out the balancing exercise under Article 8, I am not
      persuaded that there would be unjustifiably harsh consequences arising
      from the appellant's removal from the UK which would outweigh the
      public interest in maintaining effective immigration control.  The
      appeal will not succeed under Article 8.

Conclusions
  23. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the
      making of an error of law in the Tribunal's consideration of Article
      8.

  24. The decision is set aside so far as it concerns Article 8.

  25. I re-make the decision by dismissing the appeal.

Anonymity
The First-tier Tribunal did not make a direction for anonymity.  I have not
been asked to make such a direction.  While my decision contains some
personal information involving children, the children are not identified by
name.  In the circumstances it is not necessary to make a direction.





M E Deans
                                    24th July 2019
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
Approval for Promulgation


