
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
PA/11828/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Bradford                   |       Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 11th April 2019                   |       On 8th May 2019               |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

                                     HAG
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Warren, Counsel instructed by Barnes Harrild and
                       Dyer Solicitors
For the Respondent:  Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Iraq  born  in  1989.  He  appeals  with
    permission against the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
    Rosemary Bradshaw) to dismiss his protection appeal.


 2. Permission was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judges Landes on the 11th
    January 2019.

 3. The basis of the Appellant's case before the Tribunal was that he could
    not return to his home area of Mosul/Kirkuk because  these  areas  have
    been held to be 'contested' ie in state of internal armed conflict such
    that civilians may, by virtue of their presence alone, face a real risk
    of serious harm: AA (Article 15(c) Iraq CG [2015]  UKUT  00544.   As  a
    Kurd, the Appellant had particular concerns about the activity of Shi'a
    militias in the area. He further submitted that he would be targeted by
    members of Ansar al-Islam, a militant  Sunni  Islamist  group,  because
    they had in the past tried to recruit him and he had informed on  them.
    Relying on these facts the Appellant claimed entitled to  international
    protection under the Refugee Convention, and in the  alternative  under
    Article 15(c) of the Qualification Directive.

 4. The Respondent refused to grant protection on the 25th September  2018.
    The Respondent did not accept that the country  guidance  given  in  AA
    (Iraq) held good. In particular it was not accepted that Mosul was  any
    longer 'contested', since the group Daesh/ISIL had been defeated there.
     The Respondent therefore concluded that it was open to  the  Appellant
    to return to his hometown.  If he did not wish to do this, it  remained
    open to him, in the alternative, to relocate within the 'Iraqi  Kurdish
    Region'. The Appellant is fit and able to work, can speak  Kurdish  and
    it would not therefore be 'unduly harsh' to expect him to do so.

 5. When the matter came before the First-tier  Tribunal,  the  matters  in
    issue therefore were:

              i) Whether the  Appellant  is  at  a  real  risk  of  harm  in
                 Mosul/Kirkuk today;


             ii)  If  so,  whether  he  could  reasonably  be  expected   to
                 internally relocate within the IKR.

 6. Of the first issue, the First-tier Tribunal directed itself towards the
    findings of an earlier Tribunal,  contained  in  the  determination  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Ennals dated 19th August 2008.  Judge  Ennals
    had on that occasion rejected the Appellant's claim to be at risk  from
    Ansar al-Islam.    The Appellant had argued before Judge Ennals that he
    could not be expected to internally relocate within  Kurdistan  because
    his father had been complicit in the  war  crimes  of  Saddam  Hussain.
    This too was rejected. Judge Bradshaw adopted these findings and saw no
    reason to depart from them.


 7. On the second matter, Judge Bradshaw directed herself  to  the  country
    guidance on internal flight in AAH (Iraqi Kurds - internal  relocation)
    Iraq CG UKUT 00212. She found that the Appellant (or  more  accurately,
    the Respondent) was in possession of a genuine CSID,  the  same  having
    been produced when the Appellant first claimed  asylum  in  the  United
    Kingdom in 2008. She further found that the  Appellant  had  failed  to
    demonstrate that he did not have family members to whom he  could  turn
    for support. On that basis she concluded that it would  not  be  unduly
    harsh if the Appellant were to establish himself in the  IKR,  and  the
    appeal was dismissed.

 8. The central ground for complaint in the application  before  the  Upper
    Tribunal concerns the approach taken to the Appellant's CSID, a  matter
    to which I return below. Before me however the parties agreed that  the
    determination contains a more fundamental flaw, that is  a  failure  to
    make complete findings in respect  of  issue  (i)  above,  whether  the
    Appellant faces a real risk of harm in his home area.

 9. As I note above, the Appellant's claim rested on three  claimed  risks.
    There was the 'historical risk' relating to  Ansar  al-Islam,  a  claim
    that was rejected by Judge Ennals in 2008 and again by  Judge  Bradshaw
    in 2019. That finding is not challenged before me. Then there  was  the
    'general risk' arising from the armed conflict in  northern  Iraq,  and
    the 'specific risk' arising from the threat posed to Kurdish  civilians
    by Shi'a militias now filling  the  vacuum  left  by  ISIL.    For  the
    reasons set out below I have some difficulty with the approach taken by
    the First-tier Tribunal in respect of these matters.

10. The Respondent's position is that since the military defeat of ISIL the
    'general risk' has abated to the extent that AA (Iraq) should no longer
    be followed.  The Tribunal appeared to have accepted that  submissions,
    and that finding is unchallenged in the grounds. Before me the  parties
    nevertheless agreed that the negation of one threat does not mean  that
    the area is necessarily safe: decision-makers are  obliged  to  conduct
    their own risk assessment, based on the evidence before them.  That  is
    where the 'specific risk' becomes potentially relevant.   It  may  have
    been open to the Tribunal to accept the  Respondent's  submission  that
    there has been a material change in circumstances on the ground, but it
    was still necessary to consider what the new circumstances were.  I  am
    unable to find any such risk assessment in the determination.

11. That omission would of course be of no consequence if the appeal  would
    in any event have fallen for dismissal on internal flight grounds.  The
    Tribunal concluded, at paragraphs  60-63,  that  the  Appellant  is  in
    possession of a CSID and that with this  he  will  be  able  to  access
    services, accommodation and employment in Iraq. It would not, in  those
    circumstances, be unreasonable to expect him  to  internally  relocate,
    for instance to the IKR.

12. Ms Warren challenges that finding on the  grounds  that  there  was  no
    evidential basis for it, and  that  it  conflicts,  without  Devaseelan
    distinction, with findings made by Judge Ennals. The argument goes like
    this. A number of years ago the Appellant claimed asylum.  He  asserted
    that he was a minor. His age was disputed, and some time  before  Judge
    Ennals heard his initial asylum appeal in 2008, the Appellant  produced
    a CSID which demonstrated that he was a child. In  his  decision  dated
    the 19th August 2008 Judge Ennals conducted a Tanveer Ahmed  assessment
    of that document, in the round with the remaining evidence. He accepted
    the assessment of Kensington and  Chelsea  social  services  department
    that the Appellant was in fact an adult, and concluded  that  the  CSID
    was not in fact genuine.    Ms Warren submits that notwithstanding  her
    lay client's protestations, that is a finding that must stand.

13. In approaching her task Judge Bradshaw properly directed herself to the
    undisturbed findings of Judge Ennals and to the guidance in  Devaseelan
    v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2002] UKIAT 00702.     At
    paragraph 34 of her decision she finds that there is no evidence before
    her which could cast doubt upon Judge Ennals decision.  She goes on  to
    mark the Appellant's evidence that his CSID was in  fact  genuine,  and
    then as I have explained, proceeds on that basis to  conclude  that  he
    could use this card in Iraq to access the basic services  required.   I
    am satisfied that this was an error. The clear finding  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal in 2008 was that  this  card  was  a  fake,  produced  to
    substantiate a fraudulent claim to be an unaccompanied minor. There was
    no new evidence before the First-tier  Tribunal  which  could  displace
    that finding. The Appellant claimed it was genuine, but he  had  always
    done so, and this evidence had been expressly rejected by Judge Ennals.
    It is difficult to see how a fake CSID (bearing  the  photograph  of  a
    child)  could  be  of  any  assistance  to  the  Appellant  at  all  in
    reintegrating in Iraq.  Conversely there was no  evidential  basis  for
    the conclusion that it was genuine, the only such  evidence  being  the
    Appellant's  own,  excluded  from  consideration  by   the   Devaseelan
    guidelines.

14. I therefore set the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  aside  in  its
    entirety. Mr Diwnycz did not demur and  both  parties  agreed  that  in
    light of the extent of fact finding required, this  is  a  matter  that
    should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.

    Anonymity Order

15. This case concerns a claim for  international  protection.  Having  had
    regard to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
    and the Presidential Guidance Note No 1 of  2013:  Anonymity  Orders  I
    therefore consider it appropriate to make an  order  in  the  following
    terms:


         "Unless and until a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
        Appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
        shall directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his
        family.  This  direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  both  the
        Appellant  and  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply  with   this
        direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings"


Decisions


16. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contains errors of law and
    it is set aside.


17. There is an order for anonymity.


                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce

                               11th April 2019
