
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/11030/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|At: Bradford                         |Decision Promulgated                 |
|On: 10th December 2018               |On: 18th February 2019               |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                                  Chido [V]
                        (no anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:           Ms Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Davison, Ison Harrison Solicitors


                                  DECISION

 1. The Respondent (Mr [V]) is a national of Nigeria born in 1966.  On  the
    20th  June  2018  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Cox)  allowed  his
    deportation appeal on human rights and protection grounds.  By order of
    Judge Nightingale dated the 26th September 2018 the Secretary of  State
    was purportedly granted permission to appeal against that  decision  on
    protection grounds only, Judge Nightingale finding no arguable error in
    Judge Cox's findings on Article 8.


 2. Before me Mr Davison resisted the grounds on two fronts.  He  submitted
    that there was nothing wrong with the First-tier Tribunal's approach to
    the question of protection, but his primary case  was  that  permission
    should not have been granted because the application should never  have
    been admitted.

 3. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal was  served  on  the  20th
    June 2018. The deadline for an application for permission to appeal was
    therefore the 4th July 2018. The Secretary of State did  not  make  his
    application until the 7th September 2018.  In  her  decision  to  grant
    permission,  Judge  Nightingale  describes  this  as   an   "in   time"
    application, and makes no reference to the fact  that  the  application
    was in fact being made some two months past the  deadline  set  by  the
    Procedure Rules.


 4. Upon receipt of Judge Nightingale's decision Mr  [V]'s  representatives
    wrote to the Tribunal pointing out that she had failed to  address  the
    issue of timeliness.  Their letter is dated the 16th October 2018.  The
    Tribunal responded on the 25th October 2018 as follows:


         "... if the appellant wishes to argue that the First-tier Tribunal
         grant of permission is conditional upon a decision whether time
         should be extended, that case should be made at the error of law
         hearing. The parties are referred to the case of Samir (First-tier
         Tribunal Permission to Appeal: Time) [2013] UKUT 00003".

 5. Before me Ms Pettersen conceded that Judge Nightingale does  appear  to
    have erred in failing to address timeliness. She accepted that  it  was
    open to me, following Samir,  to  assess  the  question  of  timeliness
    myself, and invited me to do so.

 6. Ms Pettersen relied on the grounds as drafted  by  Mr  Zukunft  of  the
    Special Appeals Team in London. Mr Zukunft acknowledges that the  delay
    in the grounds being lodged is significant but submits that  permission
    should nevertheless be granted for the following reason:

         "... this application was received by the Specialist  Appeals  Team
         on the 4th September, the message attached from  Bradford  IAC  was
         'please find attached determination as per request,  not  sure  why
         you have not received this determination'. The reason for the delay
         is not  known  or  where  the  fault  lies  and  it  would  not  be
         appropriate to speculate"


 7. This then was the Secretary of State's case: the determination had  not
    been served upon the Home Office until the 4th September and  this  was
    the reason for the delay.


 8. Mr Davison provided me with a copy of the 'IA60' dated  the  20th  June
    2018. This is a covering letter that is sent out  with  all  First-tier
    Tribunal decisions. In this case that document indicates  that  on  the
    20th June 2018 the determination was sent to Ison Harrison  Solicitors,
    and it was copied  to  the  Presenting  Officers  Unit  in  Leeds.   Ms
    Pettersen accepted that this would be in  line  with  normal  practice,
    which would be that Bradford IAC would send any determinations  to  the
    Presenting Officers Unit which dealt with those cases, i.e. the  office
    in Leeds. She was not aware of any practice of the determination  being
    sent directly to the Specialist Appeals Team in London.

 9. Mr Davison submits that the burden lies on the Secretary  of  State  so
    show good reason for such a  significant  delay.  He  submits  that  in
    circumstances where the IA60 clearly indicates that  the  determination
    was properly served on the POU in Leeds on the 20th June, the fact that
    the Specialist Appeals Team in London did not  see  it  until  the  4th
    September 2018 is neither here nor there.   He has  a  good  point.  Mr
    Zunkunft's  grounds  very  specifically  refer  to  the  decision  only
    arriving at the Special Appeals Team  in  September.  The  grounds  are
    silent as to whether the IA60  is  wrong  or  the  POU  in  Leeds  ever
    received the decision.  Ms  Pettersen  had  nothing  from  the  POU  to
    contradict the face of the IA60. In those circumstances  the  Secretary
    of State has not shown good reasons for the delay and I refuse to admit
    the application.

10. The Secretary of State's application for permission is not admitted.


                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                                    10th
                                December 2018








