
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA115102016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 25 April 2017                         |On 5 May 2017                     |
|                                         |                                  |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE blum

                                   Between

                                BARZAN AHMADI
                       (anonymity NOT direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr G Lee, Counsel, instructed by Barnes Harrild &
                    Dyer Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

     1. This is an appeal against the decision of Judge of  the  First-tier
        Tribunal Sweet (FtJ), promulgated on 02 December  2016,  dismissing
        the appellant's appeal against the respondent's decision of 27th of
        August 2016 refusing his protection and human rights claims.


   Factual Background


     2. The appellant is a national of Iran, born on 21 March 1987.  He  is
        of Kurdish ethnicity. He entered the United  Kingdom  on  02  March
        2016 and claimed asylum after being apprehended the same  day.  His
        asylum claim was based on his 4 year  secret  relationship  with  a
        Kurdish girl. He was caught by the girl's mother on 15 January 2016
        (25 Dey 1394 in the Iranian calendar)) having  sexual  intercourse.
        He was reported to the authorities and the girl's family wished  to
        kill him. The appellant's maternal uncle located an agent  to  take
        him to a safe country. The appellant left  Iran  illegally  on  the
        same date (15 January 2016). He travelled through Turkey and  Italy
        before arriving in France where he was fingerprinted at which  time
        he informed the French authorities that he was from Iraq.


     3. The respondent rejected the appellant's claim to  have  been  in  a
        four-year relationship and to have been caught  by  her  mother  in
        flagrante delicto. This was because the respondent  had  conclusive
        evidence that the appellant had been fingerprinted in Greece on  19
        December 2015. This was inconsistent with his claim to  have  never
        left Iran before 15 January 2016. The respondent  additionally  had
        conclusive evidence that the appellant had attempted to gain  entry
        to the UK on 11 November 2007. The appellant had been fingerprinted
        in France on 3 February 2016 after  being  arrested  attempting  to
        enter the United Kingdom. On this occasion  he  gave  his  name  as
        Barzan Ahmad, a date of birth of 1 January 1988, and claimed to  be
        Iraqi. The fingerprints given on that day matched  fingerprints  he
        gave when he later entered the United Kingdom on 2 March 2016.  The
        details he gave on 3 February 2016  also  matched  the  details  he
        provided  when  arrested  on  11  November  2007.  The   respondent
        therefore concluded that the appellant had no fear  of  persecution
        in Iran.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

     4. The appeal was heard on 23 November 2016. A bundle prepared by  the
        appellant for the hearing contained, inter alia, an  expert  report
        from Prof Emile Joffe, dated 26 August 2016. Prior to  the  hearing
        the respondent had not served  on  the  appellant  any  fingerprint
        evidence. In his oral evidence the appellant stated that he had not
        been fingerprinted in Greece in December  2015,  and  that  he  had
        never been to Greece.


     5. During cross-examination two documents, 'IABS Search result'  (Form
        A1a), and 'Eurodac Search Result' (Form B1a) were received  by  the
        Presenting Officer and served on the Tribunal  and  the  appellant.
        These documents indicated that the appellant had been fingerprinted
        in Greece on 19 December 2015, and that he had  been  fingerprinted
        in Dunkirk on 3 February 2016 when he gave the name Barzan Ahmad, a
        date of birth of 1 January 1988, and claimed to be Iraqi.


     6. As a result of the late provision of this evidence the  appellant's
        representative, Mr Lee, who continued to represent him in the Upper
        Tribunal, made an adjournment application on  the  basis  that  the
        fingerprint  evidence  had  not  been  served  in  accordance  with
        directions,  had  not  been  addressed  by  the  appellant  in  his
        statement or in his examination in chief,  and  had  not  been  the
        subject  of  investigation  or  verification  by  the   appellant's
        representatives. The FtJ declined to adjourn the hearing to another
        date. He reasoned that the appellant had already been given  notice
        of the alleged fingerprinting in 2007 and 2015 and that  there  had
        been ample time for him to provide instructions to  his  solicitors
        in respect of these allegations. The  FtJ  nevertheless  offered  a
        short hearing adjournment on the day  to  enable  Mr  Lee  to  take
        further instructions and, if  necessary,  take  a  further  witness
        statement as there was an interpreter from the  solicitor's  office
        present  at  the  hearing.  Mr  Lee  declined   to   take   further
        instructions and the hearing continued.


     7. In  his  decision  the  FtJ  attached  significant  weight  to  the
        fingerprint evidence. Given that the appellant maintained that  the
        incident that caused him to leave Iran only occurred on 15  January
        2016 the FtJ concluded that the fingerprint evidence  fundamentally
        undermined  the  appellant's  credibility.  The  FtJ   additionally
        attached weight to further documentation produced by the Presenting
        Officer indicating that the appellant  had  been  fingerprinted  in
        Calais on 11 November 2007 when he gave the same date of  birth  (1
        January 1988), the same name (Barzan Ahmad) and also claimed to  be
        Iraqi. The FtJ additionally took account of section 8 of the Asylum
        and Immigration (Treatment of Claimants, et cetera.) Act  2004  for
        his failure to claim asylum in Italy and France.


     8. The FtJ considered whether the appellant would face a real risk  of
        persecution if returned to Iran based on his Kurdish ethnicity. The
        FtJ considered the leading country guidance  case  of  SSH  and  HR
        (illegal exit: failed asylum seeker)  Iran  CG  [2016]  UKUT  00308
        (IAC) which established that an Iranian male in respect of whom  no
        adverse interest had previously  been  manifested  by  the  Iranian
        State did not face a real risk of persecution/breach of his article
        3 rights on return to Iran on account of having left Iran illegally
        and/or being a failed asylum seeker. The FtJ accepted that SSH  had
        not been argued on the issue of specific risk to Kurdish  returnees
        as a result of their ethnicity. The FtJ did however  refer  to  the
        consideration given by the Upper Tribunal to the position of Kurds,
        noting that they were  disproportionately  targeted  for  arbitrary
        arrest, were subject to prolonged detention and physical abuse, and
        that being Kurdish may be an exacerbating  factor  for  a  returnee
        otherwise of interest. Whilst making the briefest of references  to
        the expert report from Prof Joffe the FtJ declined to  depart  from
        the findings in SSH. Whilst accepting that  the  appellant  was  at
        greater risk as a failed asylum seeker who was Kurdish the FtJ  did
        not find this meant that the appellant was at risk on  return,  not
        least because he had  already  found  the  appellant's  account  to
        wholly lack credibility. The FtJ briefly stated that, for the  same
        reasons, he  did  not  accept  that  there  were  very  significant
        obstacles to the  appellant's  return  to  the  wrong  pursuant  to
        paragraph  276ADE  of  the  immigration  rules.  The   appeal   was
        dismissed.

The grounds of appeal and the grant of permission

     9. The grounds of appeal contended firstly that  the  FtJ  acted  with
        conspicuous unfairness in admitting the fingerprint evidence and in
        refusing to adjourn to another  day.  Reliance  was  placed  on  RZ
        (Eurodac - fingerprint  match  -admissible)  Eritrea  [2008]  UKAIT
        00007 which indicated that, as a matter  of  fairness  and  natural
        justice, and appellant should have the opportunity of obtaining and
        calling his own  evidence  to  rebut  evidence  relied  on  by  the
        respondent. It  was  submitted  that  it  was  impossible  for  the
        appellant or his representative  to  respond  meaningfully  to  the
        evidence served after the  commencement  of  the  hearing.  It  was
        submitted that the FtJ's conduct in any event  fell  afoul  of  the
        principal that  justice  not  only  had  to  be  done  but  had  to
        manifestly be seen to be  done,  as  recently  exemplified  by  the
        president  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  Elayi  (fair   hearing   -
        appearance) [2016] UKUT 00508  (IAC).  It  was  submitted  that  an
        impartial observer would not consider that the appellant had a fair
        hearing.


    10.  The  grounds  additionally  contended  that  the  FtJ  failed   to
        adequately engage with the expert report provided by Prof Joffe and
        failed to provide adequate reasons for refusing to depart from  the
        findings in SSH. Prof Joffe's report suggested that Kurds returning
        to Iran faced an increased risk of persecution as a consequence  of
        their ethnicity and, given the worsening situation for Kurds in the
        country, a Kurd who left illegally and who made an asylum claim had
        significantly diminished prospects of avoiding persecution.


    11. It was finally contended that the FtJ failed  to  consider  whether
        the significant discrimination faced by Kurds in Iran amounted to a
        very significant  obstacle  preventing  his  integration  into  the
        country under paragraph 276ADE.


    12. Permission was granted on the basis that it was arguable there  was
        unfairness in refusing an adjournment when the fingerprint evidence
        was produced  so  late  and  when  the  FtJ's  adverse  credibility
        findings  turned  mainly  upon  this  evidence.  Albeit  with  some
        hesitation permission was granted to argue the ground  relating  to
        the expert report. In granting permission the  First-tier  Tribunal
        stated that the ground relating to paragraph  276ADE  was  relevant
        only if the FtJ erred by preferring the country  guidance  decision
        to the expert report and so should not be considered arguable as  a
        separate ground.

Submissions at the error of law hearing


    13. Mr Lee  relied  on  Elayi  (and  in  particular  paragraph  9)  and
        submitted that the manner in  which  the  hearing  before  the  FtJ
        progressed was unfair and would give a clear  impression  of  being
        unfair. The only fair outcome would have been for the FtJ  to  have
        given the appellant an opportunity to meet  the  new  case  against
        him. It was submitted that  the  FtJ's  assessment  of  the  expert
        report was inadequate. The FtJ merely disagreed with the submission
        that he was entitled to depart from the country guidance  case  and
        did not otherwise engage with the content of the expert report.


    14.  Mr Bramble submitted that any error by  the  FtJ  in  refusing  to
        grant the adjournment was  not  material  to  the  outcome  of  the
        hearing  in  the  absence  of  any  subsequent  evidence  that  the
        fingerprint evidence was not reliable. An impartial observer  would
        be aware that the FtJ gave the appellant an opportunity to speak to
        his barrister and for an additional  statement  to  be  taken,  and
        would know that the appellant had  been  aware  of  the  allegation
        regarding his presence in Greece  since  August  2016.  The  expert
        report from Prof Joffe  did  not  provide  a  sufficient  basis  to
        entitle the FtJ to depart from SSH. The reasoning given by the  FtJ
        was sufficient.


      Discussion

    15. The Presidential case of  Nwaigwe  (adjournment:  fairness)  [2014]
        UKUT 00418 (IAC) contains an assessment of the relevant  principles
        that should be considered when an adjournment request  is  made  by
        one of the parties. The headnote to the decision reads;


         If a Tribunal refuses to accede to  an  adjournment  request,  such
         decision could, in  principle,  be  erroneous  in  law  in  several
         respects: these include a failure to take into account all material
         considerations; permitting immaterial  considerations  to  intrude;
         denying the party concerned a fair hearing; failing  to  apply  the
         correct test; and acting irrationally. In practice, in  most  cases
         the question will be whether  the  refusal  deprived  the  affected
         party of his right to a fair hearing. Where an adjournment  refusal
         is challenged on fairness grounds, it  is  important  to  recognise
         that the question for the Upper Tribunal is  not  whether  the  FtT
         acted reasonably. Rather,  the  test  to  be  applied  is  that  of
         fairness: was there any deprivation of the affected  party's  right
         to a fair hearing? See SH (Afghanistan) v Secretary  of  State  for
         the Home Department [2011] EWCA Civ 1284.


    16. In Elayi the President commented on  the  importance  that  justice
        must not only be done but had to manifestly be seen to be done. The
        relevance of this fundamental principle to  all  cases  is  not  in
        doubt. The perception of what is fair and just  however  is  highly
        fact sensitive and will  depend  on  a  holistic  assessment  of  a
        judge's conduct and on the particular factual matrix of each  case.
        Elayi, for example, was a case in which the conduct of a judge  was
        described,  without  controversy,  as  being   unconventional   and
        unorthodox. The judge engaged in a private  conversation  with  the
        appellant's representative in the  absence  of  the  other  party's
        representative, in the precincts of the courtroom,  partly  out  of
        sight and earshot of the appellant and his spouse, and  before  the
        appellant's  hearing  began.  The  conversation  related   to   the
        appellant's case and, other than a question about  the  appellant's
        religious adherents (which was irrelevant), was not divulged to the
        appellant. The Upper Tribunal concluded without hesitation that the
        judge's conduct gave the impression of being unfair. At paragraph 9
        of the decision the President said this.

         There is no scope in the  present  case  for  the  view  an  unfair
         hearing having been found to have taken place this error of law may
         be immaterial, as other judgments of this Tribunal make clear.  See
         in particular MM v SSHD [2014] UKUT 105 (IAC), at [14] - [18].  The
         issue is whether the hearing was fair. Once it is decided that  the
         hearing was unfair the error of law  is  automatically  a  material
         one, unless the context is one of the greatest  rarity.  That  also
         has consequences for the final order which we shall make.  This  is
         the first error of law which  requires  the  determination  of  the
         First-tier Tribunal to be set aside.


    17. With respect  to  the  present  appeal,  no  explanation  has  been
        proffered by the respondent as to why the Eurodac documentation was
        only provided halfway through the appeal hearing.  It  should  have
        been included by the respondent in  her  bundle  prepared  for  the
        First-tier Tribunal  hearing  and  served  on  the  appellant  with
        sufficient time to enable him to assess that evidence and determine
        his  position  accordingly.  The  extremely  late  service  of  the
        fingerprint evidence clearly has the potential to  be  seen  to  be
        unfair and to be unfair.


    18. The appellant had his substantive asylum  interview  on  23  August
        2016. He confirmed at several points during his substantive  asylum
        interview that he left Iran on 15 January 2016. At question  63  it
        was put to the appellant that he had been fingerprinted  in  Greece
        on 19 December 2015. The typed interview record also indicates that
        the appellant was shown a Eurodac  match  document.  The  appellant
        therefore knew since  23  August  2016  that  fingerprint  evidence
        existed indicating that he was in Greece  in  December  2015,  even
        though he had not been formally served a copy of  that  documentary
        evidence.

    19.  Since  the  FTT  hearing  the  appellant  has  not  suggested  the
        fingerprint evidence is inaccurate (indeed in his asylum  interview
        the appellant accepted that he had been fingerprinted  in  Dunkirk,
        indicating at the very least that the information contained in  the
        Form A1a was  reliable)  and  he  has  not  provided  any  evidence
        undermining  the  reliability  of  the  fingerprint  evidence,   or
        indicated that any investigation or verification of the fingerprint
        evidence has been undertaken. It was open to the appellant to  seek
        to adduce further evidence,  pursuant  to  the  Tribunal  Procedure
        (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008. In his submissions Mr Lee did not seek
        to undermine  the  reliability  of  the  fingerprint  evidence  and
        focused instead on the perception of injustice  in  the  First-tier
        Tribunal's refusal to adjourn the hearing. I note that the FtJ  did
        give the appellant's representative a limited opportunity  to  take
        further instructions from the appellant and, if need be, to provide
        a further witness statement responding to the fingerprint evidence.
        The appellant's  representative  did  not  avail  himself  of  this
        opportunity.

    20. Having regard to the aforementioned considerations I  am  satisfied
        that the appellant was deprived of a fair hearing and that he would
        be perceived by an informed observer as someone who was deprived of
        a fair hearing. Notwithstanding the absence of  any  post  decision
        evidence rebutting the accuracy or reliability of  the  fingerprint
        evidence, or any indication that the applicant has  or  intends  to
        undertake  an  investigation  into  the  fingerprint  evidence   or
        instruct an expert, the refusal to grant an adjournment  to  enable
        the appellant to consider the details of fingerprint evidence  that
        had only been served on him and his representatives  during  cross-
        examination at the actual hearing strikes at the very heart  of  an
        individual's right to a fair hearing. The opportunity given to  the
        appellant's barrister to take instructions and  provide  a  further
        witness statement later in the day cannot on  any  reasonable  view
        rectify the deprivation of a proper opportunity to  take  stock  of
        the technical nature of the fingerprint evidence or to consider the
        appropriateness of challenging that evidence, and, if so,  on  what
        basis.

    21. Nor am I satisfied that the refusal to grant the  full  adjournment
        would inevitably have led to the same  conclusion.  The  respondent
        has provided a two-page document entitled  'Eurodac  Search  Result
        Eurodac Match' (Form B1a) indicating the  appellant's  presence  in
        Greece in December 2015. In RZ the Tribunal heard evidence  to  the
        effect that if the results show  an  automatic  match  with  prints
        already on the  database,  the  print  matches  are  then  visually
        examined  by  a  fingerprint  expert  at   IFB   (the   Immigration
        Fingerprint Bureau) to confirm the match before ASU is notified  of
        the match result. The Tribunal held (at [45]) that if there was  a
        dispute as to a match, that must  be  a  question  of  fact  to  be
        determined on the available evidence  but,  in  the  light  of  the
        evidence the Tribunal  heard  about  the  Eurodac  system  and  its
        accompanying safeguards, in its judgment "... evidence of  a  match
        produced through the Eurodac  and  confirmed  by  [the  Immigration
        Fingerprint  Bureau  in  Lunar  House]  should   be   regarded   as
        determinate of that issue in the absence of cogent evidence to  the
        contrary". There was before the  Tribunal  in  RZ  both  a  Eurodac
        Search Result Match and confirmation  from  the  IFB.  The  Eurodac
        Search Result in the present appeal makes no reference to  the  IFB
        and it is unclear to me whether separate confirmation from the  IFB
        was provided to  the  appellant  or  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  or
        whether the IFB had already confirmed  the  match  before  ASU  was
        notified. These are matters upon which clarification may have  been
        sought if a full adjournment had been granted and  which  may  have
        had a bearing on the FtJ's reliance on the fingerprint evidence and
        his ultimate conclusion that the appellant's claim was untruthful.


    22. I am additionally, and independently of the  1st  round,  satisfied
        that the 2nd ground of appeal, relating to the  inadequacy  of  the
        FtJs reasoning for refusing to depart  from  the  country  guidance
        case in light of the expert report, is made out. The  FtJ  did  not
        consider the expert report in any detail.  Although  accepting  the
        appellant was at greater risk being an Iranian Kurd returning as  a
        failed asylum seeker, the FtJ found the appellant would not  be  at
        risk per se on return  for  this  reason,  particularly  given  his
        rejection of the core of the appellant's account.


    23. In his report Prof Joffe spoke of the worsening security  situation
        for Kurds in Iran and the  increased  domestic  tensions  following
        elections in May 2016 and the emergence of  militant  Sunni  groups
        amongst Iran's own minorities. Prof  Joffe  concluded  that,  as  a
        result of a number of factors leading to intensified repression  of
        Kurds a Kurdish returnee whose conduct gave rise to  suspicions  of
        anti-regime  behaviour,  either  whilst  abroad  by,  for  example,
        applying for asylum,  or  before  he  left  Iran,  would  have  his
        prospects  of  avoiding  persecution  upon   return   significantly
        diminished. The appellant made an asylum claim and is  Kurdish.  It
        was therefore incumbent on the FtJ to have at least shown  that  he
        'got to grips' with the principal assertions in the  expert  report
        and the evidence relied on  by  the  expert  before  rejecting  the
        expert's conclusions. Whilst  the  FtJ  may  ultimately  have  been
        entitled to reject Prof Joffe's report and  to  follow  the  recent
        country guidance case he still needed to properly engage  with  the
        evidence and reasoning contained in the expert report.


    24. Given that I have found material errors of law in relation  to  the
        1st and 2nd ground, it is not necessary for me to  comment  on  the
        3rd ground  of  appeal.  Having  heard  representations  from  both
        parties, and in light of my finding  that  the  denial  of  a  full
        adjournment deprived  the  appellant  of  a  fair  hearing,  it  is
        appropriate to remit the matter back to the first-tier Tribunal for
        a full fresh hearing, all matters at large, before  a  judge  other
        that Judge Sweet.

Notice of Decision

The First-tier Tribunal decision is vitiated by a material error of law.
The appeal is allowed and the matter will be remitted  back  to  the  first-
tier Tribunal to be heard by a Judge other  than  Judge  of  the  first-tier
Tribunal Sweet.


[pic]

Signed                                  Date 04 May 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Blum


