
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11441/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 28 September 2020                 |On 26 November 2020                  |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                                    M Z Q
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr K Mukherjee, Counsel instructed by Caveat
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules
       2008 I make an order prohibiting the disclosure  or  publication  of
       any matter likely to lead members of  the  public  to  identify  the
       appellant. Breach of this order can be punished  as  a  contempt  of
       court. I make this order because the appellant is an  asylum  seeker
       and so is entitled to anonymity.

    2. This is an appeal by a citizen of Pakistan against the  decision  of
       the First-tier Tribunal dismissing his appeal against  the  decision
       of the Secretary of  State  refusing  him  international  protection
       and/or leave to remain on human rights grounds.

    3. Permission to appeal was granted by the  First-tier  Tribunal.   The
       grant of permission described the decision as "otherwise careful and
       concise" but found it arguable  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had
       erred because it had:

  "Failed to consider the  expert  report  on  scarring;  Dr  Arjiwala  was
  wrongly found not to be an expert particularly  in  the  context  of  the
  respondent's acceptance of  his  expertise;  perversely  found  that  the
  appellant would not be persecuted upon  return  contrary  to  established
  country guidance authority."

    4. It is necessary to consider  in  some  detail  what  the  First-tier
       Tribunal decided.

    5. The judge noted that the appellant arrived in the United Kingdom  in
       May 2011 with a Tier 4 Student visa that was valid until the end  of
       November in 2013.  He claimed asylum on 27  February  2019  and  the
       decision complained of was made  on  9  November  2019.   The  judge
       summarised the evidence setting out the  basis  of  the  appellant's
       case.  I do not find it necessary to set  it  out  in  detail.   The
       following is intended as an overview to indicate  the  gist  of  the
       case.

    6. The appellant said that he started to work at the Pakistan Air Force
       Academy at Risalpur Cantt in about 2007.  He worshipped at a  nearby
       mosque and began to know the imam and another worshipper there,  one
       Ameer Shaib, who encouraged him to undertake voluntary work  helping
       those in need.  The time came when the imam asked him to arrange for
       friends of Shaib to gain access to  the  air  base.   The  appellant
       could not do that and said as much and the imam became angry because
       he thought he had been shamed in front of his guests.

    7. The appellant said that about two or  three  months  after  that  in
       December 2009 he was kidnapped by the Taliban.  He was tied  up  and
       blindfolded and tortured and beaten and recognised that one  of  the
       attackers was the same Ameer Shaib.  He asked him for help  but  was
       told he was being punished for wasting their time.

    8. The appellant was asked to provide details of an inside map  of  the
       air base and times of operation  and  he  was  warned  that  if  the
       information was inaccurate "his family will be finished".

    9. He said he was stabbed in his right arm and lost  consciousness  due
       to severe bleeding.

   10. He awoke in hospital to find his brother waiting for him.   He  said
       his family had been told by people in the hospital.  He was kept  in
       hospital for seven or eight days before being discharged.

   11. Initially the appellant did not tell his family  what  had  gone  on
       because Ameer Shaib had told him that he should not.  Whilst he  was
       convalescing he was visited by the imam who took  advantage  of  the
       time they spent alone together to tell him not to  tell  his  family
       what had happened.

   12. After about two months he  was  fit  to  return  to  work.   He  was
       approached by the imam who  told  him  that  Ameer  Shaib  would  be
       arriving and the appellant should take visitors on a tour of the air
       base.  Two visitors arrived the next day and the appellant  did  get
       permission for them to enter the base.  They were  given  passes  as
       his visitors.  He showed them what they wanted  to  see  and  signed
       them out.

   13. In March 2010 he was again required to assist Ameer Shaib.   He  was
       asked to provide passes for a parade to take place on 23 March 2010.
        He was told that if he did not co-operate the authorities would  be
       told that he was involved in the organisation and  the  intelligence
       agency would deal with him.  The next day he was approached at  work
       by an intelligence officer at the  air  base  and  asked  about  the
       visitors' passes he had obtained previously.

   14. He was worried and could not hide his worry from his family and  his
       brother insisted that they spoke.  He told his story and the brother
       told another family member.  The appellant  felt  his  position  was
       impossible.  If he did not co-operate with Ameer Shaib he feared  he
       would be killed and his family hurt.  He also feared the authorities
       would kill him for being associated with an illegal group and he saw
       the attraction of his brother's suggestion that he left the area.

   15. He took himself to somewhere some seven or eight  hours  drive  away
       and got a job in the name of "Ali".  He spent a year there keeping a
       low profile.  He was then told by  his  brother  and  brother-in-law
       that the imam was looking for him.  The family home had been visited
       and his brother thought the home  was  being  watched.   The  family
       decided he should leave the country and arrangements  were  made  to
       help him.

   16. He was told he would be or could be on an  Exit  Control  List.   He
       travelled from Peshawar Airport having paid a substantial bribe.

   17. He then travelled from Doha into Heathrow and made his way  to  east
       London where he claimed to have had no connections.

   18. He said he had had limited contact with his  family  but  understood
       intelligence services had gone to his house and tortured members  of
       his family; the house was searched and documents taken and his older
       brother  continued  to  have  problems  with   harassment   by   the
       intelligence services.  His wife said that  she  believed  that  the
       telephone was being tapped.

   19. When his asylum claim failed he contacted a relative in  Lahore  who
       contacted his wife who caused documents to be passed  on  supporting
       his case.

   20. He said that he had  serious  mental  health  issues  following  his
       treatment at the hands of the Taliban and suffered  from  flashbacks
       and depression.  He could not obtain  supporting  medical  documents
       from Pakistan.  He feared for his life in the event of  his  return.
       He made it plain that he feared the authorities who he thought would
       be interested in him but he also feared the Taliban because  he  had
       not assisted them.

   21. The account  was  supported  by  affidavit  evidence  from  Pakistan
       including an affidavit from  the  appellant's  mother.   I  find  it
       significant that his mother referred to his  poor  health  after  he
       claimed to have been tortured and although I cannot find any details
       of the torture to  which  he  claims  to  have  been  subjected  the
       affidavit says that the appellant "could not  even  walk  properly".
       Plainly this is consistent with his claim that his foot was injured.

   22. There is also a police report dated 2 October 2019 which relates  to
       the kidnapping of the appellant's brother allegedly as some kind  of
       reprisal for the appellant's disappearance.

   23. Importantly  there  is  some  medical  evidence  including  evidence
       showing that the appellant has taken some assistance from  Berkshire
       Healthcare relating to his mental health and also a report dated  28
       February 2019 about the  assessment  at  the  Colnbrook  Immigration
       Removal Centre by a Dr Arjiwala.  This has become  important  and  I
       consider it below.

   24. The medical report can be found  at  page  161  in  the  appellant's
       bundle.  It is dated 28 February 2019 and identifies  as  indicative
       of torture scars to the right and left foot, right thumb, left  knee
       and right upper eyebrow and also an injury described as "right  foot
       nails - pulled out".  This is not an entirely satisfactory document.
        I can only assume that the nails were missing at the  time  of  the
       examination but there was nothing to indicate if the nails  appeared
       to have been removed traumatically and if there was  any  chance  of
       regrowth or what state they were in.  This may be because it is  not
       important to the medical practitioner but it would have  helped  the
       Tribunal although I appreciate it was not written with the intention
       of being relied on in litigation.

   25. Dr Q Arjiwala  stated  that  the  appellant  claimed  to  have  been
       tortured by the Taliban and continued:

  "His narrative appears consistent with his injuries in my  opinion  as  a
  GP.  He has no acute physical disability in the detention centre  that  I
  am aware of which impacts him being in the centre.  However, he does have
  significant mental distress from this episode and he will be referred  to
  the Mental Health Team as per protocol to be assessed by them."

   26. The First-tier Tribunal Judge was unimpressed too.   She referred in
       her decision to the "lack of medical evidence".  At paragraph 18 the
       judge said:

  "I have an indication from the GP that scarring is  consistent  with  the
  appellant's  account  of  torture  and  evidence  to  conclude  that  the
  appellant has availed of talking therapy.  This is a case where  I  would
  expect to see expert evidence, both  in  relation  to  any  scarring  and
  psychiatric diagnosis at impact, to assist me to assess  the  credibility
  of the appellant's evidence in relation to his experience of  torture  in
  Pakistan.  It is difficult to assess this evidence in the absence of such
  expert evidence."

   27. The judge went on to conclude that she was not  persuaded  that  the
       appellant had shown a  reasonable  degree  of  likelihood  that  had
       suffered the ill treatment and torture he claimed to  have  suffered
       from the Taliban.

   28. The judge made other findings before reaching this conclusion.   She
       accepted that the appellant had worked at the air  base  as  claimed
       and decided that an "internal recommendation letter" was just  that,
       rather than a testimonial  given  at  the  end  of  employment  (see
       paragraph 16 of the Decision and Reasons).  The judge noted  it  was
       the appellant's case that in February 2011, that is after there  had
       been an attack by the Taliban at the air  base,  the  appellant  was
       able  to  obtain  a  passport  without  apparent  difficulty  having
       provided photographs  and  fingerprints,  notwithstanding  that  the
       appellant claimed that a security officer had had a word  with  him.
       She also noted with obvious disbelief his explanation for being able
       to leave Pakistan openly on his own passport by choosing  a  quieter
       airport and paying a bribe.

   29. I do record that the appellant supported his case with  a  statement
       dated 11 April 2019 and at paragraph 8 he gave details of how he was
       tortured.  That included hot water being poured onto his leg  so  he
       felt his skin burn and being beaten with a small  bamboo  stick  and
       his nails being removed as well as other matters leading to cuts and
       the cuts being treated by stitching.

   30. At paragraph 18 of the Decision and Reasons the  judge  referred  to
       the medical evidence as:

  "an  indication  from  the  GP  that  scarring  is  consistent  with  the
  appellant's  account  of  torture  and  evidence  to  conclude  that  the
  appellant had availed of talking therapy."

   31. However the judge went on to conclude again at paragraph 18 that:

  "Taking the evidence as a whole I do not consider that the appellant  has
  shown a reasonable degree of  likelihood  that  he  was  subject  to  the
  treatment of torture that he has claimed by the Taliban."

   32. The judge made it clear that she did accept that  the  appellant  is
       scarred and has mental health problems.

   33. At paragraph 18 again the judge said how she  would  expect  to  see
       expert evidence and this is a phrase that has been criticised.

   34. As will be well understood by people  familiar  with  assessing  the
       reliability of an account  of  torture,  chapter  5  of  the  United
       Nations document known as the Istanbul Protocol under heading D sets
       out the five possible categories  of  consistency.   The  degree  of
       consistency between an injury and the attribution can be:

(a)  not consistent,

(b)  consistent with but also with other causes,

(c)  highly consistent which means there are few other possible causes,

(d)  typical which means could have been caused in another way but it is  of
the kind usually found, and

(e)  diagnostic which means it could not have been caused in any other way.

   35. The presentation of signs on the body does not always  indicate  how
       an injury was caused so the  absence  of  evidence  from  a  medical
       practitioner confirming the alleged cause is not evidence  that  the
       injury was not cause as alleged. However the judge did  not  suggest
       otherwise. At paragraph 18 of the Decision and Reasons she described
       the medical evidence as "limited".

   36. I do not accept the criticism that she demeaned the expertise of the
       general medical practitioner.  There is no insult in describing  him
       as a "GP" as indicated above that is how he  described  himself  and
       that is what he is.  General medical practitioners have considerable
       expertise in a wide range of medicine but they do not, usually, have
       the additional qualifications of  someone  with  real  expertise  in
       particular areas.  The  nature  of  their  work  is  to  be  a  good
       generalist.  There is absolutely no reason  to  doubt  the  doctor's
       competence to say that the signs on the body  were  consistent  with
       the explanation given but it is a matter of record that  the  degree
       of consistency was not amplified or explained in any way. The  judge
       was entitled to say, as she did, that she would have expected expert
       evidence about the injuries. It is quite  plain  that  she  did  not
       overlook or discount the evidence  that  the  scars,  and  the  poor
       mental health, were consistent with the appellant's account.

   37. It is the injuries to the  foot  that  bother  me  most.   Signs  of
       burning and scarring on the feet can result from a variety of  cause
       some of which are entirely benign but if, as appears to be the case,
        the doctor is not entirely specific, all of  the  nails  have  gone
       from the right foot, I find it difficult to  think  of  an  innocent
       explanation.

   38. The First-tier Tribunal Judge was perfectly aware  of  these  things
       but balanced them against the late claim and the appellant's ability
       to get a passport and leave the  country  at  a  time  when  on  the
       appellant's own account he was of interest to the security forces.

   39. The  judge  was  obliged  by  Section  8  of  the  2004  Asylum  and
       Immigration (Treatment of Claimants, etc.) Act 2004 to  regard  this
       as discreditable behaviour and it was not explained in any way  that
       she found at all satisfactory.

   40. Mr Melvin submitted that the judge was entitled to treat the medical
       evidence in the way that  she  did  and  although  I  listened  very
       respectfully to Mr Mukherjee's helpful submissions, I find  that  Mr
       Melvin on this occasion is right.  Medical evidence was not demeaned
       or under-valued unlawfully.  It was actually seen  for  what  it  is
       which is supportive evidence from a general medical practitioner but
       not  supportive  in  a  way  that  is  particularly  compelling   or
       persuasive.  The judge weighed that against  other  aspects  of  the
       case that she found unacceptable and although she had resolved  some
       contentious matters in the appellant's favour, she  decided  he  had
       not been tortured as claimed.

   41. The rest of the decision follows from that finding.

   42. I do not see any merit in ground 2.   I  think  I  would  have  been
       concerned if the judge had offered  as  an  alternative  explanation
       that the appellant would be safe anyway because of the time that had
       lapsed.  It  is  the  appellant's  case  that  the  authorities  are
       interested in him and it is trite law that a good reason needs to be
       given for thinking that a person who has been tortured once  by  the
       Taliban, or anyone else, will be safe in the future  but  I  do  not
       have to go along that route.  The judge's finding is that he has not
       been injured as claimed.

   43. I have come to the conclusion that the First-tier Tribunal  did  not
       err in law.  It reached a conclusion that was  open  to  it  on  the
       evidence that  it  had  got  and  when  it  is  read  carefully  the
       explanation is sound in law.

   44. I  understand  that  the  appellant  has  an  appointment  with  the
       organisation "Freedom from Torture".  I do not make this a matter of
       any kind of direction or ruling but the Secretary of State might not
       want to take steps to remove the appellant  until  that  report  had
       been considered very carefully.   The  appellant  says  it  will  be
       available before the end of November.

   45. Nevertheless for the reasons given I am not persuaded  there  is  an
       error of law in this case and I dismiss the appellant's appeal.





                              Jonathan Perkins
|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 23 November 2020               |

