
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11189/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 19th March 2019                           |On 7th June 2019              |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

                                     SR
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARy OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Butler; Fountain Solicitors (Walsall)
For the Respondent:    Mr. McVeety; Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The First-tier Tribunal ("FtT) Judge declined to make an anonymity
    order.   No application is made before me, but the appeal concerns a
    claim for asylum and international protection and in my judgement, it
    is appropriate for an anonymity order to be made under Rule 14 of the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.  SR is granted
    anonymity throughout these proceedings. No report of these proceedings
    shall directly or indirectly identify him.  This direction applies both
    to the appellant and to the respondent. Failure to comply with this
    direction could lead to proceedings being brought for contempt of
    court.


 2. The appellant appeals against the decision of First-tier Tribunal
    ("FtT") Judge Chambers promulgated on 24th May 2018, dismissing the
    appellant's asylum and human rights appeals.  Permission to appeal was
    granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley on 12th November 2018. The
    matter comes before me to consider whether or not the decision of FtT
    Judge Chambers involved the making of a material error of law, and if
    the decision is set aside, to re-make the decision.


 3. At the conclusion of the hearing before me, I announced that in my
    judgement, the decision of the FtT is not infected by a material error
    of law and the appeal is dismissed.  I said that I would give the
    reasons for my decision in writing.  This I now do.


 4. The appellant arrived in the UK on 23rd February 2009 and claimed
    asylum.  Briefly stated, the appellant claimed that he left Iran
    because the authorities were after him because he had converted from
    Islam to Christianity in March 2008.  The claim was refused for the
    reasons set out in a decision dated 19th March 2009.  The appellant, as
    he was entitled to, appealed to the Tribunal and his appeal was heard
    Immigration Judge Baird on 12th May 2009.  The appeal was dismissed for
    the reasons set out in a decision promulgated on 29th May 2009.  Judge
    Baird found that the general evidence of the appellant was vague,
    inconsistent and unsubstantiated and rejected the account being
    advanced by the appellant.  Judge Baird found that the appellant's
    account is unlikely to be true, but even if she was wrong about that,
    the appellant has not established to the standard of proof required
    that he would have a well-founded fear of persecution upon return to
    Iran.


 5. On 19th April 2012 solicitors instructed by the appellant made further
    representations into the respondent. It was submitted on the
    appellant's behalf that the further representations are materially
    different to the basis of his original claim.  The claim advanced on
    behalf of the appellant was that he had formed a relationship with his
    partner, AT, an Iranian national who had been granted refugee status on
    the basis of his homosexuality. The further representations state:


             ".. In his witness statement our client provides background
             information to his homosexuality and his reasons for not
             advancing the matter previously. Our client asserts that he
             began exploring his sexuality following moving to Bolton and
             particularly following his relationship with [Mr AT] which our
             client states is his first homosexual relationship. These
             matters occurred following the determination of our clients
             asylum claim by the SSHD and the Tribunal".


 6. The further representations made on behalf of the appellant were
    supported by a witness statement made by the appellant, dated 17th
    April 2012, and a witness statement comprising of four short
    paragraphs, made by AT, also dated 17th April 2012.  They both claimed
    to have met in August 2010 and to have moved in together, in January
    2012.  By a decision dated 17th October 2017, that further claim for
    international protection was refused by respondent.  It was that
    refusal that was the subject of the appeal before FtT Judge Chambers.


 7. At this juncture, it is appropriate to record that in October 2016,
    before the respondent's decision of 17th October 2017, the appellant
    gave evidence in an appeal brought by 'AR', another Iranian national
    who appealed against a decision of the respondent of 29th January 2016,
    to refuse his claim for international protection.  AR arrived in the UK
    in June 2015, and claimed asylum on the grounds of his sexuality.  FtT
    Judge Chambers had been provided with a copy of the decision of FtT
    Judge Lloyd-Smith promulgated on 26th October 2016.  The appellant and
    AR both gave evidence before FtT Judge Lloyd-Smith, who rejected their
    claim to be in a genuine homosexual relationship.  AR was found to have
    a distinct lack of knowledge about the appellant.  The appellant's
    evidence before FtT Lloyd Smith was that after being in the UK for a
    year he had realised he was gay.  He explained that in Iran he had
    considered his sexuality but had not had the opportunity to discover or
    experience a homosexual relationship.  The Judge found the appellant's
    knowledge about AR, particularly his reasons for coming to the UK to be
    equally vague.  At paragraph [16(b)(vi)], FtT Judge Lloyd-Smith states:


         "I likewise find the evidence of the partner's knowledge about the
         appellant's reason for coming to the UK was extremely vague and
         lacking in detail, the only detail he gave was that in Iran "he had
         told me his life was in danger also that he is not in a stable
         mental state".  Again, as with the appellant's knowledge of the
         witnesses background, if in a genuine relationship I would have
         expected a far greater level of knowledge, particularly given their
         claimed similar circumstances and experiences."


 8. FtT Judge Lloyd-Smith rejected AR's claim that he is a gay man, and it
    follows that she rejected the claimed relationship between AR and the
    appellant.  AR's appeal was dismissed for the reasons set out in the
    decision of FtT Judge Lloyd-Smith promulgated on 26th October 2016.


 9. The appellant's appeal against the decision of 17th of October 2017 was
    heard on 22nd May 2018.  A summary of the claim advanced by the
    appellant is set out at paragraph [2] of the decision of FtT Judge
    Chambers.  FtT Judge Chambers heard evidence from the appellant and his
    partner AT.  The evidence given by AT of his relationship with the
    appellant is referred to at paragraph [16] of the decision of FtT Judge
    Chambers.  Briefly stated, AT claimed that he first met the appellant
    in August 2010, their relationship began in October 2011 and that they
    started living together in January 2012. He claimed that the
    relationship ended in February 2015 but they met, and started seeing
    each other again in October 2017.


10. At paragraph [18] of his decision, FtT judge Chambers refers to the
    evidence given by the appellant at the hearing of AR's appeal before
    FtT Judge Lloyd-Smith.  At paragraph [18], FtT Judge Chambers states:


         "... having regard to the fact that the appellant gave evidence of
         a four-year gay relationship with [AR] which was rejected, the
         findings are of some importance in this appeal. The Judge in [AR's]
         appeal decided that what the appellant said about delaying making a
         claim because of his sexuality for several years lack credibility.
         The decision in the appeal of [AR] it's not the starting point in
         this appeal. The appellant's appeal must be separately considered
         on its own individual circumstances. It is however difficult to
         reconcile the basis of the finding against [AR] in the appeal that
         it was not demonstrated that he was in a relationship with the
         appellant. The Tribunal looking at the same evidence from the
         appellant concludes that he was not in a relationship with [AR].
         That finding does not stem from the decision in [AR's] appeal but
         from the Tribunal's rejection of the appellant as a credible
         witness in this appeal."


11. In reaching his decision, FtT Judge Chambers considered the evidence of
    the appellant's witness, AT, having considered in particular, the
    reasons advanced for the breakdown of the appellant's relationship with
    AT in February 2015.  At paragraphs [20], FtT Judge Chambers states:


         "... the appellant is not demonstrated to be interested in
         religious matters. The Tribunal having regard to the cavalier
         fashion in which the appellant seems to put forward categories of
         persecution, concludes that the appellant was not telling the truth
         about his religious involvement. The contention that the appellant
         and [AT] were partners from January 2012 to February 2015 appears
         to be a recent concoction to fit in with either side of the gap of
         33 months in relation to the claimed but fictitious relationship he
         is said to have had with [AR], whose appeal was dismissed in
         separate proceedings."


12. At paragraph [21], FtT Judge Chambers noted that the appellant had now
    abandoned his previous claim, that in any event had been rejected, that
    he fears return to Iran due to his religion.  FtT Judge Chambers
    stated:


         "... The appellant is not a witness of truth. The Tribunal conclude
         (sic) he is not telling the truth.  The Tribunal plays (sic) no
         reliance upon the evidence of Mr [TA].  The Tribunal agree (sic)
         with the submissions made in the letter on behalf of the
         respondent.  The appellant is not a refugee.  The appellant has not
         since coming to the United Kingdom become a Refugee.  The asylum
         appeal is dismissed."


The appeal before me


13. In the grounds of appeal relied upon by the appellant, it is said that
    the FtT Judge has failed to give anxious scrutiny to the claim and has
    failed to make any findings on any factual aspect of the appellant's
    case.  It is accepted that the FtT Judge found that the appellant is
    not a credible witness, but in reaching the decision, it is said, the
    FtT Judge fails to demonstrate that he applied the lower standard
    applicable.  Furthermore, it is said that the FtT Judge fails to give
    adequate reasons for rejecting the live evidence of [TA], who has been
    recognised as a refugee on account of sexuality, and fails to give
    adequate reasons for rejecting the appellant's evidence that he is gay.


14. Before me, Ms Butler relied upon the grounds of appeal, and submits
    that the FtT Judge failed to give adequate weight to the evidence of
    the witness, AT.  She submits that the evidence of AT was not properly
    considered by the Judge, and the adverse credibility findings that had
    previously been made against the appellant in entirely separate
    appeals, have impacted upon the Judge's assessment of the claim now
    being advanced, and the evidence before the Tribunal.


15. In reply, Mr McVeety submits that at paragraphs [5] and [6] of the
    decision, the FtT Judge properly refers to the applicable burden and
    standard of proof and there is nothing in the decision that suggests
    that the Judge applied any heightened standard of proof.  He submits
    the FtT Judge was entitled to consider the adverse credibility findings
    made against the appellant, by two different Tribunal Judge's in two
    unrelated appeals previously.  He submits that at paragraphs [14] to
    [19], the FtT Judge considered all the material available to the
    Tribunal in the round, and having considered the evidence of the
    appellant and his witness, TA, reached findings that were properly open
    to the Tribunal on the evidence.  He submits it was open to the Judge
    to reject the claim and to find that the account given by the appellant
    and TA of a relationship between January 2012 and February 2015, and
    since October 2017, was a concoction to fill either side of the gap to
    the claimed, but fictitious relationship, that the appellant claims to
    have had with AR.


Discussion


16. I reject the claim that the FtT Judge  fails  to  demonstrate  that  he
    applied the lower standard applicable. Ms Butler was unable  to  direct
    me to anything within the decision itself, that demonstrates  that  the
    Judge had in mind anything  other  than  the  lower  standard  that  is
    applicable.


17. As Brooke LJ observed in the course of his decision in R (Iran)  v  The
    Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department  [2005]  EWCA  Civ  982,
    "unjustified complaints" as to an  alleged  failure  to  give  adequate
    reasons are all too frequent.  The obligation on a Tribunal is to  give
    reasons in sufficient detail  to  show  the  principles  on  which  the
    Tribunal has acted and the reasons that have led to the decision.  Such
    reasons need not be  elaborate,  and  do  not  need  to  address  every
    argument or every factor which weighed in the decision.  If a  Tribunal
    has not expressly addressed an argument, but if there  are  grounds  on
    which the argument could properly have  been  rejected,  it  should  be
    assumed that the Tribunal acted on such grounds.  It is sufficient that
    the critical reasons to the decision are recorded.


18. The Court of Appeal held that a finding might only be set aside for
    error of law on the grounds of perversity if it was irrational or
    unreasonable in the Wednesbury sense, or one that was wholly
    unsupported by the evidence.  A finding that is "perverse" embraces
    findings that are irrational or unreasonable in the Wednesbury sense,
    and findings of fact that are wholly unsupported by the evidence.  On
    appeal, the Upper Tribunal should not overturn a judgment at first
    instance, unless it really could not understand the original judge's
    thought process when the Judge was making material findings.


19. The claim made by the appellant is a simple one.  It is summarised at
    paragraph [2] of the FtT Judge's decision. I have had an opportunity to
    read the witness statements that were before the FtT Judge.  The
    appellant's witness statement dated 17th April 2012, was a statement
    that the appellant made in support of the further submissions made to
    the respondent. It comprises of eight paragraphs, and in the briefest
    of terms, the appellant sets out where and when he met AT.  There was
    also a statement from AT dated 17th April 2012, which comprises of four
    very short paragraphs.  Neither of those witness statements contain any
    meaningful information about their relationship.  Following the refusal
    of the claim by the respondent, the appellant signed a further witness
    statement dated 11th May 2018 in readiness for the hearing of his
    appeal. The appellant responded in the briefest of terms to the matters
    referred to in the respondent's decision.  At paragraph [7] of that
    statement, the appellant refers to his relationship with AR and claims
    that on 10th August 2017 the appellant found out that AR was cheating
    on him, and so he stopped seeing AR.  In September 2017 the appellant
    started to post on the internet about being homosexual, and in October
    2017 he was contacted by AT. The appellant claimed that they met up,
    and resumed their relationship. The appellant stated that AT lives in
    Wigan, and they see each other as much as they can, and the appellant
    sometimes stays over with AT.  AT had also signed a witness statement
    dated 15 May 2018. In his statement, AT refers to their relationship
    between October 2011 and February 2015. He claims that the relationship
    ended in February 2015, because of their disagreements with regards to
    the appellant's involvement with religious activities.  AT claims that
    after about 33 months, one of his friends told him about an article
    from the appellant on the internet. AT claims that he read the article,
    and he then contacted the appellant.


20. As the FtT Judge properly noted at paragraph [20] of the decision, the
    appellant's claim that he converted to Christianity and became involved
    in religious activities, was a claim that was rejected by FtT Judge
    Baird.  At paragraph [21] of his decision, FtT Judge Chambers refers to
    that previous claim and properly notes that the appellant has simply
    abandoned that aspect of his claim without qualification or
    explanation.  It was in the circumstances open to FtT Judge Chambers to
    conclude, having carefully considered all of the evidence, that the
    claim made by the appellant and AT that they were partners between
    January 2012 and at February 2015,  ".. Appears to be a recent
    concoction to fit in with either side of the gap of 33 months in
    relation to the claim that fictitious relationship [the appellant] is
    said to have had with AR..".


21. Although it is right to say that AT has been recognised as a refugee,
    on the basis of his sexuality, it does not follow that the FtT Judge
    was bound to accept that the appellant and AT are in a relationship, or
    that the appellant is a homosexual.  The evidence of AT was that his
    relationship with the appellant had ended in February 2015, because of
    disagreements with regard to the appellant's involvement with religious
    activities.  In reaching his decision, the FtT Judge was entitled to
    have regard to the fact that the appellant's claim to have converted to
    Christianity and his account of religious activities had been rejected
    by Judge Baird, and that the appellant has now abandoned that claim,
    without any explanation.


22. It is clear in my judgement that the FtT Judge considered the claim
    advanced by the appellant. The Judge rejected the appellant's claim for
    the reasons set out in the decision, and in my judgement it was open to
    him to do so. In my judgement, the findings reached by the Judge were
    neither irrational nor unreasonable in the Wednesbury sense, or
    findings that were wholly unsupported by the evidence.  The assessment
    of such matters is always a highly fact sensitive task.  The FtT Judge
    was required to consider the evidence as a whole and clearly did so.


23. The FtT Judge considered the claim by reference to the test set out by
    Lord Hope in his judgement in HJ (Iran) -v- SSHD [2010] UKSC 31.  Such
    appeals involve what is essentially an individual and fact-specific
    inquiry.  The FtT Judge found that the appellant is not a homosexual
    male.  The first stage of the test set out in HJ (Iran) is not
    satisfied by the appellant.


24. In my judgment, the appellant is unable to establish that there was a
    material error of law in the decision of the FtT and it follows that
    the appeal is dismissed.


Notice of Decision


25. The appeal is dismissed and the decision of FtT Judge Chambers stands.


26. No anonymity direction was made by the First-tier Tribunal. As this is
    a protection claim, it is appropriate that a direction is made.



Signed                                  Date          2nd May 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia
