
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11620/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 12 May 2017                        |On 18 May 2017                        |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

                                    [s m]
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Khan of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer
                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. I see no need for and do not make any  order  restricting  publicity
       about this decision.

    2. This is an appeal against the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
       dismissing in the absence of the appellant  an  appeal  against  the
       decision of the respondent.   The  circumstances  in  terms  of  the
       decision are not important because the  ground  of  appeal  is  very
       simple.  It is that there was a procedural irregularity amounting to
       an error of law because the appellant did not  actually  know  about
       the hearing.

    3. The records show that notice of hearing was sent to  the  appellant,
       who at that time was not represented, to a garbled  version  of  her
       address.  Reference is made to  "St.  Lawrences"  but  in  fact  the
       relevant address at the time was "St. Lukes".  The only error on the
       record is the reference to St. Lawrences. The area and  postal  code
       to which the notice  of  hearing  was  sent  was  correct.   In  the
       ordinary course of events it would not be in least surprising if the
       Post Office had been sufficiently adept to have  actually  delivered
       it to the correct address but there is absolutely no  evidence  that
       that happened and I cannot be satisfied that it did.

    4. It follows therefore that I must find the  appellant  did  not  know
       about the hearing.

    5. There is a slight gloss on this  because  there  were  in  fact  two
       hearings. There was a pre-hearing review and then  the  hearing  for
       the determination of the appeal and between those two  hearings  the
       solicitors came on the record.  It is regrettable that they were not
       in fact given notice of the hearing by the  Tribunal  and  it  is  a
       matter of surprise, which has been  drawn  to  my  attention  by  Ms
       Isherwood's diligent work, that the appellant's solicitors were able
       to introduce themselves with reference to the Tribunal file  number.
       I can only see this as an unexplained mystery. I can go  no  further
       than saying that a mistake was  made.   The  important  mistake  for
       these purposes is that the address to which the  notice  of  hearing
       was sent to was the wrong  address  and  there  is  no  evidence  it
       actually ever arrived in the hand of the appellant.

    6. It follows that I have no alternative but to set aside the  decision
       and as the consequence is that the appellant  has  not  had  a  fair
       hearing the only proper course is to send it back to the  First-tier
       Tribunal where it will be listed and heard properly, I hope, in  due
       course.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed and the case returned to the First-tier  Tribunal  for
a decision.




|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 16 May 2017                    |





