
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                Appeal Number:
PA/11149/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House            |           Determination & Reasons      |
|                                |Promulgated                             |
|On 11 April 2019                |           On 08 May 2019               |
|                                |                                        |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHANA

                                   Between

                               MR AKHTAR NAWAZ
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the appellant:         Mr A Swain of Counsel
For the respondent:     Mr L Tarlow, Senior Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


The appellant and the circumstances of the appeal

1. The appellant is a  national  of  Pakistan  born  on  8  April  1984  who
   appealed against the decision of the respondent  refusing  to  grant  him
   asylum and humanitarian protection  in  the  United  Kingdom.  First-tier
   Tribunal Judge Hawden Beale dismissed his appeal in a decision  dated  27
   November 2015. First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Pedro  granted  permission  to
   appeal to the appellant stating  that  it  is  arguable  that  the  Judge
   misdirected herself on the issue of internal relocation in light  of  the
   background evidence before her to  which  he  made  reference  indicating
   State persecution.

2. The First-tier Tribunal Judge in her decision stated the issue  that  she
   has to decide is whether the appellant is credible in his claim  to  have
   been approached by four armed men before he came to  the  United  Kingdom
   and whether he can return to his home area and if he cannot,  whether  he
   can relocate given that he says that he is a Pushtun who are not  welcome
   and  also  whether  his  credibility  been  damaged  by  his  claim   for
   humanitarian protection only being made after he had been arrested.

3. The grounds  of  appeal  state  the  following  which  I  summarise.  The
   background evidence relied on by the Judge  finds  that  not  all  Pashto
   speakers have been discriminated  against  whereas  the  report  actually
   confirms State persecution of ethnic Pashtuns.  The  report  states  that
   since the launch of nationwide antiterrorism measures, and  the  National
   Action Plan, large number of students have been arbitrarily arrested  and
   detained  across  the  country  on  suspicion  of  terrorist  activities.
   Although the report examines in detail the position of  Pashtuns  in  the
   Punjab  province,  the  report  makes  clear  that  these  measures   are
   nationwide and that Pashtuns across the whole of Pakistan  are  targeted.
   Specific mention is made of racial profiling in Islamabad of the  classes
   of persons who are most at risk. The appellant is such a class of person.
   The  report  also  confirms  that  the  European  Commission   and   High
   Representative of the Union  for  foreign  affairs  and  Security  Policy
   acknowledges  that  Pashto  people  seem  to  have  been   systematically
   discriminated against as potential terrorists.

4. The Judge has therefore  approached  the  issue  of  internal  relocation
   incorrectly. The issue before the Judge was not whether all Pashtuns have
   been  discriminated  against  but  whether  this  appellant  would   face
   prosecution if returned to Pakistan.

5. In view of the nationwide measures taken against ethnic  Pashtuns  it  is
   submitted that there is State persecution of Pashto Pakistanis by reasons
   of imputed political opinion.  Therefore,  the  Judge  has  fundamentally
   erred in law in assessing the appellant's claim  for  asylum  and  saying
   that any risk to him  can  be  obviated  to  the  appellant  by  internal
   relocation.

6. The Judge found that the appellant's account of four men  approached  him
   and injured his father was  consistent  and  supported  by  some  of  the
   background evidence. The Judge  however  found  that  objective  evidence
   confirms that although the appellant cannot return to his home area given
   the proximity of the appellant's home area to the Afghan border  and  the
   objective evidence states that the local authorities have  joined  forces
   with the fight the Afghan Taliban she was satisfied  that  it  is  likely
   that the appellant will be pressurised into fighting with the local area.



7. The Judge found however that the appellant can relocate to  another  area
   of Pakistan other than Punjab, Lahore and to a  lesser  extent  Islamabad
   where Pashtuns have been targeted. The Judge  found  that  the  appellant
   speaks Urdu and would be able to communicate in that language if returned
   to Pakistan.

8. The Judge found that risk to the appellant will be obviated  by  internal
   relocation. The Judge relied on the objective evidence  and  stated  that
   Pashto speakers are not targeted all over Pakistan and there are areas in
   Pakistan to which the  appellant  can  relocate.  The  Judge  found  that
   Pakistan was a large and populous country and the  appellant  speaks  the
   local language and therefore language would not be a barrier.

9. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis  that  the  Judge  did  not
   consider whether relocation for the appellant in the  whole  of  Pakistan
   must be considered because he is a Pashto speaker who was targeted in the
   past. The Judge has considered the appeal even-handedly and while finding
   the appellant's account  plausible,  he  found  that  the  appellant  can
   relocate to a part of Pakistan where Pashtuns are not  targeted  even  if
   they may face some discrimination which does not reach the  threshold  of
   persecution.

10. I do not find that  the  judge  misdirected  himself  on  the  issue  of
   relocation having considered background evidence that only certain  areas
   in Pakistan such as the Punjab, Lahore and to a lesser  extent  Islamabad
   where it would not be safe for the appellant to return as a  Pashto.  The
   Judge was entitled to make this  finding  on  his  consideration  of  the
   background evidence before him.

11. There are many Pashtuns living in Pakistan and the Judge found that  the
   appellant's fear is localised to his area. Karachi would  be  a  possible
   city for the appellant to relocate to. The Judge found that Pakistan is a
   larger populous country and if he does not return to his home area, there
   would be no risk to him, and this is a decision reasonably open to her.

12. It was accepted on the grounds of appeal that most of  the  evidence  in
   the report states that Pashtuns are targeted relates  to  the  Punjab.  I
   find that the appeal is an attempt to relitigate the  issues  which  have
   been properly decided and a sustainable conclusion reached.  The  grounds
   of appeal are no more than a quarrel with the findings of the Judge based
   on her consideration of background evidence.

13. I find that no error of law  has  been  established  in  the  First-tier
   Tribunal Judge's decision. I find that the Judge was entitled to conclude
   that the appellant is not entitled to be recognised as a refugee or to be
   granted humanitarian protection in this country because he  can  relocate
   within Pakistan safely. I uphold the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.
   I further find that no other differently constituted Tribunal would  come
   to a different conclusion.

DECISION

I find that there is no material error of law and I dismiss the appeal

Signed by
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
Mrs                                 S                                  Chana
       Dated this 30th day of April 2019
