
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
             (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: PA/11837/2017
                                                               PA/10473/2017
                                                               PA/10696/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 29th October 2018                          |On 17th December 2018        |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY


                                   Between

                                   A P (1)
                                   M P (2)
                                   E P (3)
                            (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Palmer, of Counsel, instructed by Barnes
                    Harrild & Dyer Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr J McGill, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS



Introduction

    1. The  appellants  are  citizens  of  Albania.  The  first  and  second
       appellants are married, and the third appellant is their son born  in
       1995. They are therefore all adults at the current time  and  at  the
       time of the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.  The  third  appellant
       arrived in the UK on 21st October 2012, when  he  was  a  minor,  and
       claimed asylum the next day. The first and second appellants  arrived
       in the UK on 31st May 2016, and claimed asylum on 6th June 2016.

    2. The first appellant was refused asylum on  24th  November  2016,  the
       second appellant on 3rd October 2017, and the third appellant on  3rd
       October 2017. The first and second appellants also  have  a  daughter
       who left Albania with them, and who is a dependent  on  their  claim.
       The appeals against the decisions were dismissed on  all  grounds  by
       First-tier Tribunal Judge JK Swaney in a determination promulgated on
       the 16th February 2018.

    3. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge  Freeman  on
       15th August 2018 on the basis that all of the grounds  were  arguable
       but that there would be a great deal  of  explaining  needed  on  the
       salient features of a blood feud given that the first  appellant  had
       lived in Tirana from 2008 until 2016 when they left for Italy.

    4. The matter  came  before  me  to  determine  whether  the  First-tier
       Tribunal had erred in law.

Submissions - Error of Law

    5. The grounds of appeal contend, in short  summary,  firstly  that  the
       First-tier Tribunal failed to consider relevant evidence going to why
       the third appellant had not been able to give a consistent account of
       the incident which led to the blood feud relating to his age and  the
       fact that he was not present; there was a  failure  to  consider  the
       origins of the internet article supporting the fact that the original
       shooting incident  took  place;  and  also  to  consider  the  expert
       evidence that blood feuds are not reported in the Albanian  press  as
       they are commonplace.

    6. Secondly, it is contended  that  there  was  a  failure  to  consider
       relevant expert evidence of Ms Antonia Young  with  regard  to  young
       women being increasingly threatened in blood  feuds  which  explained
       why the first and second appellant's daughter was threatened but  the
       second appellant was not. There was also an error in finding that  Ms
       Young's email to Mr Marku was not disclosed when  this  was  in  fact
       present, and thus in failing properly to consider the report and give
       it due weight.

    7. Thirdly, it is said that the First-tier Tribunal erred by failing  to
       apply country guidance in EH (Blood feuds)  Albania  CG  [2012]  UKUT
       00348 and the expert evidence when  finding  that  police  protection
       would be available to the third appellant.  This  evidence  indicates
       that there is no sufficiency of protection in  the  appellants'  home
       area of northern Albania if there is a blood feud.

    8. Fourthly, it is contended that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  failed  to
       consider the fact that the third and first appellants managed  to  be
       safe from threats by remaining indoors in self-confinement.

Conclusions - Error of Law

    9. The First-tier Tribunal properly directs itself by citing the country
       guidance in EH at the start of the findings and  reasons  section  of
       the decision. The First-tier Tribunal also states that  consideration
       is given to the young age of the third appellant when inconsistencies
       are noted between his account and that of the  first  appellant  with
       relation to the shooting incident which started the blood  feud,  and
       with respect to discrepancies in his evidence about the threats  said
       to have been made to  him at school between his evidence and that  of
       the second appellant, see  paragraph  52  and  55  of  the  decision.
       Although the First-tier Tribunal does not find there to  be  a  blood
       feud it is accepted that the incident took place in  May  2008  where
       the first appellant's  uncle  shot  two  people  from  two  different
       families injuring one seriously took place, see paragraph 60  of  the
       decision. It is therefore not material that weight was not  given  to
       the internet article about the incident as ultimately it is  accepted
       that it happened.

   10. The appeal is dismissed because  the  First-tier  Tribunal  does  not
       believe the evidence of the appellants and the expert  evidence  that
       the fall out from the incident was to create a blood  feud  in  which
       they had to "confine" themselves to find safety in Albania, and  thus
       that they were entitled to international protection as otherwise they
       would face a real risk of serious harm.

   11. I find that the reasons for  rejecting  the  expert  evidence  of  Ms
       Antonia Young set out at paragraph 65 of the decision of  the  First-
       tier  Tribunal  are  not  sufficient  or  good  enough.   There   are
       inaccuracies, such as stating that Ms Young's email to Mr  Marku  was
       not disclosed; contrary to what is said in the decision it  is  clear
       that Mr Marku's information did not  come  from  Ms  Young  but  from
       another  source  named  in  his  emails;  and  the  evidence  of  the
       appellants is consistent with other family  members  having  referred
       the feud to the Committee of Nationwide Reconciliation  (CNR)  as  is
       set out by Mr Marku.

   12. However, I do not find that this failure in reasoning  is  ultimately
       material as I find that the report of Ms Young cannot be given weight
       as she relies heavily for her opinion on the key  issue  of  internal
       flight and sufficiency  of  protection  for  the  appellants  in  her
       conclusion at pages 42 to 46 of her report  on  the  evidence  of  Mr
       Marku. Mr Marku is an expert witness who gave evidence in the country
       guidance case of EH. At paragraphs 43 to 47 of  EH  his  evidence  is
       described as unimpressive, and it  is  found  that:  "he  was  not  a
       truthful or reliable witness and that rumours of attestation  letters
       being available for payment from CNR were likely to be correct". As a
       result, no weight was placed on his  attestation  letter  in  the  EH
       appeal. It is also clear from paragraph 47 Mr Marku had been arrested
       and charged with criminal offences in  Albania  relating  to  selling
       genuine CNR attestation letters for use abroad, although this was not
       the basis on which the Upper Tribunal formed its low opinion  of  his
       evidence.

   13. Mr Palmer had not been previously aware of the issue with  Mr  Marku,
       but when it arose in the hearing before me he was instructed  by  his
       clients (the first and third appellants) that  counsel  who  appeared
       before the First-tier Tribunal, Ms A Seehra, had known about  it  and
       that she apparently informed them that the criminal  charges  against
       Mr Marku had not amounted to anything and he was acquitted.  However,
       there was no evidence before me  this  was  the  case  or  any  other
       evidence of any type which would suggest that the opinion  the  Upper
       Tribunal had formed of Mr Marku needed to  be  revisited.  As  stated
       above the opinion of the Upper Tribunal in EH  explicitly  relies  on
       the panel's own assessment of Mr Marku's credibility not the criminal
       proceedings.

   14. When considering the evidence of the appellants alone with regard  to
       the issue of whether the incident in May 2008 did amount to  a  blood
       feud, I find that the First-tier Tribunal made a rational decision on
       this evidence, placed in the context of the country  guidance,  which
       was lawfully open to them. The  First-tier  Tribunal  had  to  assess
       whether the potential "aggressor families" had desire to perpetuate a
       feud  and  sufficient  reach  to  create  a  threat  which   extended
       throughout Albania. Examination is given to the contended threats  to
       the daughter of the first and second  appellant,  and  to  the  third
       appellant, and to the claims of self-confinement. Care  is  taken  to
       use  the  correct  definition  of  self-confinement  as  set  out  at
       paragraph 61 of the decision. It was open to the First-tier  Tribunal
       to conclude that the threats to the daughter did not happen, based on
       the evidence of the second appellant that  women  were  not  involved
       with blood feuds, but also in the alternative to find  that  even  if
       the threat was made it was an empty one,  see  paragraph  56  of  the
       decision. It was for open to the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  to  find
       that  the  first  appellant  had  probably  transferred   his   civil
       registration to Tirana as he was a disabled person accessing benefits
       as this was consistent with his evidence at interview at question 44,
       and not contradicted by any other evidence from the appellants before
       her and thus to conclude he  was  not  in  self-confinement.  I  find
       therefore the First-tier Tribunal Judge was  entitled  to  find  that
       whilst the first appellant relocated to Tirana he was  not  in  self-
       confinement for the reasons set out at  paragraph  63.  It  was  also
       rationally open to the First-tier Tribunal to  find  that  the  third
       appellant had not shown the lower civil standard of proof that he was
       also not safe in Tirana for the reasons set out at  paragraph  58  of
       the decision.

Decision:

    1. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve
       the making of an error on a point of law.

    2. I uphold the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  dismissing  the
       appeals on all grounds.



Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless  the  Upper  Tribunal  or  a
Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  the  original
appellants. This direction applies to,  amongst  others,  all  parties.  Any
failure to comply with this direction could give rise to contempt  of  court
proceedings. I do so in  order  to  avoid  a  possibility  of  serious  harm
arising to the appellants from the contents of their protection claim.


Signed:     Fiona Lindsley                         Date:  30th October 2018
Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley

