
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11546/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 14th August 2019                  |On 30th August 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal judge ROBERTS


                                   Between

                                   mr s.h.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss Popal, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Avery, Senior Presenting Officer

Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
An anonymity direction was made by the First-tier Tribunal. As a protection
claim, it is appropriate to continue that direction.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal  by  Mr  S.H.  against  a  decision  of  Judge  Freer
    promulgated on 20th March 2019,  to  dismiss  his  appeal  against  the
    refusal of his protection claim.

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh.  He claims he is a homosexual
    and accordingly at risk of persecution on return to Bangladesh by  both
    state and non-state actors.

 3. However the judge did not believe that the Appellant was gay.  He noted
    that the Appellant was supported at the hearing by two  witnesses;  the
    first Mr  Kawsar  is  the  chairperson  of  Apanjon,  a  gay  community
    organisation.  The second witness who came on the Appellant's behalf is
    his partner R.A. and is someone with whom the Appellant has been  in  a
    discreet gay relationship for three years.

 4. After hearing evidence from the Appellant and his  two  witnesses,  the
    judge said the following at [80]:

         "The Appellant's fear of persecution is accepted if he proves  that
         he is a gay man.  Do I believe he is a gay man?  I  have  seen  his
         demeanour and that  of  his  partner  and  the  man  from  the  gay
         community  organisation  namely  Mr  Maskur  Hussain  Kawsar,   the
         Chairperson of Apanjon.  I have no doubt that the latter  gentleman
         is a gay man.  It is not just that he  wore  lipstick  and  had  an
         effeminate way of looking round the room and speaking but also, and
         much more significantly, he is a committed  organiser  in  his  gay
         organisation which is not likely to be a post for non-gay  men,  as
         it would not interest them, and he has no asylum claim to make."

 5. Further at [82] the judge followed  this  line  of  analysis  up  (when
    commenting on what the judge considered discrepant evidence) saying:

         "The evidence suggests strongly to me that either Mr Kawsar  has  a
         terrible memory or was not candid or both.  He is the only  witness
         who was obviously a gay man.  It  is  possible  that  he  has  been
         produced to the Tribunal by a straight man with an asylum  problem,
         namely both the Appellant and his claimed partner, if they are both
         straight men...."

 6. At [90] the judge said the following:

         "Mr Kawsar has not explained how he decides if a man is gay or not.
          I was supposed to find that somebody  who  is  an  expert  on  gay
         Bangladeshi men has identified the Appellant with a partner and not
         only that but he has also taken the trouble  to  come  along  to  a
         Court hearing.  It is possible that Mr Kawsar was  working  from  a
         template document when he created the witness statement  signed  on
         20th February 2019 but he was  not  articulate  about  his  writing
         process and frankly not everybody can be."

 7. At [108] the judge says the following:

         "The man he claims to be his partner is not proven to be a gay  man
         or his partner, perhaps just a friend cooperating as they are  both
         making asylum claims."

 8. Following that analysis the judge dismissed the appeal finding that the
    Appellant was not a gay man.



Onward Appeal

 9. The Grounds of  Appeal  against  the  decision  may  be  summarised  as
    follows. The judge has made findings on the  Appellant's  sexuality  by
    assessing the Appellant's demeanour to determine whether he is gay.  It
    is asserted that this is not an appropriate way in which to make such a
    finding  because  assessing  demeanour  implies  the  imparting  of   a
    subjective viewpoint.  The judge has used his assessment  of  demeanour
    as the platform for assessing credibility.  That  is  the  wrong  test.
    Credibility should be assessed by the consideration of the  consistency
    and plausibility of evidence both written and live.

10. The grounds make a further point that the judge  failed  to  apply  the
    standard of proof applicable to protection appeals which is  the  lower
    standard of proof applying anxious scrutiny, because at [103] the judge
    indicates in his overall conclusion that, "On balance, he  is  not  gay
    and not regarded as gay."

11. Permission to appeal the decision was granted on a renewed  application
    to the Upper Tribunal in the following terms:

         "It is  arguable  that  the  Judge  based  his  assessment  of  the
         appellant's  claimed  homosexuality  by  reference  to   irrelevant
         matters, such as the demeanour of the appellant and his  witnesses,
         coupled with the Judge's subjective  expectation  of  how  gay  men
         should present (Ground 3).  Arguably, this was a material error  of
         law that tainted the Judge's overall credibility assessment."

12. Thus the matter comes before me to decide whether the decision  of  the
    FtTJ contains such error of law that it must be set aside and remade.

Error of Law

13.  I  heard  submissions  from  both   representatives.    Miss   Popal's
    submissions relied on  the  grounds  seeking  permission.   Mr  Avery's
    submissions in essence amounted to saying  that  the  judge  had  given
    adequate reasons for finding that  the  Appellant's  claim  was  not  a
    credible one. At the end of submissions I announced my decision that  I
    was satisfied that despite the best endeavours of Mr Avery to  persuade
    me to the contrary, the grounds in my judgment  are  made  out.   I  am
    satisfied that on a reading of the decision the  judge  has  based  his
    credibility findings on a subjective view of how he considers  gay  men
    should look and present.  Following on, I am satisfied that the judge's
    subjective expectation of how gay  men  should  present  amounts  to  a
    material  error,  in  that  it  clearly  taints  the  judge's   overall
    credibility assessment when determining whether the Appellant  is  gay.
    I find therefore that the decision must be set aside in its entirety in
    order that a fresh assessment of the credibility or  otherwise  of  the
    Appellant's claim is undertaken.

14. The representatives were in agreement that having regard to the reasons
    outlined  above  in  setting  aside  the  FtT's  decision,   the   only
    appropriate course is to remit the appeal to be heard afresh at  Taylor
    House before a judge other than Judge Freer. I agree with this  course.
    Any further directions concerning the relisting of this appeal must  be
    a matter for the Resident Judge at Taylor House.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed.  The decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  set
aside.  The matter is remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  fresh
hearing.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   C E Roberts                    Date     21 August 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Roberts
