
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11073/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Cardiff Civil Justice Centre        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 1 February 2019                           |On 1 March 2019               |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN


                                   Between

                                     B I
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Alban of Fountain Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Howells, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   I do not need to go into detail in this  case.   It  is  common  ground
    between the representatives, and indeed my view also,  that  the  judge
    erred as a matter of law in failing  to  consider  risk  on  return  to
    Afghanistan to the appellant on the basis of returning as a minor as he
    was at the time of the hearing.  This clearly fed through also into the
    judge's evaluation of the appellant's credibility since again the  fact
    that he was a minor at the time when the events in question  were  said
    to have occurred was not  taken  into  account  by  the  judge.   As  a
    consequence, the appeal will have to be reheard in full before a  judge
    at Newport other than  Judge  Page.   To  that  extent  the  appeal  is
    allowed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


[pic]
Signed                                  Date 27 February 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Allen


















