
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal number:  PA/11810/2019 (P)



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard Remotely at Manchester CJC   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 18 September 2020               |On 22 September 2020               |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PICKUP



                                   Between

                                     AD

                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



For the appellant:     Ms A Nnamani, instructed by Howe & Co

For the Respondent:    Mr A Tan, Senior Presenting Officer



                          DECISION AND REASONS (P)

This  has  been  a  remote  hearing  which  has   been   consented   to by
the parties. The form of remote hearing was video by Skype (V). A face to
face hearing was not held because it was  not  practicable  and  all  issues
could be determined in a remote hearing. At the conclusion of the hearing  I
announced that I found an error of law in the  decision  of  the  First-tier
Tribunal, reserved my full  reasons,  which  I  now  give.  The  order  made
is described at the end of these reasons.

 1. The appellant, who is a Turkish national with date of  birth  given  as
    11.11.94, has appealed with permission to the  Upper  Tribunal  against
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated 23.1.20, dismissing
    on all grounds her appeal against the  decision  of  the  Secretary  of
    State, dated  22.11.19,  to  refuse  her  claim  made  on  18.9.19  for
    international protection on the basis of political  opinion  as  a  HDP
    member and on the basis of her Kurdish ethnicity.

 2. I have carefully considered the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  in
    the light of  the  submissions  and  the  grounds  of  application  for
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  I have also been  assisted
    by  the  appellant's  consolidated  bundle  served  pursuant   to   the
    directions issued on 27.7.20. However, the appellant was also  directed
    to serve a skeleton argument, with which direction there  has  been  no
    compliance.

 3. For the reasons set out below, I accept the submissions of Ms  Nnamani,
    not opposed by Mr Tan, to the effect that there is such error of law in
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal to require it to be  set  aside
    in its entirety and remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be remade de
    novo.

 4. In summary, the grounds assert that the First-tier  Tribunal  erred  in
    reaching flawed credibility findings, in the assessment of the  medical
    evidence, and failed o assess the  risk  on  return  on  the  basis  of
    findings made. In particular, it is argued that  the  judge  failed  to
    consider or make findings as to the reliability of a document submitted
    at the hearing confirming that the appellant's appeal against  sentence
    had been dismissed.

 5. Permission to appeal was granted by the First-tier Tribunal on 30.3.20,
    pointing out that the decision is not helped by the fact that the judge
    variously refers to the female appellant as  'he'  and  'she'.  It  was
    considered arguable that the judge had failed to take  account  of  the
    document confirming dismissal of the appellant's appeal.  It  was  also
    arguable that consideration of the medical evidence was flawed. At [15]
    of the decision the judge stated that the findings of Dr  Hajioff  were
    accepted but, contrary to that evidence, the judge  went  on  to  state
    that the appellant did not meet the diagnosis for  PTSD.  At  [11]  the
    judge accepted the respondent's concession that  the  appellant  was  a
    member of HDP but arguably failed to  adequately  assess  the  risk  on
    return as a result of that membership. Permission was  granted  on  all
    grounds.

 6. The respondent accepted the appellant's claimed Turkish nationality and
    Kurdish ethnicity. It was also accepted that she is a  member  of  HDP,
    having given a detailed and internally consistent account.

 7. The appellant claimed that whilst at university in April 2016  she  had
    been detained by the authorities for 5  days  on  accusation  of  being
    involved with the PKK, during which she  was  tortured  and  humiliated
    before being taken  to  court,  which  released  her  on  condition  of
    fortnightly reporting. She claims that  she  did  this  for  two  years
    before being able to leave Turkey under her own identity  and  using  a
    new passport issued in January 2019,  despite  claiming  to  have  been
    sentenced to 6 years 3 months imprisonment, against which she appealed.
    The respondent considered this aspect of her claim  and  in  particular
    being able to obtain a new passport  after  having  been  sentenced  to
    imprisonment internally inconsistent  and  in  particular  inconsistent
    with a statement from the Turkish Ministry of Justice stating  that  as
    of 12.6.19 she had no criminal record. She had also submitted  evidence
    of employment as a teacher  which  confirmed  that  she  was  on  leave
    between 14.6.19 and  9.9.19.  The  respondent  rejected  the  claim  of
    detention and criminal conviction for political or any activity, citing
    country background information that such a person would have had  their
    passport taken away and would not be able to  travel.  The  account  of
    detention and torture was also considered to be inconsistent  with  the
    country background information on treatment of low  level  HDP  or  PKK
    supporters.

 8. It is unfortunate and perhaps indicative  of  poor  drafting  that  the
    decision alternately refers to  the  appellant  in  the  masculine  and
    feminine. Whilst this complaint  is  not  in  itself  material  to  the
    outcome of the appeal, it is compounded by the judge's misdirection  as
    to the medical evidence, addressed below, and  the  way  in  which  the
    decision is drafted which does not disclose a careful consideration  of
    the evidence, or indeed cogent reasoning for rejecting the  appellant's
    account.

 9. The grounds  assert  that  the  appellant  had  promptly  provided  the
    respondent with corroborating documentary evidence of  her  prosecution
    and sentence and  additionally  provided  a  document  at  the  hearing
    confirming that her appeal against sentence  had  been  dismissed.  Her
    claimed fear was that on return to Turkey she  would  be  arrested  and
    tortured. It  is  asserted  that  the  judge  failed  to  consider  the
    documentary material and make a finding as to its reliability.

10. The judge found at [14] of the decision the appellant's claim of  being
    detained, tortured and prosecuted had been fabricated and that  at  its
    highest she was a low level supporter who had not been charged with any
    offence and who would not be of adverse interest to the authorities  on
    return to Turkey.

11. It is asserted at [9] of the decision that the judge had considered the
    evidence and submissions. At [14] the judge confirmed that the evidence
    given during the hearing, her witness statement, and  the  contents  of
    her interview were all considered. At [15]  the  judge  also  confirmed
    that  the  skeleton  argument  had  been  taken  carefully  considered.
    However, on a careful reading of the relatively short decision,  whilst
    the judge purported to find the claim inconsistent with  the  objective
    material, including that from the fact-finding mission, it is not clear
    that any consideration  was  given  to  the  documentation  adduced  in
    support of the criminal prosecution. At [10] the judge referred to  the
    Tribunal being provided with a copy of the conviction  "which  had  not
    been previously provided". However,  that  document  was  in  both  the
    appellant's and the respondent's bundle. The additional document handed
    to the Tribunal was a purported confirmation from the  court  that  the
    appellant's appeal against sentence had  been  dismissed.  Again,  this
    suggests a lack of care and attention  in  making  the  decision.  More
    significantly, the decision is devoid of any assessment of the criminal
    prosecution material or reasoning for according it little or no weight.
    Much of the decision  is  given  over  to  restating  the  respondent's
    position rather than making independent reasoned finding. Whilst it  is
    acceptable for the judge to indicate agreement  with  the  respondent's
    case, reasoning must be provided for doing so.

12. In a similar vein, there may have  been  a  flawed  assessment  of  the
    medical evidence, as asserted in the second ground of appeal. Whilst it
    is clear that the judge considered  the  medical  evidence,  the  judge
    misstated the effect of that evidence at  [15]  of  the  decision  when
    stating, "I also accept the findings of Dr Hajioff and  his  conclusion
    that the appellant does not fulfil the diagnosis for PTSD and that  the
    appellant will benefit form anti depressant  medication  which  may  be
    obtained from Turkey." However,  the  doctor's  finding  was  that  the
    appellant did fulfil the diagnosis for PTSD. The  greater  significance
    is, as submitted by Ms Nnamani and  accepted  by  Mr  Tan,  is  such  a
    diagnosis is relevant as  being  supportive  of  the  appellant's  core
    account, with PTSD arising from her  mistreatment  in  detention.  This
    aspect does not appear to have been considered by the judge and the way
    the decision is drafted it is not clear that the medical  evidence  was
    taken into account when considering the credibility of the core account
    of having been detained, tortured and prosecuted.

13. The  third  ground  asserts  that  the  judge  failed  to  reach  clear
    conclusions on whether it was accepted  that  the  appellant  had  been
    identified as a member of HDP or a pro-Kurdish  activist,  and  whether
    she had been detained and tortured as claimed. However, as the  grounds
    appear to accept at paragraph [9], the judge found at [14]  the  entire
    claim of criminal prosecution fabricated. At [11] the judge  had  noted
    the respondent's acceptance that the appellant is a HDP member and that
    she had given a detailed and consistent account.  The  judge  concluded
    that the appellant was a low level  HDP  supporter  who  had  not  been
    charged with any offence and who would not be of any  interest  to  the
    authorities on return to Turkey. This  was  repeated  at  [17]  of  the
    decision.

14. The grounds go on to assert that given  that  the  respondent  accepted
    that the appellant was a HDP member and the judge accepted at [12] that
    HDP members were arrested and beaten before being released,  the  judge
    failed to adequately assess the risk on return on account  of  being  a
    HDP membership who had been detained, placed on reporting restrictions,
    and engaged in sur place activities. It  is  asserted  that  the  judge
    either failed  to  consider  or  misconstrued  the  country  background
    evidence, and lengthy extracts from the Fact-finding Mission are  cited
    in the grounds. However, it is clear that the judge rejected the  claim
    to have been detained and at [16] did not  accept  that  the  appellant
    would be at risk on the basis of alleged sur place  activities  in  the
    UK, where the appellant was unable to give the  correct  date  for  the
    single demonstration she allegedly attended and  also  carried  a  flag
    which was not that of the HDP.

15. Whilst the country background information cited in the grounds suggests
    that even low level supporters  engaged  in  pro-KDP  activity  can  be
    targeted for adverse interest by the authorities, there was no evidence
    that mere HDP membership alone presents a sufficient  risk  on  return.
    HDP is a legal political party in Turkey mere membership of which  does
    not carry a risk of persecution or serious harm on return. Neither does
    the appellant's Kurdish ethnicity give rise to discrimination amounting
    to persecution. The grounds as drafted do not assert that either  or  a
    combination of both HDP membership and  Kurdish  ethnicity  would  give
    rise to a risk of persecution on return and this was not asserted by Ms
    Nnamani. It follows that I do not  accept  the  premise  of  the  third
    ground. However, in the  light  of  my  findings  in  relation  to  the
    previous grounds, I am satisfied that the rejection of the  appellant's
    core account was flawed by an absence of consideration of the  relevant
    evidence and adequate reasoning for the conclusions reached.

16. In the circumstances and for the reasons set out  above,  I  find  such
    material error of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal as  to
    require it to be set aside and remade.

17. Both Ms Nnamani and  Mr  Tan  submitted  that  given  that  the  entire
    decision will need to be remade with oral evidence from the  appellant,
    assisted by an  interpreter  in  Turkish,  the  appropriate  venue  for
    remaking the decision is the First-tier Tribunal. When  a  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal has  been  set  aside,  section  12(2)  of  the
    Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007  requires  either  that  the
    case is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal with directions, or it must
    be remade by the Upper Tribunal. The scheme of the Tribunals Court  and
    Enforcement Act 2007 does not  assign  the  function  of  primary  fact
    finding to the Upper Tribunal. The errors of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    identified above vitiate all findings of fact and the conclusions  from
    those facts so that there has not been a  valid  determination  of  the
    issues in the appeal.

18. In all the circumstances, at the invitation and request of both parties
    to relist this appeal for a fresh hearing in the First-tier Tribunal, I
    do so on the basis that this is a case which falls squarely within  the
    Senior President's Practice Statement at paragraph 7.2.

Decision

    The appeal of the appellant to the Upper Tribunal is allowed

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

    The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be remade de novo

    I make no order for costs.



Signed: DMW Pickup

Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

Date:       18 September 2020





Anonymity Direction

I am satisfied, having had  regard  to  the  guidance  in  the  Presidential
Guidance Note No 1 of 2013: Anonymity Orders, that it would  be  appropriate
to make an order in accordance with  Rules  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 in the following terms:

    "Unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellant
    is granted anonymity. No report of these proceedings shall directly  or
    indirectly identify him or any member of  her  family.  This  direction
    applies to, amongst others, both  the  appellant  and  the  respondent.
    Failure to comply with this direction could lead to contempt  of  court
    proceedings."



Signed: DMW Pickup

Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

Date:       18 September 2020





