
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/11746/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision and Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 18 April 2018                         |On 19 April 2018                  |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

                                     MA
                          ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:      Ms Jacquiss, Counsel
For the respondent:     Ms Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI2008/269) an Anonymity Order is made. Unless the Upper Tribunal or  Court
orders otherwise, no report of any proceedings or any  form  of  publication
thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the original  Appellant.  This
prohibition applies to, amongst others, all parties.




Introduction and background




      1. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan.  He entered the UK in  2002
         as a visitor and has overstayed since then.




      2. The appellant sustained strokes in 2009 and 2014 and according to a
         letter from a GP, Dr Subramony, dated 5  December  2017  since  the
         stroke[s] he has been having "weakness in the face,  arm  and  legs
         [and]...has  also  sudden  confusion;  he   finds   it   difficulty
         understanding speech with lack of coordination."  He resides at the
         Edwardian care home, paid for by the local authority, Luton Borough
         Council ('LBC').  The  manager  of  the  care  home  described  the
         appellant as having limited mobility with severe pain in his  right
         shoulder, and requiring assistance with all  personal  care,  in  a
         letter dated 5 December 2017.  In an undated assessment carried out
         by LBC the  appellant's  physical  impairment  and  current  health
         status were both described as "severe".




      3. On  26  February  2016  the  appellant  applied  for  asylum.   The
         screening interview took place that same day at the care home.  The
         appellant briefly explained that he feared persecution in  Pakistan
         because of an affair that he had in Pakistan, in 1975.  The  asylum
         claim was  refused  on  26  October  2017  because  the  respondent
         considered the claim to  be  vague,  of  considerable  vintage  and
         unsupported by any evidence, notwithstanding close  family  members
         in Pakistan and the UK.




Appeal proceedings




      4. The appellant appealed against  this  decision  to  the  First-tier
         Tribunal and a hearing took place  at  Birmingham  on  13  December
         2017.  The appellant did not attend that hearing  and  relied  upon
         evidence to support his claim that he was unable to do  so.  First-
         tier Tribunal Judge Andrew refused an adjournment  application  and
         dismissed the appeal on protection and human rights  grounds.   She
         wholly rejected the appellant's account.




      5. First-tier Tribunal Judge Shimmin granted permission to appeal on a
         limited basis in a decision dated 24 January 2018.  Permission  was
         not granted in relation to the appellant's claim that  his  removal
         would breach Articles 3 and 8 of the ECHR for reasons  relating  to
         the  medical  evidence.   Judge  Shimmin  however  regarded  it  as
         arguable that in the absence of a substantive asylum interview  the
         First-tier Tribunal erred in  failing  to  adjourn  the  appeal  to
         enable the appellant to give oral evidence.

Hearing

      6. Ms Jaquiss relied upon the grounds of  appeal  and  invited  me  to
         allow the appeal by remitting it to the  First-tier  Tribunal.   Ms
         Aboni submitted that the First-tier Tribunal was entitled to refuse
         the adjournment for the reasons provided.




      7. After hearing from both representatives, I reserved my decision.




Error of law discussion




      8. I begin this decision by considering the medical  evidence  that  I
         have already summarised above.   That  evidence  is  sufficient  to
         satisfy me that the appellant is vulnerable and should  be  treated
         as such, in accordance with the Joint Presidential Guidance Note No
         2 of 2010 ('the Guidance').




      9. In AM (Afghanistan) v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 1123, Sir Ernest  Ryder,
         the  Senior  President  of  Tribunals,  Ryder  LJ  said  this   (my
         emphasis):





             "30.      To assist parties and tribunals a Practice Direction
             'First-tier and Upper Tribunal  Child,  Vulnerable  Adult  and
             Sensitive Witnesses', was issued by the Senior President,  Sir
             Robert Carnwath, with the agreement of the Lord Chancellor  on
             30 October 2008. In addition, joint Presidential Guidance Note
             No 2 of 2010 was issued by the then President of UTIAC,  Blake
             J and the acting President of  the  FtT  (IAC),  Judge  Arfon-
             Jones. The directions and guidance contained in them are to be
             followed and for the convenience of  practitioners,  they  are
             annexed to this judgment. Failure to  follow  them  will  most
             likely be a material error of law. They are to be found in the
             Annex to this judgment.






             31. The PD and the Guidance Note [Guidance]  provide  detailed
             guidance on the approach to be adopted by the tribunal  to  an
             incapacitated or vulnerable person.  I  agree  with  the  Lord
             Chancellor's submission that there are five key features:


                  a.   the early identification of issues  of  vulnerability
                  is encouraged, if at all possible, before any  substantive
                  hearing through the use of a CMRH  or  pre-hearing  review
                  (Guidance [4] and [5]);


                  b.   a person who is incapacitated or vulnerable will only
                  need to attend as a witness to give  oral  evidence  where
                  the tribunal determines that "the evidence is necessary to
                  enable the fair hearing of  the  case  and  their  welfare
                  would not be prejudiced by doing so" (PD [2] and  Guidance
                  [8] and [9]);


                  c.   where an incapacitated or vulnerable person does give
                  oral evidence, detailed provision is to be made to  ensure
                  their welfare is protected before and during  the  hearing
                  (PD [6] and [7] and Guidance [10]);


                  d.   it is necessary to give special consideration to  all
                  of the  personal  circumstances  of  an  incapacitated  or
                  vulnerable person in assessing  their  evidence  (Guidance
                  [10.2] to [15]); and


                  e.    relevant  additional   sources   of   guidance   are
                  identified in the Guidance  including  from  international
                  bodies (Guidance Annex A [22] to [27]).






     10. At [33] Ryder LJ observed that the emphasis on the determination of
         credibility in an asylum appeal is such that  there  is  particular
         force in the Guidance at [13] to [15], which states as follows:





             "13.       The  weight  to   be   placed   upon   factors   of
             vulnerability may differ depending on the matter under appeal,
             the burden and standard of proof and whether the individual is
             a witness or an appellant.


             14. Consider the evidence,  allowing  for  possible  different
             degrees of understanding by witnesses and  appellant  compared
             to those are not vulnerable, in the context of  evidence  from
             others  associated  with  the  appellant  and  the  background
             evidence before you. Where there were clear  discrepancies  in
             the oral evidence, consider the extent  to  which  by  mental,
             psychological or emotional  trauma  or  disability;  the  age,
             vulnerability or sensitivity of the witness was an element  of
             that discrepancy or lack of clarity.


             15. The  decision  should  record  whether  the  Tribunal  has
             concluded the appellant (or a witness) is a child,  vulnerable
             or  sensitive,  the  effect  the   Tribunal   considered   the
             identified vulnerability had in assessing the evidence  before
             it and thus whether the Tribunal  was  satisfied  whether  the
             appellant had established his or  her  case  to  the  relevant
             standard of proof. In asylum appeals, weight should  be  given
             to objective indications of risk rather than necessarily to  a
             state of mind."






     11. The same medical evidence was available to the First-tier Tribunal,
         yet it has given no consideration whatsoever to the Guidance or AM.
          The decision refusing an adjournment in order for the appellant to
         appear by videolink or telephone was also made without the  benefit
         of the Guidance.  I am satisfied  that  in  refusing  to  grant  an
         adjournment the First-tier Tribunal has  acted  unfairly  for  this
         reason combined with the additional reasons I set out below.




     12. First, the First-tier Tribunal has  not  adequately  addressed  the
         medical evidence  relied  upon.   The  GP's  letter  is  criticised
         because it is silent as to when the GP last saw the  appellant  and
         therefore questions how up to date the evidence is.  This fails  to
         take into account that the GP attached a list of the medication the
         appellant is on.  This is taken from a printout  dated  7  December
         2017.   When  this  is  read  together  with  the  letter,  it   is
         sufficiently clear that the GP was making a current  assessment  of
         the appellant.




     13. Second, the First-tier Tribunal  has  not  considered  the  medical
         evidence against an important aspect of  the  relevant  background.
         The respondent took the unusual step of  conducting  the  screening
         interview at the care home.  In the decision letter  at  [16],  the
         respondent "noted that due to your current  medical  prognosis  you
         are not fit to travel for an interview...and as such you have  been
         able to provide a written statement  in  support  of  your  claim".
         This gives the clear impression that the  respondent  accepted  the
         appellant was unable to travel to be interviewed, at  the  time  of
         writing.  This appears to have been accepted by  Judge  Andrews  at
         [14] because she was satisfied that paragraph  339NA(vii)  applies.
         339NA states as follows:





             "Personal interview


             339NA. Before a decision  is  taken  on  the  application  for
             asylum, the applicant shall be  given  the  opportunity  of  a
             personal interview on their  application  for  asylum  with  a
             representative of  the  Secretary  of  State  who  is  legally
             competent to conduct such an interview.


             The personal interview may be omitted where:


             ...

                  (vii)      it is not reasonably practicable, in particular
                  where the Secretary of State is of the  opinion  that  the
                  applicant is unfit or unable to be  interviewed  owing  to
                  enduring circumstances beyond their control; or

             ...


             The omission of a personal interview  shall  not  prevent  the
             Secretary of State from taking a decision on the application.


             Where the personal interview is  omitted,  the  applicant  and
             dependants shall be given a reasonable opportunity  to  submit
             further information."





     14.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  has  therefore  accepted  it  was   not
         reasonably  practicable  for  the  appellant  to   be   interviewed
         substantively, given the respondent's opinion  that  the  appellant
         was  unfit  or  unable  to  be  interviewed   owing   to   enduring
         circumstances  beyond  his  control.   His  medical  condition  and
         circumstances remained the same for the purposes  of  the  hearing.
         It is very difficult to see from the  limited  reasoning  provided,
         how the First-tier Tribunal could be satisfied that 339NA(vii)  was
         met but not satisfied that the appellant was  unfit  or  unable  to
         attend the hearing.




     15. Finally, the First-tier Tribunal  has  not  considered  whether  it
         could  fairly  proceed  without  giving  the  appellant  a  further
         opportunity to provide relevant details or address the respondent's
         concerns.  The headnote in Nwaigwe (adjournment:  fairness)  [2014]
         UKUT 418 (IAC) states as follows:





             "If a Tribunal refuses to accede to  an  adjournment  request,
             such decision could, in principle,  be  erroneous  in  law  in
             several respects: these include a failure to take into account
             all    material    considerations;    permitting    immaterial
             considerations to intrude; denying the party concerned a  fair
             hearing;  failing  to  apply  the  correct  test;  and  acting
             irrationally.  In practice, in most cases the question will be
             whether the refusal deprived the affected party of  his  right
             to a fair hearing.  Where an adjournment refusal is challenged
             on fairness grounds, it is important  to  recognise  that  the
             question for the Upper Tribunal is not whether the  FtT  acted
             reasonably.  Rather,  the  test  to  be  applied  is  that  of
             fairness:  was there any deprivation of the  affected  party's
             right to a fair hearing? See SH (Afghanistan) v  Secretary  of
             State for the Home Department [2011] EWCA Civ 1284."






     16. I am satisfied that the appellant was deprived of  a  fair  hearing
         because the First-tier Tribunal failed to consider the  appellant's
         vulnerability and the impact this played on the lack of  detail  in
         his claim and the absence of a clear explanation for the  delay  in
         making the asylum claim.  The First-tier Tribunal  also  failed  to
         resolve the inconsistency in the finding that  339NA(vii)  was  met
         and its other findings as to fitness to attend the hearing.




Disposal




     17. I have had regard to para 7.2 of the  relevant  Senior  President's
         Practice Statement and the nature and extent of the  error  of  law
         and the factual findings required in remaking the decision,  and  I
         have decided that this is an appropriate case to remit to the  FTT.
         This is because completely fresh findings of fact are necessary.




     18. I note that permission was restricted to the asylum  grounds  only.
         However the failure to adjourn and /  or  apply  the  Guidance  has
         resulted in an unfair hearing, and in  all  the  circumstances  the
         interests of justice require that  the  decision  on  all  grounds,
         asylum and human rights, should be set aside and remade de novo.




     19. In order for the appellant's vulnerability to be taken into account
         fully with a view to making the necessary adjustments  for  a  fair
         hearing, a case management hearing in the First-tier Tribunal would
         assist.  It would also assist if the appellant's  solicitors  could
         set out precisely what  steps  it  suggests  would  ensure  a  fair
         hearing in advance of the case management hearing, and in any event
         as soon as possible, by reference to updated medical evidence.

Decision

     20. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making  of  an
         error of law.  Its decision cannot stand and is set aside.

     21. The appeal shall be remade by the First-tier Tribunal de novo.



Signed:

Ms M. Plimmer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date:
18 April 2018

