
                                    [pic]

|Upper Tribunal                   |                                |
|(Immigration and Asylum Chamber) |Appeal Number: PA/11918/2017    |

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 25 July 2019                  |On 2 August 2019                 |
|                                 |                                 |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BLUNDELL


                                   Between

                                     NR
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Gajjar, instructed by SMA Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Bramble, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is an Afghan national who was born on 24 April 1993.   He
    appeals against a decision which  was  issued  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Rothwell on 15 March 2019,  dismissing  his  appeal  against  the
    respondent's refusal to grant him international protection.






Background
 2. The appellant claimed asylum on the basis that he was in  fear  of  the
    Taliban.  He stated that he had lived in Kabul since he was around  six
    years old and that he had worked in haulage, for a construction company
    there.  He drove a lorry in and around Kabul, and held a special permit
    which would allow him to  drive  into  the  Ministry  of  the  Interior
    ("MoI").  In June 2015,  the  appellant's  lorry  was  stopped  by  the
    Taliban as he was  driving  from  Logar  Province  to  Kabul.   He  was
    blindfolded and brought in front of senior Taliban members.  These  men
    told the appellant that he was required to assist them with a  plan  to
    explode a bomb inside the Ministry of the Interior.  They  stated  that
    explosives would be loaded onto his lorry on a date in the  future  and
    that he would be required to drive it into the MoI.  It was  not  clear
    to him whether this would be a suicide  mission.   Threats  were  made,
    however, and the appellant agreed to co-operate so  that  he  could  be
    allowed to leave.  Having done so, he drove to the nearest police  base
    and reported what had happened.  The appellant gave his account and was
    allowed to proceed onwards to Kabul. He was not allowed  to  enter  the
    MoI, however, and his security pass was taken from him.   On  reporting
    this to his employer, he was told that he could no longer work for them
    because he was of interest to the Taliban.  The appellant decided  that
    he was not safe in Afghanistan and made his way  to  the  UK  to  claim
    asylum, which took some time due to difficulties along the way.


 3.  The  appellant  was  interviewed  by  the  respondent.   During   that
    interview, he added that two drivers from his company had  been  killed
    and burned by the Taliban  and  that  he  had  been  contacted  by  the
    Taliban, stating that he  would  be  killed  by  them  because  he  had
    disobeyed their instructions.


 4. The appellant's claim was refused by the respondent in a refusal letter
    dated 2  November  2017.   The  respondent  did  not  accept  that  the
    appellant had been a truck driver; that he had  been  targeted  by  the
    Taliban; or that he would be at risk  from  them  on  return.   In  the
    alternative, the respondent suggested that the appellant could relocate
    internally, to Kabul, so as to obviate any risk from the Taliban.  This
    was the first of a number of wrong turns in this case; the appellant is
    from Kabul and it cannot sensibly be suggested that he can relocate  to
    his home area.

Appellate History
 5. The appeal came before Judge Dineen, sitting  at  Hatton  Cross  on  15
    December 2017.  He heard  oral  evidence  from  the  appellant  and  he
    considered a large number of documents, amongst which  were  an  expert
    report on the risk to the appellant in Afghanistan and letters from his
    company and  his  mosque  in  Afghanistan,  stating  that  the  Taliban
    continued to visit their premises and to ask for the appellant by name.
     Having considered the evidence in the round,  Judge  Dineen  concluded
    that the appellant had given an account which was reasonably likely  to
    be true and that he would be at risk from  the  Taliban  on  return  to
    Kabul. Judge Dineen's decision was issued on 22 June  2018,  more  than
    six months after he had heard the appeal.

 6. The respondent sought  permission  to  appeal  against  Judge  Dineen's
    decision, stating that AS (Afghanistan) CG [2018]  UKUT  118  had  been
    issued between the date of the hearing before Judge Dineen and the date
    on which he issued his decision and that he ought  to  have  reconvened
    the  hearing  in  order  to  consider  the  effect  of  that  decision,
    particularly in relation to the question of whether the appellant could
    "internally relocate to Kabul to avoid  the  Taliban".   This  was  the
    second wrong turn in this case; as I have said above, the appellant  is
    from Kabul and no question of internal  relocation  to  his  home  area
    could logically arise.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted by the FtT, however, on the basis that
    the judge had arguably erred in law  in  failing  to  apply  a  country
    guidance decision which had been issued between the date of hearing and
    the date of promulgation.

 8. The appeal came before a Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge  on  14  September
    2018.  The appellant was represented by Mr Gajjar at that  hearing,  as
    he was before me.  Mr Gajjar submitted that there was no error  of  law
    in Judge Dineen's decision.  The Deputy Judge concluded as follows:

         "[6]  The  judge  failed  entirely  to  consider  whether  internal
         relocation to Kabul was an option available to the appellant.   The
         judge made a material error by not considering the country guidance
         case in respect of possible relocation to Kabul even  if  he  found
         the appellant credible."

 9. The Deputy Judge then remitted the appeal to be heard by another  judge
    at Hatton Cross, preserving the findings made by Judge Dineen as to his
    credibility, and directing that the issue was  whether  "relocation  to
    Kabul" is a viable option for this appellant.

The Decision Under Challenge
10. So it was that the appeal came before Judge  Rothwell  on  27  February
    2019.  On any view, her task was a difficult one.  Confronted  with  an
    appellant who had lived and worked in Kabul, and had been sought  there
    by the Taliban, she was required by the  DUTJ's  decision  to  consider
    whether he could internally  relocate  to  Kabul.   She  heard  further
    evidence from  the  appellant  and  she  received  further  documentary
    material from him.  The Presenting Officer submitted that the appellant
    would not be at risk in Kabul because he was not, in the words  of  the
    first paragraph of the headnote in AS (Afghanistan) a senior figure  in
    the government, a spy or a  security  operative.   For  the  appellant,
    counsel (not Mr Gajjar) submitted that the appellant was from Kabul and
    had been targeted there.  There had been  no  error  of  law  in  Judge
    Dineen's decision and the question of relocation did not arise.

11.  Having considered the evidence and set out the country guidance in  AS
    (Afghanistan), Judge Rothwell concluded as follows:

         "[34] I am bound by the country guidance decision in  the  case  of
         AS.  The Tribunal assessed the expert evidence of Dr Giustozzi  and
         the ability of the Taliban to track down individuals via  informers
         including agents  within  the  Government  within  Afghanistan  and
         within Kabul.  The case addresses the particular risk in Kabul  and
         not just the issue of  internal  relocation  there.   The  Tribunal
         assessed that a person would not be at risk  unless  they  were  "A
         person who is of lower level interest for the  Taliban  (ie  not  a
         senior government or security services official or a spy)  and  the
         appellant does not fall within any of these categories.


         [35] I have seen the letters from the appellant's ex-employers  and
         I agree that they are vague as to  when  the  Taliban  came  asking
         about the appellant, given that the incident occurred as  long  ago
         as in 2015 and according to the appellant  the  incident  with  the
         lorry drivers occurred shortly after his problems.


         [36] Therefore applying the case of AS, as I am bound to do, I find
         that the appellant would not be at risk of serious harm  on  return
         to Afghanistan and I do not find that the appellant is a refugee."

12. The grounds of appeal which were presented to the FtT,  and  thereafter
    to  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  McWilliam  on  renewal,  lacked  focus.   A
    challenge was presented to the paragraphs of Judge Rothwell's  decision
    which I have set out above but the mainstay of the grounds referred  to
    parts of the headnote to AS (Afghanistan) which were simply  irrelevant
    to the issues.  In granting permission to  appeal,  however,  Judge  Mc
    William sorted the wheat from the chaff when she  stated  that  it  was
    arguable that relocation to Kabul could not have been  the  issue  when
    the appellant is from that city.

Submissions
13. Mr Gajjar submitted before me that the judge had erred  in  failing  to
    factor the preserved findings made by  Judge  Dineen  into  account  in
    reaching the conclusion she did at [35].  It had been accepted by Judge
    Dineen that the appellant had been sought by the Taliban in  Kabul  and
    the further evidence before Judge Rothwell  was  to  be  considered  in
    light of that acceptance.  The judge  had  failed  to  do  so  and  had
    reached an illogical conclusion when she  decided  that  the  appellant
    would not be at risk in Kabul.

14. Mr Bramble had initially been minded to  submit  that  the  grounds  of
    appeal simply failed to identify the point now made by Mr  Gajjar,  and
    that he should not be permitted to augment those grounds without formal
    application.  On considering the grounds carefully, however, Mr Bramble
    accepted that the submissions made by Mr Gajjar fell within  the  scope
    of [4] of the grounds of appeal.  As  to  the  merits  of  Mr  Gajjar's
    submissions, Mr Bramble accepted that Judge Rothwell had erred  in  law
    in the manner claimed.

15. It was consequently agreed by the representatives that Judge Rothwell's
    decision could not stand and that the proper course, in light  of  what
    has gone before, was for the Upper Tribunal to remake the  decision  on
    the appeal.  I asked Mr Bramble whether he sought  a  further  hearing,
    and therefore an opportunity to cross-examine the appellant  about  the
    assertion that the Taliban have continued to seek  him  in  Kabul.   In
    light of the favourable findings reached by Judge  Dineen,  Mr  Bramble
    did not seek to do so.  That was plainly the proper course.

Disposal
16. I therefore remake the decision in this appeal, and  I  do  so  on  the
    basis of the findings made by Judge Dineen.  It  was  accepted  in  his
    decision that the appellant had been asked by the Taliban to take  part
    in an attempt to explode a lorry full of explosive in the MoI.  It  was
    accepted that he had taken the matter immediately  to  the  authorities
    and that threats had been made against him by the Taliban as a  result.
    It was accepted that the Taliban subsequently went to his place of work
    and his mosque in order to locate him, and it  was  accepted  that  two
    other lorry drivers at his place of work  had  been  killed  and  their
    bodies burned in their  lorries.   Letters  from  the  mosque  and  the
    appellant's company were before Judge Dineen, confirming the  Taliban's
    ongoing visits to those places in Kabul.

17. Further letters from the mosque and the place of work were before Judge
    Rothwell.  I do not consider those letters to be vague  when  they  are
    considered in the context of what has gone before.   They  confirm  the
    ongoing adverse interest in the appellant on the part  of  the  Taliban
    and they confirm an ongoing ability to visit his  places  of  work  and
    worship.

18. Like Judge Rothwell, I  note  the  headnote  of  AS  (Afghanistan)  and
    particularly the first paragraph of the same.  I do  not  consider  the
    guidance to be prescriptive in relation to the categories of people who
    might be sought by  the  Taliban.   The  country  guidance  requires  a
    decision to be made as to whether a person is of lower level  interest,
    since it is only those at a higher level of priority which the  Taliban
    can and will target in Kabul.  I consider the Taliban to have shown  by
    their actions that this particular appellant is a higher priority.   On
    the facts  of  this  case  that  is  perhaps  unsurprising,  since  the
    appellant not only contravened their instructions;  he  reported  their
    plan to the police immediately and may, in doing  so,  have  endangered
    the senior Taliban figures with whom he met  on  the  road  from  Logar
    Province.   It  is  reasonably  likely,  therefore,  that  he  is   not
    considered to be of low-level interest, and that  he  continues  to  be
    sought by the Taliabn in Kabul, notwithstanding their limited  presence
    and capability in that city.


19. In the circumstances, I consider that the appellant would be at risk on
    return to Kabul.  It was not submitted by Mr Bramble that  there  would
    be a sufficiency of protection in that  city,  or  that  the  appellant
    would be able to relocate to another part of  Afghanistan.   Given  the
    proliferation of the Taliban in other parts of the  country,  any  such
    submission would have been surprising.  The appeal will accordingly  be
    allowed on the basis that the appellant's removal would be contrary  to
    the Refugee Convention.

20. I record for the sake of completeness that Mr Gajjar sought to preserve
    the  appellant's  position  in  relation  to  Article  15(c)   of   the
    Qualification Directive.  In light of my conclusion that the  appellant
    is a refugee, however, I do not resolve that question.


Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Rothwell) is  set  aside.   I
remake the decision on the appeal, and allow the appeal on the  ground  that
the appellant is a refugee whose removal from the UK would  be  contrary  to
the 1951 Convention.

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.
                                    [pic]
                                MARK BLUNDELL
                      Judge of the Upper Tribunal (IAC)

                                26 July 2019
