
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:  PA/11625/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision and Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 24 January 2018                       |On 22 March 2018                  |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CONWAY


                                   Between

                                   MR SWS
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss Seehra
For the Respondent:    Ms Ahmad


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Sri  Lanka  born  in  1986.   He  appeals
    against a decision of the respondent made on 13 October 2016 to  refuse
    his claim for asylum.

 2. His claim in summary is that he is Sinhalese and witnessed  the  murder
    in 2009 of a Tamil  friend.   It  was  believed  that  the  Sri  Lankan
    authorities were responsible for his murder.  The appellant submitted a
    complaint to the police, the Human Rights Commission (HRC) and later to
    the Lessons Learnt Reconciliation Commission (LLRC).   The  authorities
    considered his friend to have Tamil terrorist links.
 3. Threats were made by telephone telling him to withdraw the  complaints.
    In 2015 the police called at his house  with  an  arrest  warrant.   He
    fears return as he is suspected  of  involvement  with  the  Liberation
    Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE) because of his deceased friend.


 4. The application was refused.


 5. The respondent stated that the  appellant  had  given  an  inconsistent
    account of why he was wanted by the authorities as in the Statement  of
    Additional Grounds  he  referred  to  being  accused  of  helping  LTTE
    terrorists, whilst  in  the  asylum  interview  he  referred  to  being
    instructed to withdraw the complaint made to the HRC.


 6. Reference was made to the appellant stating in the interview  at  first
    that the threatening phone calls were not reported to the police and to
    changing his account later in the interview when stating that they were
    reported to the police.


 7. The respondent also noted the appellant's claim that people  in  a  van
    came looking for him in early 2010 yet he was able to leave  Sri  Lanka
    six months later using his own passport.


 8. He appealed.


    First tier hearing


 9. Following a hearing at Hatton Cross on 8 August 2017 Judge of the First-
    Tier Swinnerton dismissed the appeal.  His findings are  at  paragraphs
    21 to 29. In summary, at [21] the judge found there to be discrepancies
    between his interview and Statement of Additional  Grounds  as  to  the
    basis upon which the telephone threats were made to him.  Also, at [22]
    that he gave contradictory  answers  at  interview  as  to  whether  he
    reported the threatening calls to the police.


10. Further, he cast doubt on the reliability of correspondence from a  Sri
    Lankan lawyer Mr Liyanage, who stated that the appellant fled Sri Lanka
    and that he was being sought, when the appellant's  evidence  was  that
    when he left in 2010 he had no situation to fear only becoming  fearful
    in 2015 [26].  He attached 'very little weight' to the letters from  Mr
    Liyanage.


11. Also, there was contradictory evidence as to the date of  his  friend's
    death [24].


12. At [23] the judge questioned why the authorities would wait almost five
    years from an arrest warrant being issued before they sought to use it.
     In addition a Documentation Verification Report (DVR) stating that the
    court documents and arrest warrant had, enquiry having been  made  with
    the Director, Terrorist Investigation Department, Colombo,  been  found
    to be not genuine [25].  As the report  was  brief  on  detail  and  no
    detail or explanation had been provided in relation  to  the  verifying
    department, Ralon Colombo, the judge attached 'only some weight.'


13. The judge noted letters from two attorneys  Mr  Wickramarathna  and  Mr
    Herath who stated they had perused the court record and that an  arrest
    warrant was issued [26].  He found 'no reason to approach their letters
    with the same reservations' that he had for the letters of Mr Liyanage.
     He 'therefore attach[ed] weight to their letters although not decisive
    weight' [27].


14. The judge's final point taken against the appellant's  credibility  was
    his delay in claiming asylum after he became fearful of  the  situation
    in November 2015.  He only claimed in  April  2016  after  his  student
    leave was curtailed.  He did not believe the explanation  of  ignorance
    finding the timing 'highly convenient'.


    Error of law hearing


15. The appellant sought permission to  appeal  which  was  granted  on  27
    November 2017.


16. At the error of law hearing before me Ms Seehra essentially  relied  on
    her written grounds.  There were three main matters.  First, the  judge
    failed to consider relevant evidence, namely, documents which supported
    his account  of  having  made  a  complaint  against  the  authorities.
    Second, he failed to give sufficient reasoning, in particular, at  [22]
    where the discrepancies claimed to have been found and  to  be  'highly
    significant' were not supported by a close  reading  of  the  interview
    record.  Third, a failure to make clear findings of fact in respect  of
    the court and lawyers' documents.  His finding that  having  noted  the
    evidence of Mr Wickramarathna and Mr Herath  that  they  had  seen  the
    existence of an arrest warrant he attached weight  but  not  'decisive'
    weight to that evidence, was unclear.


17. In addition, having noted reservations about the contents of the DVR it
    was unreasoned on what basis he attached 'some' weight to the DVR.


18. Ms Ahmad's response  was  that  the  judge  had  made  several  adverse
    findings which had not been attacked.  On the criticism that he had not
    referred to all the documents bearing to support his claim there was no
    need to do so.  As for the claim of  a  lack  of  reasoning,  Ms  Ahmad
    submitted that findings of inconsistencies in the interview record were
    open to him.  Ms Ahmad accepted that some of the findings  in  relation
    to  the  attorney's  letters  were  not  clear.   Nonetheless,  he  had
    considered the evidence in the round and concluded that the account was
    untruthful.  Such was a conclusion open to him.


    Consideration


19. In considering this matter it is clear that the  judge  has  sought  to
    give careful thought to his decision.  Some of his individual  findings
    on credibility are ones which were clearly open to him on the evidence.
     However, I consider that there are several  significant  errors  which
    make the decision unsafe.


20. There is of course no requirement to make a finding on every  piece  of
    evidence presented but I agree with Ms Seehra that the judge failed  to
    consider relevant evidence in respect of  his  claim  to  have  been  a
    witness to the murder.  Such included an affidavit  prepared  before  a
    Justice of the Peace, letters from his parents and,  in  particular,  a
    letter from the LLRC referring to the appellant as an eyewitness to the
    murder.


21. I consider these to be relevant because they  support  his  account  of
    having made a complaint against the authorities and ex facie  there  is
    independent evidence to confirm the same from the LLRC. In  failing  to
    consider relevant evidence the judge erred.


22. A second issue is his findings at [22]  where  the  judge  referred  to
    threatening phone calls to the appellant in 2009 and 2010 and found the
    account of the calls being reported to the police and whether  he  took
    them seriously to be 'completely contradictory'.  He found that to be a
    'highly significant point' given that he said he was not  fearful  when
    he left Sri Lanka in 2010.


23. However, from my reading of the interview it is not  clear  that  there
    was inconsistency.  At Q164 he was questioned that he  had  a  call  in
    2009 and 2010 telling him to withdraw  his  complaint  and  another  in
    2015.  Q165 questioned whether he reported this to the police to  which
    he answered 'no'.  The question was ambiguous  as  to  which  call  the
    interviewer was referring to, but at Q166 asked why he did  not  report
    it to the police he said 'Because I was here' (i.e. in the UK).  It  is
    evident therefore that he was referring to the call in 2015.  He states
    that he reported the 2010 call (Q203 and para [13] witness  statement).
    At Q183 he said he became scared after the second call  because  people
    came looking for him.  Despite this he was clear that  these  were  not
    the reasons why he left Sri Lanka although  he  was  a  little  worried
    (para 14 witness statement).


24. In failing to give sufficient reasoning on this matter, an issue which,
    as indicated, he found to  be  a  'highly  significant  point'  against
    credibility, the judge erred.


25. I find a further difficulty with the decision,  namely,  how  he  dealt
    with the evidence from two Sri Lankan attorneys, Mr Wickramarathna  and
    Mr Herath.  At [27] the judge attached weight to their evidence.   Such
    implies that he accepted that they were  genuine  attorneys  and  their
    evidence was truthful.  Their  evidence  confirmed  independently  that
    they had perused the court records, spoken to the court  registrar  and
    confirmed the existence  of  a  warrant  [26].   However,  although  he
    attached weight to their evidence he decided not to  attach  'decisive'
    weight to it.


26. I consider that the judge erred in failing to make a clear  finding  of
    fact on  material  evidence.   Either,  their  evidence  was  accepted,
    namely, they were genuine attorneys who confirmed the  existence  of  a
    warrant, or it was not.


27. I consider that these errors must taint the adverse  findings  made  by
    the judge, such that the case must be reheard.


    Notice of Decision


28. The decision of the First tier Tribunal is set aside. The nature of the
    case is such that it is appropriate in terms of section 12(2)(b)(i)  of
    the  Tribunals,  Courts  and  Enforcement  Act  2007  and  of  Practise
    Statement 7.2 to remit the case to  the  First  tier  Tribunal  for  an
    entirely fresh hearing before a judge other than Judge Swinnerton.   No
    findings stand.


Direction Regarding Anonymity

Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                             Dated 20 March 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Conway





















