
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11217/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Civil Justice    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Centre                               |                                     |
|On 5 August 2019                     |On 15 August 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

                                  MISS Z S
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr W Khan, Counsel, instructed by Fountain
Solicitors (Walsall)
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant, who claims to be a national of Eritrea,  has  permission
    to challenge the decision of Judge Fowell of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    sent on 6 December 2018 dismissing her appeal against the decision made
    by the respondent on 14 August 2018 refusing her protection claim.  The
    respondent noted in the refusal decision that "... it is accepted  that
    you come  from  Egypt"  (paragraph  25)  and  took  the  basis  of  the
    appellant's claim to be that on return to  Egypt  she  would  not  have
    anywhere else to stay and would not be able to afford her medication.

2.   The respondent noted that the appellant stated  that  whilst  in  Egypt
    she had accepted a job from a princess to work for her as a servant and
    had been granted entry clearance to accompany the princess to  the  UK.
    The respondent noted further that the appellant claimed  that  once  in
    the UK she had been forced to work against her  will.   The  respondent
    observed that the National Referral Mechanism (NRM) had  decided  on  6
    July 2018 that  she  was  not  a  victim  of  trafficking  or  slavery,
    servitude or forced/compulsory labour.  The respondent  concluded  that
    "[d]ue  to  your  responses  in   your   asylum   interview   and   the
    inconsistencies in your account, it has been  rejected  that  you  were
    forced to work against your will" (paragraph 32).

3.   In her grounds of appeal the appellant stated inter alia that  "I  have
    been the victim of trafficking" and that "I am an Eritrean national.  I
    would be seen as evading military service".  The judge considered  that
    "[t]he  essential  question  here  is  simply  her   nationality   ..."
    (paragraph 8).  At paragraphs 22-32 the judge addressed the appellant's
    representatives' submissions that  the  appellant  was  a  national  of
    Eritrea, not Egypt.  At paragraph 32 the judge concluded:

         "32. Given these failures and discrepancies I cannot accept that Ms
             Saleh's account is credible or that she is from Eritrea.  As a
             result her claims for asylum and humanitarian protection  must
             be dismissed".


4.   The appellant's  grounds  are  stated  as  being  four  in  number  but
    essentially articulate two grounds, the first alleging that  the  judge
    failed to make findings on the appellant's asylum claim  which  centred
    on her being a victim of trafficking and been forced  to  work  against
    her will as a domestic servant; the second contending that the  judge's
    reasoning for concluding the appellant was a  national  of  Egypt  were
    erroneous.



The Trafficking/Forced labour issue

5.   It is demonstrably clear, and Mr Mills  did  not  dispute  the  matter,
    that the judge did not address the appellant's claim to have  been  the
    victim of trafficking and servitude.  Since the  appellant  had  raised
    this claim in her asylum interview and the respondent had addressed  it
    in the refusal decision under the  sub-head  "Forced  to  work  by  the
    princess in Egypt and the UK", it was a  matter  that  required  to  be
    addressed and a decision made upon it.  It was not addressed.

6.   However, I agree with Mr Mills that this error was not a  material  one
    insofar as the appellant's asylum claim was concerned.  I  so  conclude
    for two reasons.  First,  the  only  fear  regarding  return  to  Egypt
    identified by or relied upon by the appellant was her medical condition
    and the fact that prior to obtaining work with the  princess  in  Egypt
    she could not afford to pay for the medication necessary to control her
    epilepsy.  Even taking the appellant's claim at its highest  she  could
    only succeed on the basis of this claim if able to show that the likely
    problems she would face as regards medication amounted  to  an  act  of
    persecution within the meaning of Article  9(1)  of  the  Qualification
    Directive.  That would require establishing that such problems amounted
    to a violation of her non-derogable right not to be ill-treated or some
    violation of a  fundamental  human  right  (or  rights)  equivalent  in
    severity.  Yet the judge made a clear finding on the issue of Article 3
    ill-treatment, concluding at paragraph 36:

         "36. Finally, little was made of her medical condition.  It appears
             that this was under control in Egypt and that  the  medication
             she requires could be obtained there,  even  if  a  charge  is
             made, so there is no basis to succeed under  Article  3,  that
             she would be returning to inhuman or degrading treatment".


    That finding was not challenged in the grounds of appeal  nor  did  the
    appellant's representatives in submissions take issue with  it.   Given
    the nature of the appellant's  medical  condition  (epilepsy)  and  the
    uncontroversial fact that it is controlled by medication, the appellant
    could only have been able to succeed if able to show that on return she
    would  not  be  able  to  obtain  that  medication  or  access  medical
    facilities able to provide it to her.  This she had  wholly  failed  to
    do.  This point links to my second reason.

7.   My second reason for concluding that the judge did not  materially  err
    in law by failing to address the appellant's  claim  to  face  risk  on
    return to Egypt is that it was predicated  on  the  appellant  being  a
    national of Egypt.  She could only face a real risk  in  Egypt  on  the
    basis that she was a national of that country.  If she was,  then  that
    would mean she had the rights and benefits that attach  to  persons  of
    that nationality.  This is important because, prior to  the  princess's
    agents  helping  her  obtain  an  Egypt  passport,  she  was  a  person
    registered with UNHCR as an asylum seeker and at that time on  her  own
    account (taking it at its highest) she and her family were undocumented
    and in hiding.  By virtue of being a national of  Egypt  who  had  been
    granted a passport, the appellant would not face the previous types  of
    difficulties arising from her non-national status.



The appellant's nationality

8.   If the appellant's grounds are to succeed, therefore,  it  must  be  on
    the basis of the judge's treatment of  the  issue  of  the  appellant's
    nationality.  The first point raised in the appellant's  second  ground
    is unpromising.  It complains that  the  judge  "failed  to  take  into
    account the fact that the appellant's mother and sister  were  accepted
    by UNHCR as refugees in Egypt on the  basis  that  they  were  Eritrean
    citizens by descent".  Clearly, however, the judge took this fact  into
    account: see paragraph 24.

9.   The second point contends that "[t]here was  no  evidential  basis  for
    the judge to find differently that the  appellant  was  not  Eritrean".
    That ignores the fact that the judge's finding was that  the  appellant
    was a national of Egypt and it is  unarguable  that  in  reaching  that
    conclusion the judge had evidence of this: in the form of the  copy  of
    her  Egyptian  passport  submitted  with  her  application  for   entry
    clearance. That was  quite  a  different  factual  scenario  than  that
    disclosed by the documentation relating to the mother  and  sister.   I
    would accept that the judge does not specifically state  anywhere  that
    he considered the appellant a national of Egypt, but read as  a  whole,
    the judge's decision is clearly premised  on  that  fact,  as  was  the
    respondent's clear refusal decision: see paragraphs 2, 5, 7, 19 and  29
    of the judge's decision.

10.  The appellant's third point takes issue with the judge's  statement  at
    paragraph 27 that:

         "27. Each country has different rules about nationality.  Some  are
             based on place of birth, some on descent or on  a  combination
             of the two.  I have no evidence before me about the  basis  of
             Eritrean nationality, but even if it is the case Mrs Adams  is
             entitled to claim Eritrean nationality, and by  extension  her
             daughter too, it is surprising that Egypt does not  allow  any
             naturalisation of those who are  born  there  and  have  lived
             there all of their lives".


    I would agree that it was mere speculation on the part of the judge  to
    opine  that  "it  is  surprising  that  Egypt  does   not   allow   any
    naturalisation of those who are born there and  have  lived  there  all
    their lives", but this shortcoming cannot establish  an  error  of  law
    since, as explained earlier, the judge's  entirely  reasonable  premise
    was that the appellant held an Egyptian passport anyway.

11.  The fourth prong of the appellant's  second  ground  assails  what  was
    said by the judge at paragraph 24:

         "24. On its face it provides support to the appellant's  case,  and
             there is further support in  the  fact  that  her  mother  and
             sister were admitted to the UK on a similar basis.   The  fact
             that they were accepted as refugees  indicates  that  it  must
             have been accepted that they too were Eritrean.  But they have
             not been able to explain to me why that was the case".


    I would accept that the first sentence is problematic.  Given that  the
    mother and sister had produced their documentation  showing  that  they
    were accepted by UNHCR as Eritrean and that their other  evidence  made
    clear that their family origins were in the territory  of  what  became
    Eritrea, there was nothing else for them to explain: these facts  spoke
    for themselves.  I would also agree that there  is  a  further  related
    error in paragraph 26 where the judge said:

         "26. That claim is therefore based on descent from her father,  who
             would also have been Ethiopian before independence.  Since she
             cannot have acquired Eritrean nationality before she  was  32,
             and was not living there, she must have applied for it,  based
             on her father's origins.  But she made no mention of any  such
             application or the evidence needed to support it".


    If the mother and daughter had Eritrean nationality by descent, then on
    the basis of the known facts about Eritrean nationality law (set out in
    MA (Ethiopia) [2009] EWCA Civ 289), they possessed that nationality  ex
    lege.   Their  possession  of  it  was  not  dependent  on  making   an
    application.

12.  At the same time, I fail to see that either error was material for  the
    same reason given earlier.  Even if the judge was wrong to  reject  the
    evidence pointing to the appellant being Eritrean, the appellant  could
    only succeed in establishing that this was a material error if able  to
    show that the judge erred in finding that she was a national of  Egypt.
    By virtue of the second paragraph of Article 1A(2) of the 1951  Refugee
    Convention, if a person has dual nationality they  can  only  establish
    they fall within the scope of the first paragraph if able to show  they
    face a well-founded fear in both countries (there was no issue  in  the
    appellant's case that Egypt would refuse to admit her or refoule her to
    Eritrea).

13.  The critical issue, therefore, is whether the judge  erred  in  finding
    that the appellant was a national of Egypt.  It seems to me  that  here
    the crux of the judge's decision is paragraphs 28 and 29:

         "28. Even it all that is true, the position could still  have  been
             investigated and resolved,  as  required  in  cases  involving
             disputed Ethiopian/Eritrean nationality.  In MA  (Ethiopia)  v
             Secretary of State for the Home Department (2009) EWCA Civ 289
             the Court of Appeal held that the Tribunal should require  the
             claimant  to  act  in  good  faith  and  take  all  reasonably
             practical steps to seek to obtain the requisite  documents  to
             enable her to return.  The evidence  in  that  case  indicated
             that the appellant, of dual Ethiopian/Eritrean nationality had
             gone to the Ethiopian Embassy and asked  for  a  passport  but
             told the staff that she was Eritrean.  That did not constitute
             an attempt in good faith to obtain an Ethiopian  passport  and
             so her appeal was dismissed.


         29.  In this case Ms Saleh says  that  she  could  not  go  to  the
             Egyptian Embassy as she did not hold  the  original  passport.
             But it ought still to have been possible to send  a  copy  and
             ask whether that passport number was valid and  in  her  name.
             If this was met with a demand for the original, an approach to
             the Home Office could have been made and if that  was  refused
             the position would have been different - she would  have  done
             all that she could to substantiate her claim".


    Essentially what the judge relied on was the failure of  the  appellant
    to show that she was not  a  national  of  Egypt,  notwithstanding  her
    possession of an Egyptian passport.  The appellant's case  both  before
    the judge and before me was that the appellant's Egyptian passport  had
    been obtained (without the appellant's full involvement or consent)  by
    agents of the princess and thus could not, in the usual way,  be  taken
    as prima facie evidence of the appellant's nationality as Egyptian.  Mr
    Khan submitted before me that since the appellant did not have  a  copy
    of her passport (her princess employer having held on to  it),  it  was
    not possible or realistic to expect  that  enquiries  of  the  Egyptian
    Embassy on her behalf to seek  confirmation  of  whether  or  not  they
    accepted her as a national of Egypt would yield results.   It  was  the
    respondent's case, by contrast, that the appellant's passport had  been
    checked by the British Embassy when the application had been  made  for
    entry clearance.  Mr Mills  pointed  out  that  the  photocopy  of  the
    biodata page of the appellant's Egyptian passport (at A2) contained all
    the information needed in order for a specific request to  be  made  to
    the Egyptian Embassy to confirm or disconfirm that the appellant was an
    Egyptian national.  I agree with Mr Mills.   The  burden  of  proof  to
    establish nationality rests on the appellant.   Given  that  there  was
    prima facie evidence that she was a national of Egypt (in the  form  of
    the photocopy of the biodata page of her  passport),  it  was  for  the
    appellant to establish that this evidence was  not  to  be  relied  on.
    There was a simple, realistic way in which  the  appellant  might  have
    been able to substantiate her claim that she  was  not  a  national  of
    Egypt, namely contacting the Egyptian Embassy.   Her  failure  to  take
    such steps constituted a failure  to  establish  that  she  was  not  a
    national of Egypt: see also AS (Guinea) [2018] EWCA Civ 2234.

14.  The appellant's second  ground  includes  the  contention  that  "[t]he
    judge has failed to appreciate that enquiries to the  Egyptian  Embassy
    would not have been relevant as to whether the appellant is an Eritrean
    national".  Of  course,  such  enquiries  could  not  have  established
    anything about whether the appellant was an Eritrean national.  But the
    judge did not rely on them for that purpose: the plain -  and  entirely
    proper - purpose of such enquiries was considered at  paragraphs  28-29
    to be established of Egyptian nationality.

15.  The appellant's second ground  also  challenges  the  judge's  reliance
    when assessing nationality on doubts about whether  the  appellant  had
    told the truth about her age and  the  circumstances  under  which  she
    managed to contact her mother in the UK, and the  judge's  reliance  at
    paragraph 32 on such "failures and discrepancies".  This  ground  lacks
    force and substance.  In assessing the issue of nationality  the  judge
    was obliged to take into account all relevant  factors,  including  the
    appellant's general credibility.  The  judge's  specific  reference  in
    paragraph 3 to Article 4 of the  Qualification  Directive  makes  clear
    that he was applying the requisite holistic approach.

16.  This appeal therefor fails. However, it may be this is  not  completely
    the end of the matter. Given the unusual circumstances  of  this  case,
    and the fact that if one left entirely to  one  side  the  evidence  of
    Egyptian nationality, the appellant would have realistic  prospects  of
    establishing she was Eritrean, I would merely observe that:

    (i)  if she is able to make diligent enquiries  without  delay  of  the
         Egyptian Embassy; and


    (ii) the result of those enquiries was that they considered her not  to
         be a national of Egypt,


    then she would likely have a strong basis  for  making  a  fresh  claim
    under paragraph 353.

17.  To conclude:

    The decision of the judge,  being  free  of  material  legal  error  is
         upheld.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date

Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed:

[pic]                                   Date: 14 August 2019
Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
