
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11962/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard remotely at Field House        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 29 January 2021 via Skype for     |On 17 March 2021                     |
|Business                             |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STEPHEN SMITH


                                   Between

                            Nicholas Nigel wilson
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M. Zahab Jamali, Counsel, instructed by Burney
                    Legal Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A. Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                          DECISION AND REASONS (V)

This has been a remote hearing which has been consented to  /  not  objected
to by the parties.  The form of remote hearing was  V  (video).  A  face  to
face hearing was not held because it was  not  practicable  and  all  issues
could be determined in a remote hearing.

The documents that I was referred to are in  the  bundles  from  before  the
First-tier Tribunal, and the grounds of appeal,  the  contents  of  which  I
have recorded.

The order made is described at the end of these reasons.

The parties said this about the process: they were content  the  proceedings
had been conducted fairly in their remote form.

 1. This is an appeal against a decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Thew
    dismissing an appeal brought by the appellant,  a  citizen  of  Jamaica
    born on 24 February 1996, against  a  decision  of  the  respondent  to
    refuse his asylum and human rights claim and deport him from the United
    Kingdom.

Factual background

 2. The appellant arrived in this country in April  2002  aged  six,  on  a
    visitor's visa. He has remained here ever since.  On 8  July  2015,  he
    was sentenced to 18 months' detention for the  possession  of  cocaine,
    and to 3 months'  detention  for  resisting  or  obstructing  a  police
    officer, to run concurrently. The appellant now faces  deportation  for
    those offences. The procedural history  to  the  Secretary  of  State's
    attempts to deport him is complex and need not be stated here. It  will
    be sufficient to state that, on 28 September  2018,  the  Secretary  of
    State refused his protection and human  rights  claim  made  to  resist
    deportation. It was that decision that was under  appeal  before  Judge
    Thew.

 3. The appellant's asylum claim was advanced on the basis he  faced  being
    persecuted as a member of the particular  social  group  "deportees  in
    Jamaica". The judge rejected his appeal on that basis, and there is  no
    challenge to that aspect of her reasoning.

 4.  Before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  the  appellant  is  said  to  have
    "accepted" that neither of the exceptions to  the  public  interest  in
    deportation contained in section 117C(4) or  (5)  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("the  2002  Act")  were  engaged.  His
    submissions contended that there were "very  compelling  circumstances"
    over and  above  those  exceptions  arising  from  the  length  of  his
    residence in this country, the best interests of his step-siblings, who
    were children at the time, and that there would be a risk of Article  3
    ECHR mistreatment upon his return.

 5. As of 25 February  2020,  the  appellant  is  not  recorded  as  having
    committed any further offences: see [16] of the judge's decision.

 6. After having considered the appellant's family and private life in this
    country, which had been established through living with his  stepmother
    as his father was in prison and he lost contact with  his  mother,  the
    judge addressed the public interest in the appellant's deportation.  At
    [42], the judge took into account the fact the  appellant  had  only  a
    single conviction for two offences and had not  reoffended  since.  She
    noted the observations of the sentencing judge that the  appellant  had
    demonstrated a determination to overcome his drug use.  He  was  a  low
    risk of reoffending.

 7. At [44], the judge noted the appellant's poor immigration history,  but
    attached little weight to it, as the appellant had  been  a  child  for
    most of the time he had been here unlawfully. The  judge  outlined  two
    Court of Appeal authorities addressing the position of the  appellant's
    relationship with his stepsiblings, finding that, despite the impact of
    the appellant's deportation on them, it would not be "unduly harsh" for
    the appellant to be  deported  as  far  as  they  were  concerned.  The
    appellant would not present any real risk of  suicide,  contrary  to  a
    suggestion that had been made in the OASyS report prepared as  part  of
    the criminal proceedings [49].

 8. At [50], the judge said:

         "I take into account the length of time that he has been in the  UK
         including all of his adult life. His separation from his stepmother
         and her family members if deported will undoubtedly  hit  him  hard
         emotionally and he would no longer have the support of  adults  who
         have been significant in his life in the UK."

 9. She continued at [51]:

         "Whilst there is a background cultural connection with  Jamaica,  I
         take into account that he has lived in the UK since the age of  six
         and there is no evidence of any family members  to  assist  him  in
         Jamaica, it being unclear as to whether his mother is still  there.
         He is now an adult aged 24 and he would have to  make  an  entirely
         new life there for himself. I have no doubt that  it  will  be  far
         from  easy  for  him  to  do  so  and  will  most  likely   involve
         considerable hardship."

10. At [52], the judge said she had undertaken a proportionality "balancing
    exercise", concluding that his deportation would be proportionate.  His
    offending was serious, and to the extent deportation would break up the
    appellant's family relationships, that was an inevitable "and  in  this
    case a necessary" consequence of his actions. She added:

         "I find that whilst the consequences of his removal will  be  harsh
         both on him and his family members the evidence before me does  not
         establish that the consequences will be either unduly harsh or very
         compelling. I recognise that there will be significant obstacles to
         his integration into the life in Jamaica, but I conclude that those
         obstacles do not reach the  threshold  of  being  very  significant
         obstacles."

11.  The  judge  found  the  decision  to  deport  the  appellant   to   be
    proportionate and dismissed the appeal.

Permission to appeal

12. The grounds of appeal are twofold.

13. First, the judge is said to  have  "failed  to  properly  consider/give
    rational weight to material factors", namely the harsh consequences  to
    the appellant of deportation.

14. Secondly, the grounds contend that it was irrational for the  judge  to
    place little weight out of the fact the appellant  "committed  a  crime
    out of necessity".

15. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara on  the
    basis that it was  arguable  that  the  judge's  consideration  of  the
    appellant's lack of ties to Jamaica was flawed.   She  also  considered
    that insufficient consideration was given to  the  circumstances  which
    led to the appellant's offending.

Submissions

16.  Developing  ground  1,  Mr  Jamali  submits  that  the  judge   placed
    insufficient weight on the absence of family or social ties  in  or  to
    Jamaica, especially given the appellant left the country  when  he  was
    aged six.   That was an important  factor  in  light  of  the  moveable
    public interest in deportation, as underlined by Akinyemi  v  Secretary
    of State for the Home Department [2019]  EWCA  Civ  2098  at  [45]  and
    following.  There, the then  Senior  President  of  Tribunals  ascribed
    significance to the fact that section 117C(2) of the 2002 Act  provides
    that: "The more serious the offence committed by  a  foreign  criminal,
    the greater is the public interest in deportation of the criminal".

17. Mr Jamali also submits that the judge was required  to,  but  did  not,
    address whether the appellant would be able to  integrate  in  Jamaica,
    pursuant to Kamara v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2016]
    EWCA Civ 813; [2016] 4 WLR 152.  At [14], Sales LJ,  as  he  then  was,
    said:

         "In my view, the concept of a foreign criminal's 'integration' into
         the country to which it is proposed that he be deported, as set out
         in section 117C(4)(c) and paragraph 399A, is a broad one. It is not
         confined to the mere ability to find a job or to sustain life while
         living in the other country. It is not  appropriate  to  treat  the
         statutory language as subject to some gloss and it will usually  be
         sufficient for a court or tribunal simply to direct itself  in  the
         terms that Parliament has chosen to use. The idea of  'integration'
         calls for a broad evaluative judgment to be made as to whether  the
         individual will be enough of an insider in terms  of  understanding
         how life in the society in that other country is carried on  and  a
         capacity  to  participate  in  it,  so  as  to  have  a  reasonable
         opportunity to be accepted there, to be able to operate on a day-to-
         day basis in that society and to build up within a reasonable  time
         a  variety  of  human  relationships  to  give  substance  to   the
         individual's private or family life."

18. Mr Jamali submits that there  was  simply  no  consideration  of  these
    matters.   The  judge's  enigmatic   reference   to   the   appellant's
    "background cultural connection with Jamaica" was an insufficient basis
    to conclude that the judge had assessed the full  spectrum  of  matters
    related to the appellant's prospective (or lack thereof) integration in
    Jamaica.  The judge accepted that deportation would be hard; "he  would
    have to make an entirely new life there for himself",  which  would  be
    "far from easy" and would "most likely involve  considerable  hardship"
    [51].  She accepted at [52] that there would be "significant" obstacles
    to his integration,  albeit  not  very  significant  obstacles  to  his
    integration.

19. Ms Everett submits that the term "background cultural connection"  does
    not simply mean, for example, ethnic ties, but encompasses the fact the
    appellant was raised in this country in a Jamaican household,  and  was
    surrounded by members of the Jamaican diaspora.  Although the reasoning
    is brief, she  accepts,  the  judge  nevertheless  had  regard  to  all
    relevant factors, and reached a decision that was open to  her  on  the
    facts.

20. In relation to ground 2, Mr Jamali submits that  the  judge  failed  to
    ascribe the required significance to the fact that  the  appellant  was
    only 19 years old at the time he was convicted.  As recognised  by  the
    sentencing judge, he was then experiencing significant difficulties  at
    home.  He turned to those older than him for help and  was  pressurised
    into dealing drugs.  It was  the  appellant  who  was  the  victim,  he
    submitted.  The circumstances  of  the  offence  call  for  the  public
    interest in deportation to be calibrated downwards, given  it  was  not
    for "pure financial gain to fund a luxurious lifestyle".

Legal framework

21. Under section 32(5) of the UK Borders Act 2007, the Secretary of  State
    must make a deportation order in respect of a "foreign criminal".   The
    principle does not apply if the removal  of  the  foreign  criminal  in
    pursuance of the deportation order would breach  that  person's  rights
    under the European Convention on Human Rights ("ECHR").

22. Section 117C(1) of the  2002  Act  provides  that  the  deportation  of
    "foreign criminals" is in the  public  interest  for  the  purposes  of
    determining the proportionality of deportation under Article 8(2) ECHR.
     The appellant satisfies the definition of foreign criminal  as  he  is
    not a British citizen, and has been convicted of an offence  which  led
    to a period of imprisonment of at least 12 months: see section  117D(2)
    of the 2002 Act.

23. The appellant's convictions fall into section 117C(3) of the 2002  Act;
    he has not been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years  or
    more,  with  the  effect  that,  if  Exception  1  or  2  applies,  his
    deportation will not be in the public interest.  Those exceptions are:

         "(4)  Exception 1 applies where-

             (a)  C has been lawfully resident in the United  Kingdom  for
             most of C's life,
             (b)  C is socially and culturally integrated  in  the  United
             Kingdom, and
             (c)  there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles  to  C's
             integration into the country to which  C  is  proposed  to  be
             deported.

         (5)  Exception 2 applies where C  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
         relationship with a qualifying partner, or a genuine and subsisting
         parental relationship with a qualifying child, and  the  effect  of
         C's deportation on the partner or child would be unduly harsh.

         (6)  In the case of a foreign criminal who has been sentenced to a
         period of imprisonment of at least four years, the public  interest
         requires   deportation   unless   there   are    very    compelling
         circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions  1  and
         2."

24. Subsection (6) also applies to foreign criminals sentenced to less than
    four years' imprisonment, it has been held.  The  extent  to  which  an
    individual satisfies the criteria in Exceptions 1 and 2,  even  if  not
    meeting their requirements fully, is  relevant  to  the  assessment  of
    "very compelling circumstances..."  See NA (Pakistan)  v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ 662.

Discussion

Ground 1 - failure "to properly consider/give rational  weight  to  material
factors"

25. Before addressing the substance of Mr Jamali's submissions, it will  be
    helpful to  recall  the  restraint  with  which  this  tribunal  should
    approach the findings of  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   This  ground  of
    appeal challenges the weight ascribed by the judge to the evidence  and
    her evaluation of that evidence.  The appellant therefore invites me to
    stray into the territory which would ordinarily be the preserve of  the
    first instance judge.  Weight is a matter  for  trial  judges,  and  an
    appeal lies to this tribunal only on the basis of an error of law,  and
    not an error of fact  or  disagreement  of  weight.   Of  course,  some
    findings of fact, and decisions as to weight, may  be  infected  by  an
    error of law, and properly be open to challenge on appeal.  In relation
    to questions of weight, this tribunal looks to whether the decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal was rational, or properly open  to  it  on  the
    evidence before it.

26. It is also helpful to refer to the appellant's case as advanced  before
    the First-tier Tribunal.  The appellant's counsel before the First-tier
    Tribunal, Mr Jay Gajjar, accepted at [2] of his skeleton argument dated
    17 February 2020 that the appellant did not rely on section 117C(4)  or
    (5) of the 2002 Act.  The skeleton argument  conceded  that  paragraphs
    399(a), (b) and 399A of the Immigration Rules were  not  met.   On  the
    appellant's behalf, Mr Gajjar advanced a three-limbed argument.

        a. First, there were  "very  compelling  circumstances"  militating
           against the appellant's deportation.

        b. Secondly, his removal would be contrary to the best interests of
           the appellant's children.

        c.  Thirdly,  the  appellant  would  be  at  risk  on  return,  and
           deportation would breach his Article 3 ECHR  rights  (which,  at
           [5] of the skeleton argument, appear to be  a  term  used  as  a
           proxy for the appellant's protection claim).  The claimed  "very
           compelling circumstances"  included  the  fact  the  appellant's
           immigration history should not be held against him, given he was
           a child when he was  arrived,  and  also  related  to  the  best
           interests of his step  siblings.    He  was  of  good  character
           before the index offences, did not have  a  strong  relationship
           with his biological mother, had developed strong ties  with  the
           Scott/Wilson family in this country, and presented a low risk of
           reoffending.  The OASys report suggested that there was  a  risk
           of suicide upon his return.

27. Significantly, there was no express challenge  to  deportation  on  the
    basis that the appellant would face "very significant obstacles" to his
    integration on his return.  Mr Gajjar specifically eschewed reliance on
    section 117C(4) of the 2002 Act, which is the statutory source  of  the
    very provision Mr Jamali now contends  the  judge  failed  properly  to
    consider.   Put another way, the challenge being advanced on appeal  is
    an emphasis which did not feature in the appellant's case below.

28. It is against that background that I approach the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal.  In her analysis, the judge was  clearly  aware  of  the
    extent of the difficulties that would be encountered upon the appellant
    returning to Jamaica.  She took those factors into account at [50]  and
    noted the impact upon him of the lack the support  he  enjoys  in  this
    country upon his  return  to  Jamaica.   As  Ms  Everett  submits,  the
    reference to the "background cultural connection" with Jamaica must  be
    read in the context of the facts  of the case; the appellant  had  been
    raised within the Jamaican community, and would have been familiar with
    Jamaican culture.  At [51], the judge's findings  that  establishing  a
    new life for himself in Jamaica would be  "far  from  easy"  and  would
    involve "considerable hardship" must be read  as  a  whole:  the  judge
    found that the appellant would make a new life for himself in  Jamaica,
    albeit with some difficulty.  That is entirely consistent with finding,
    as the judge expressly reached at [52], that there  would  be  no  very
    significant obstacles to his integration in Jamaica.  As Sales LJ  said
    in Kamara:

         "It is not appropriate to treat the statutory language  as  subject
         to some gloss and it will usually be  sufficient  for  a  court  or
         tribunal simply to direct itself in the terms that  Parliament  has
         chosen to use".

29. The judge considered the difficulties the  appellant  would  encounter,
    and concluded that, although the obstacles to his integration would  be
    "significant", they would not be very significant  [52].   It  is  also
    important  to  recall  the  judge's  unchallenged  findings  that   the
    appellant would not be at risk upon his return to Jamaica as a returned
    deportee, and that he would not come to the adverse attention  of  gang
    members.  Those  unchallenged  findings  dealt  dispositively  with  Mr
    Gajjar's Article 3-based submissions, and also form part of the factual
    matrix  upon  which  the  judge's  consideration  of  the   appellant's
    integration was based.

30. Another judge may have reached a different conclusion, but that  is  no
    basis for this tribunal to interfere with the judge's  findings,  which
    were open to  her  on  the  evidence,  and  sufficiently,  if  briefly,
    expressed.  It cannot be said  that  no  reasonable  judge  could  have
    reached these findings.  Ground 1  is  a  disagreement  of  weight  and
    discloses no error of law.

31. Ground 2 similarly seeks to challenge the weight ascribed by the  judge
    to the evidence she  heard,  this  time  to  the  case-specific  public
    interest in the appellant's deportation.   The  appellant  committed  a
    serious offence at a young age, having moved here at  an  even  younger
    age.  The judge considered the  Recorder's  sentencing  remarks,  which
    themselves noted the difficult circumstances the appellant  was  in  at
    the time of the offence.  In that respect, the judge  also  noted  that
    the Recorder  had  herself  observed  that  many  others  in  difficult
    situations would not, in contrast to this appellant, resort to  dealing
    in Class A drugs.  The  judge  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  expressly
    recognised that it was to the appellant's credit that he had  developed
    an awareness of his offending, and that he had taken steps  to  address
    his behaviour.

32. It is true that the public interest has a moveable quality, as held  by
    the Senior President in Akinyemi at [39]:

         "The correct approach to be taken to the 'public interest'  in  the
         balance to be undertaken by a tribunal is  to  recognise  that  the
         public interest in the  deportation  of  foreign  criminals  has  a
         moveable rather than fixed quality. It is necessary to approach the
         public interest flexibly, recognising  that  there  will  be  cases
         where the person's circumstances in the individual case reduce  the
         legitimate and strong public interest in removal.   The  number  of
         these cases  will  necessarily  be  very  few  i.e.  they  will  be
         exceptional having regard to the legislation and the Rules."

33. However, the moveable quality of the public interest does not mean that
    this judge was bound to ascribe  minimal  weight  to  this  appellant's
    offending, to the extent that a failure to do so was irrational.  While
    it may have been open to the judge to ascribe  reduced  weight  to  the
    public interest in the appellant's deportation, she chose not to do so.
     That was an entirely rational decision.

34. The sentencing judge specifically noted that not all those  facing  the
    circumstances this appellant faced at the time  would  have  turned  to
    crime, and certainly not  drug-related  crime.   The  First-tier  judge
    agreed.  The appellant was not, for example, under pressure, or subject
    to intimidation or coercion falling short  of  duress,  as  many  drugs
    offenders are.  The suggestion that a different  approach  should  have
    been adopted because the appellant acted out of necessity, or  was  not
    funding a  lavish  lifestyle,  is  simply  a  disagreement  of  weight.
    Another judge may not have adopted this approach.  But  the  fact  that
    this judge did does  not  take  her  decision  into  the  territory  of
    irrationality.  Indeed, as the Senior President noted in Akinyemi,  the
    number of cases in which the legitimate and strong public  interest  in
    the removal of foreign criminals will be reduced will be very few,  and
    will be exceptional.  It was not an error of law for this judge not  to
    find anything exceptional in the circumstances of this appellant.  This
    ground is without merit.

35. This appeal is dismissed.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of  an
error of law.  This appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed Stephen H Smith              Date 9 March 2021

Upper Tribunal Judge Stephen Smith
