
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11194/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 21 June 2017                               |On 29 June 2017               |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HUTCHINSON

                                   Between

                                     HMM
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Hodson, Elder Rahimi Solicitors (London)
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

 1. The appellant in this case is a male citizen of  Iraq  who  claimed  to
    have been born on 1 July 2000 and therefore claimed to be  aged  16  at
    the hearing.  The  appellant  had  appealed  against  the  respondent's
    decision on 29 September 2016 to refuse the  appellant's  asylum  claim
    (although as a minor the appellant was granted leave to remain and  the
    respondent indicated he would not be returned until  contact  had  been
    made with his family or until  he  turned  18)..   In  a  Decision  and
    Reasons promulgated on 20 April 2017 following a hearing on 14 November
    2016 Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  M  S  Emerton  dismissed  the
    appellant's appeal  on  all  grounds,  nevertheless  finding  that  the
    appellant's date of birth was 1 July 2000 and that he was  aged  16  as
    claimed.

 2. The appellant appealed on the following grounds:

    Ground 1 - that there was a misdirection in relation  to  returnability
    and humanitarian protection; AA (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG  misunderstood;
    and

    Ground 2 - failure to consider asylum claim  on  alternative  basis  of
    membership of particular social group on  which  the  appeal  ought  to
    succeed on the facts as found.

Error of Law Discussion

 3. Although the grounds for permission to appeal at paragraph 5 alluded to
    the fact that there was a five month delay in  the  judge  promulgating
    his decision, as I indicated at the  hearing,  there  was  no  specific
    ground as conceded by Mr Hodson on this basis and in any event no nexus
    has been established between the delay and the alleged errors,  despite
    the vague accusations made at paragraph 5 that the First-tier  Tribunal
    had forgotten or had not taken notes on some of  the  oral  submissions
    and points made by the legal representatives at the hearing (Arusha and
    Demushi (deprivation of citizenship  -  delay)  [2012]  UKUT  80  (IAC)
    applied).  Mr Hodson withdrew this issue, properly in my view.

 4. I am of the view that the  appellant's  first  ground  in  relation  to
    humanitarian protection is made out.  I am satisfied that  the  judge's
    reasoning discloses a misreading of the country guidance in relation to
    Article 15, namely AA (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG [2015] UKUT 00544  (IAC).
    The judge made detailed findings of fact in this  case  including  that
    the appellant was aged 16 as  claimed.   However,  the  judge  did  not
    accept that the appellant had established that he faced any  risk  from
    the family of Rasoul and was satisfied that the asylum claim could  not
    succeed on that basis.  The judge went on  to  consider  at  [36]  that
    there were references to the appellant being at risk as  a  Sunni  Kurd
    but these were not relied on and seemed to have no  basis.   The  judge
    found at [37] that:

         "I do accept that there would have been risk from ISIS,  once  they
         took over  the  area  of  the  appellant's  village,  and  entirely
         appreciate why he would feel unsafe.  However,  I  agree  with  the
         respondent that a generalised risk from ISIS does not constitute  a
         Convention reason."

 5. Mr Hodson referred me to paragraph 18 of the Reasons for Refusal Letter
    where the respondent had set out that the appellant had claimed he  had
    fled Iraq because ISIS took over his village and that he feared that he
    would be assumed on return to have a political opinion and that it  was
    accepted that this reason for claiming asylum may be on the basis of an
    imputed political opinion which would engage the  1951  United  Nations
    Convention relating to refugees.  However that ground was  not  in  the
    appellant's grounds for permission  to  appeal  and  is  not  therefore
    before me.  In any event I  am  satisfied  that  the  judge  adequately
    addressed this at [37] where he did not accept that in the  appellant's
    case this  would  constitute  a  Convention  reason  and  although  his
    reasoning is brief on  this  issue,  it  is  adequate.   This  was  not
    substantively challenged in the grounds for permission to appeal.   The
    judge went on to find at [38] that he did not accept that the appellant
    had established even to the low standard  of  proof  required  that  he
    would be at risk for a Convention reason and at [39]  that  there  were
    "no facts capable  of  substantiating  the  asylum  claim,  which  must
    accordingly be dismissed."

 6. However, the judge made a number of positive findings,  including  that
    the appellant was 16.  The judge  also  accepted,  at  [31],  that  the
    appellant's parents were dead and that he had  lost  contact  with  his
    uncle in Iraq and that if they were alive it  was  by  no  means  clear
    where they were living.  The judge went on to make  findings  that  the
    appellant  was  an  unaccompanied  minor  and  that  it  would  not  be
    reasonable to expect him to make his way to the IKR and noted  at  [50]
    that he had been provided with no evidence suggesting that it would  be
    practicable and in  the  absence  of  any  evidence  suggesting  family
    members in the IKR would be able to provide assistance  the  judge  did
    not find that this proposed solution would be  reasonable.   The  judge
    also found  that  that  position  under  Section  55  of  the  Borders,
    Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009  strengthened  this  argument  and
    that it would not be in the appellant's best interests to  subject  him
    to this process.

 7. Although there was some discussion at the hearing before  me  that  the
    judge was exercised about the question of when he should  consider  the
    situation in relation to return, it was not  disputed  by  the  parties
    that the judge made no error in his subsequent findings and that he had
    to consider the situation that the appellant would be returned  at  the
    date of the hearing despite the fact that this was not  what  would  in
    practice happen.

 8. The judge's findings of fact were  not  substantively  challenged.   Mr
    Hodson submitted that  the  judge  had  failed  to  consider  that  the
    appellant would qualify for asylum on the facts as found by the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge as a member of a  particular  social  group,  as  a
    minor and an orphan whose home area is under the control of  ISIS.   Mr
    Hodson relied on LQ (Age: immutable characteristic) Afghanistan  [2008]
    UKAIT 00005, which established that age can be a basis of membership of
    a particular social group.  Mr Hodson also relied, by  analogy,  on  AA
    (unattended children) Afghanistan CG [2012]  UKUT  16  (IAC).   It  was
    submitted that the vulnerabilities of the appellant  to  violence  from
    ISIS and the attendant risk of serious harm  on  account  of  being  an
    orphaned child apply equally to the appellant's  circumstances  in  his
    home area of Iraq in making internal relocation unduly  harsh  as  they
    would in the circumstances of unattended children in Afghanistan.

 9. I am of the view that given the judge's  particular  findings  of  fact
    that it was not Robinson obvious, as submitted by Mr Hodson,  that  the
    appellant would be at risk for a Convention reason  as  a  minor  child
    with no family and at risk in his home area.  AA (unattended  children)
    Afghanistan CG [2012] UKUT 16 (IAC) was allowed on  refugee  convention
    grounds  on  the  basis  of  that  appellant's  anti-Taliban  political
    opinion, whether actual or imputed.  The First-tier  Tribunal  in  this
    appeal considered and  rejected, at [37] that the generalised risk from
    ISIS would constitute a convention reason for this appellant  (and  the
    judge evidently had in mind that this appellant is a minor).  There was
    no error in that approach.

10. However, as I indicated at the hearing I am satisfied  that  the  judge
    erred in his approach to Article 15(c).   Whilst  the  judge  indicated
    that  if  the  appellant  was  returnable  he  would  be  entitled   to
    humanitarian protection, the fact that the appellant's  return  is  not
    currently feasible as indicated in the refusal letter, is not authority
    for humanitarian protection claims being refused in every case, as  the
    judge appears to have concluded.

11. As set out subsequently in R (on the application of H) v The  Secretary
    of State for the Home Department  (application  of  AA  (Iraq  CG)  IJR
    [2017] UKUT 00119 (IAC), at paragraph 41:

         "Secondly (and crucially), a person whose return is  not  currently
         feasible  may,  nevertheless,  still  succeed   in   a   claim   to
         international protection, if and insofar as the claim is based on a
         real risk of harm, which arises otherwise than by  not  having  the
         requisite documentation."

12. Ms Isherwood accepted that she was in difficulties in relation  to  the
    judge's dismissal of the appeal  on  humanitarian  protection  grounds,
    given his (unchallenged) findings of fact.  That has to  be  the  case.
    The judge's findings were not that the harm was on the basis of a  lack
    of documentation but rather on a variety of factors including his  age,
    that he did not formerly come from the IKR, that there was no  evidence
    suggesting that his uncle and aunt, who appeared to be the only sort of
    close family members, had relocated there,  that  the  appellant  spoke
    Kurdish and little Arabic and that he had no  passport.   Taking  these
    factors cumulatively therefore, the risk of harm to the  appellant  was
    not solely based on his lack of documentation.

13. Therefore I am satisfied that although  the  appellant  cannot  succeed
    under  the  refugee  convention,  the  claim  must  succeed  under  the
    Qualification Directive, Article 15(c).

Conclusion

14. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error of  law  such
    that the conclusion is set aside.  All findings of fact are  preserved.
    I remake the decision as follows:

Notice of Decision

15. The appellant's asylum appeal is dismissed.

16. The Humanitarian Protection appeal is allowed under  Article  15(c)  of
    the Qualification Directive.

17. The appeal is allowed under Articles 2 and 3 on the same basis.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed                                  Dated:  28 June 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee award application was made or is payable.

Signed                                  Dated:  28 June 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson

