








Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11795/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 24 May 2019                       |On 10 June 2019                      |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON


                                   Between

                               MS DUOJIZHUOMA
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Winter, instructed by Latta & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A Govan, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, who is a national of China from Tibet, has been  granted
    permission to appeal the decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Agnew
    who for reasons given in her decision dated 12 December 2018, dismissed
    the appellant's appeal against the Secretary of State's decision  dated
    21 September 2018.  This has been to refuse her  protection  and  human
    rights claim which had been based on her ethnicity as a Tibetan and her
    Buddhist belief.

 2. The appellant had been educated in Beijing and, after being awarded  an
    Honours Degree in History at Beijing University, obtained a scholarship
    from the Cambridge Overseas Trust to  attend  Cambridge  University  in
    order to study an MPhil in Social Anthropology at Cambridge University.
     She came to the UK for that course in September 2012.   On her  return
    to China she worked for  the  Tibet  Development  Fund  and  later  the
    Tibetan Foreign Affairs Office.   She was then offered a place  for  an
    MSc in Social Anthropology at Oxford University which did  not  however
    include a scholarship,  to  begin  in  October  2014.   The  offer  was
    repeated in March 2015.  She was successful in obtaining a  grant  from
    the Dalai Lama Trust for a Graduate Scholarship but was unable to  take
    up a place at Oxford University because  the  Chinese  authorities  had
    held her passport.

 3. The appellant had left her job in January 2017  during  which  she  had
    received harassment from the authorities in China.  In July  that  year
    she received an offer from Edinburgh  College  to  study  a  six  month
    English course and flew to the United Kingdom on 17 August 2017  to  do
    so, with a Chinese passport valid until 21 June 2019.  She applied  for
    a  new  passport  in  December  2017  from  the  Chinese  Consulate  in
    Edinburgh.  The refusal of that  application  had  led  to  her  asylum
    claim.

 4. After a survey of the evidence on which she made  findings,  the  judge
    concluded:

         "52. There are significant problems  in  the  appellant's  evidence
             which I find go to the core of her claims and  which  she  has
             not satisfactorily explained to  the  low  standard  of  proof
             which rests with her.   Her  evidence  is  not  internally  or
             externally consistent.  The cumulative effect of these matters
             is such that in my view no evidence can be given to her claims
             as to the problems she claimed she  experienced  in  China  or
             since she arrived in the UK.

         53.  Articles 2 and 3 of the European Convention  on  Human  Rights
             stand or fall with the asylum claim and therefore  it  is  not
             necessary for me to consider these further or the humanitarian
             protection issue.

         54.  The respondent did consider the appellant's private and family
             life at paragraphs 114 to 129 of the refusal letter and  found
             that she did not qualify  under  the  Immigration  Rules.   Mr
             Forrest submitted that there were very  significant  obstacles
             to the appellant returning to China and therefore she met  the
             requirements of paragraph 276ADE(vi).  However, this is  based
             on the acceptance of the appellant's claims of her experiences
             in China and the UK whereas I have found  these  not  to  have
             been established to the low standard of proof resting with her
             under the Refugee Convention.  The standard of proof is higher
             in human rights claims.

         55.  Mr Forrest made submissions under Article 8 of  the  ECHR  and
             made reference to the considerations listed in section 117B of
             the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002.   Section
             117A(3) confirms that the Tribunal is required to carry out  a
             balancing  exercise  where  a  person's  circumstances  engage
             Article 8(1) to decide whether the  proposed  interference  is
             proportionate in all the circumstances.

         56.  The maintenance of effective immigration controls  is  in  the
             public interest (section 117B(1)).   I  have  found  that  the
             appellant not only does not meet the Immigration Rules but has
             deliberately made a false asylum claim in order that  she  can
             remain in the UK.  Those who have  attempted  to  deceive  the
             authorities in an effort to gain residency status in  the  UK,
             as this appellant has, should be strenuously discouraged.  Her
             private life has been established whilst she knew  her  status
             in the UK was precarious.  She is not financially independent.
              She has had access to public funds in various ways  including
             paying for her maintenance, accommodation and health care, all
             of which is a burden on the taxpayer."

 5.  The  grounds  of  challenge  are  lengthy.   They  comb  through   the
    determination and in  part  are  commentary  and  disagreement.   I  am
    however able to infer the following challenges:

    (i)  A failure to apply Immigration Rule 339L and  give  the  appellant
         the benefit of the doubt regarding the background evidence  on  the
         issue of passports in Tibet.

    (ii)  The  appellant  had  not  been  inconsistent  with  her  evidence
         regarding the cessation of her studies in  2012  and  her  passport
         seizure.

    (iii)    The judge had required impossible corroborative evidence  that
         would not exist.

    (iv) The judge had erred over the date of the Korean visa and the basis
         of her passport return.

    (v)  The judge had failed to assess what risk, if  any,  the  appellant
         faced as a "splittist".

    (vi) A failure to consider the appellant's evidence she was required to
         attend an "education" course.

    (vii)    A failure to  consider  the  appellant's  explanation  of  the
         danger caused by the possibility of an expired passport.

    (viii)   A failure by the judge to consider  the  appellant's  evidence
         that she was told orally the renewal application  of  her  passport
         had been refused.

    (ix) It was unreasonable of the judge to  expect  Diana  Dodd  to  give
         evidence.

    (x)  A failure to consider the potential risk as a failed asylum seeker
         upon return.

    (xi) The judge had gone behind a  concession  made  by  the  respondent
         regarding her attendance at a Buddhist temple in Scotland.

    (xii)    It was an unreasonable requirement to have  seen  evidence  of
         the appellant's blog.

    (xiii)   The judge had failed to consider the risk the appellant  would
         face if she were not credible on return.

    (xiv)    A failure by the judge to consider the receipt of funding from
         the Dalai Lama Trust in 2015.

    (xv) A failure  to  consider  correctly  the  obstacles  faced  by  the
         appellant on return to China.

    (xvi)    Mr Forrest referred to in the decision was a representative in
         another appeal for another appellant in the same court room on  the
         day of the hearing.

 6. In granting permission to appeal, Judge  Gibb  considered  the  grounds
    arguable and observed at [2] and [3]:

         "2.  The grounds, which were in time, complain that the judge erred
             in: (1) relation to  adverse  credibility  findings;  (2)  not
             assessing whether online evidence would lead to  a  perception
             as to supporting Tibetan Independence; (3) her approach to the
             evidence of a witness, and  going  behind  a  concession;  (4)
             failing to  address  risk  as  a  failed  asylum  seeker;  (5)
             conflating  protection  and  the  test  in  276ADE;  and   (6)
             appearing to confuse cases in  the  list  by  referring  to  a
             different representative than that for the appellant.

         3.   The grounds are arguable.  The 6th point raises a  concern  as
             to the appearance of a  fair  hearing/anxious  scrutiny  in  a
             protection case.  The other matters justify  consideration  as
             to whether, considered together, they are enough to  undermine
             the adverse credibility findings; and whether all aspects were
             considered addressing risk on return."

 1. I am grateful to Mr Winter and Mr Govan for their detailed  submissions
    in particular Mr Winter who candidly acknowledged the range of  grounds
    and the difficulties that this posed.  His overall submission was  that
    the judge erred by not carrying out an adequate risk  assessment  based
    on the various facts found and in play.  He was not instructed to yield
    up any of the grounds and it seemed to me that there was no  substitute
    to going through the decision line for line to see if error on  one  of
    the 16 grounds was made out.  Context is  all  otherwise  there  was  a
    danger that passages could be overlooked  that  might  (or  might  not)
    sustain the decision.

 2. My analysis of the decision begins with the observation that it  was  a
    careful well-structured one that as accepted by Mr Winter took  account
    of all the evidence. Disagreement with the result which was  summarised
    by the judge at [52] to [56] is not enough as Mr Winter  accepted.   To
    show to error it was  necessary  to  see  if  any  tangle  (using  Lord
    Wilson's metaphor in KV (Sri Lanka) v SSHD [2019]  UKSC  10)  was  more
    than minor.  With these factors in mind I turn to each of the grounds.

 3. Ground (i):  Benefit of the doubt is not regarded as a rule of  law  in
    the assessment of an asylum claim; see KS (Benefit of the doubt) [2014]
    UKUT 552 (IAC).  The provisions in 339L replicate article 4(5)  of  the
    Qualification Directive which does not require the benefit of the doubt
    to be applied but instead sets out a criteria where corroboration  will
    not be required when certain conditions are met.  This  ground  is  not
    made  out;  the  judge  did  not  reach  her  conclusion  for  want  of
    corroboration but due to an  unchallenged  assessment  of  the  country
    information.

 4. Ground (ii):  The appellant did  not  mention  the  additional  reasons
    given in oral evidence why she did not return to complete her course at
    Cambridge when it was open to her to do so. Whilst the judge might have
    better expressed the point, she was  unarguably  entitled  to  draw  an
    adverse  inference  from  reasons  not  previously  mentioned  in   the
    appellant's interview or her statement. Not giving the same  (and  thus
    consistently expressed)  reasons  for  a  particular  event  can  be  a
    legitimate credibility concern.

 5. Ground (iii) and (xii):  Mr Winter accepted that  these  ran  together.
    To my mind, in the light of  the  evidence  provided  for  the  initial
    arrangements for the course, the judge was rationally entitled to query
    the absence of evidence of any exchange with the  university  regarding
    her additional reasons for truncating her studies by reference  to  her
    wish to enhance her listening skills and her grandmother's poor health.
     It was rationally open to the judge to observe that copies of the blog
    (as opposed to the photograph) had not been produced but that it  would
    have been helpful to have seen them.

 6. Ground (iv):  As accepted by Mr Winter, the reference to  2011  as  the
    date of issue of the visa was clearly  a  typographical  error  in  the
    light of the judge's subsequent reference to the brevity of  its  life:
    This is not a factor that has any bearing on  the  correctness  of  the
    decision.  Mr Winter also accepted that grounds (x), (xiii)  and  (xiv)
    also relate to this aspect of the challenge.  Each asserts a failure to
    consider the risk it is claimed the appellant would face.  A reading of
    the decision shows that the judge had risk in her mind throughout which
    was assessed against legitimate credibility concerns in the context  of
    a proper evaluation of the country evidence summarised in the  extracts
    cited above.  I am not persuaded  that  any  of  the  grounds  in  this
    category even when taken together makes out error of  law.   Mr  Winter
    acknowledged his difficulties with reference to (x) in any event.

 7. Ground (v):  This ground is little more than a bare assertion and fails
    to take account to matters  that  the  judge  accepted  and  those  she
    rejected after a careful analysis of the evidence between [29] and [37]
    leading to her finding in [37] as follows:

         "37. If the authorities had any suspicion regarding the  appellant,
             I consider it highly unlikely she  would  have  been  able  to
             travel abroad, rather than take a course before she  left,  if
             required, or leave at all.  The background information is that
             these courses are directed towards monks and nuns.  There  are
             some education schemes or were for villagers but the appellant
             does not fall into  any  of  the  categories  covered  by  the
             background information before me.  I find that this claim that
             the appellant was required to  attend  a  political  education
             course and failed to do so which means she would be at risk on
             return is an invention of the appellant in order to expand her
             reasons for fearing persecution on return."

 1. Ground (vi):  This ground, as accepted by Mr  Winter,  relates  to  (v)
    above and was considered in [37].

 2. Ground (vii):  The judge gave rational reasons why she had doubts  over
    the explanation by the appellant for claiming asylum.  She acknowledged
    the difficulties that  Tibetans  had  in  obtaining  the  new  type  of
    passport and was entitled to  conclude  that  the  Consulate's  refusal
    should not have been a significant surprise.  It was also open  to  the
    judge to consider the possibility of the grant of a new  passport  (see
    [41]) but to qualify that with the observation:

         "That is neither here nor there but the point is that the appellant
         has  produced  documentary  evidence  of  an  application  but  the
         documentary evidence then comes to an abrupt halt  with  no  follow
         up."

 8. Ground  (ix):   The  judge's  observations  regarding  the  absence  of
    evidence from Ms Dodd in the light of the significant support  provided
    by her.  It was for the witness to say that it was not possible to give
    such evidence rather than for it to be asserted in the grounds.

 9. Ground  (xi):   It  is  correct  that  the  respondent  considered  the
    appellant should be given the benefit of the  doubt  and  that  it  was
    accepted she did attend a pilgrimage and was photographed with the Lama
    (in Scotland).  Implicit in the judge's consideration of this  in  [47]
    is an acceptance that the appellant attended a pilgrimage on  at  least
    one date.  It was open to the judge to observe the absence of  evidence
    in support of the appellant's contention that she  had  been  attending
    almost monthly since October 2017.  The respondent had not accepted the
    evidence of such claimed regular attendance.

10. Ground (xv):  Mr Winter accepted that this disclosed no ground  of  any
    substance.

11. Ground (xvi):  I do not consider this to be a major tangle.  Mr  Winter
    accepted that the  error  was  not  material  in  that  the  judge  had
    accurately recorded what Mr Price had said.  It was an unfortunate slip
    but not one that led to material error.

12. Stepping back from these individual challenges and  taking  an  overall
    view of the assessment undertaken by the judge, I am satisfied that she
    directed herself correctly as to the law  and  carried  out  a  careful
    assessment of all  the  evidence.  She  gave  sustainable  reasons  for
    rejecting the aspects she did not accept.  The conclusion by the  judge
    that such risk was not made out was one that was rationally open to her
    on the evidence and it was one reached without legal error.



NOTICE OF DECISION

This appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed

     UTJ Dawson   Date 3 June 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson

