
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
PA/11827/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester                |          Decision & Reasons       |
|                                   |Promulgated                        |
|On 1 May 2018                      |           On 11 May 2018          |
|                                   |                                   |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE

                                   Between

                                GULSHAN RANI
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:             Ms  S Ashraf of Lei Dat & Baig, solicitors
For the Respondent:         Ms R Petterson, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and  evidence  I
do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  the  decision  of  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Hillis promulgated  on  1  June  2017,  which  dismissed  the
Appellant's appeal on all grounds.

Background


3. The Appellant was born on 17 August 1990 and is a national  of  Pakistan.
The appellant arrived  in  the  UK  as  a  visitor  on  5  March  2011.  The
respondent granted the appellant discretionary leave to remain  outside  the
immigration rules until 21 September 2014. The appellant made  a  number  of
unsuccessful applications for further leave to remain in the UK,  and  then,
on 26 April  2016,  made  a  protection  claim.   On  16  October  2016  the
Secretary of State refused the Appellant's protection claim.


The Judge's Decision

4. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge Hillis ("the Judge") dismissed the  appeal  against  the  Respondent's
decision. Grounds of appeal  were  lodged  and  on  30  October  2017  Upper
Tribunal Judge Jackson gave permission to appeal stating

      The grounds of appeal are that Judge Hillis materially erred in law in
      (i) dismissing the appeal despite the  positive  credibility  findings
      made; (ii) failing to engage with the evidence as to ongoing risk from
      the appellant's family; (iii) failing to give adequate reasons for his
      conclusions that  the  appellant's  family  would  want  to  keep  the
      dishonour as private as possible, displaying a lack  of  understanding
      of honour crimes; (iv) assuming that the appellant has or could obtain
      a copy of the arrest warrant and failing to consider her  evidence  on
      this; and (v) failing  to  take  into  account  that  the  appellant's
      partner may be at risk in Pakistan from  the  appellant's  family  and
      failing to take into account  the  risk  for  all  the  family  of  an
      illegitimate child.


      It is arguable that in  respect  of  the  findings  about  the  arrest
      warrant (grounds (iii) and (iv), Judge Hillis has not  given  adequate
      reasons as to why it would be unreasonable to expect the appellant  to
      have produced a copy of this and arguably the  Judge  has  formed  and
      relied on his own view as to how a  dishonoured  family  would  behave
      without any objective basis. For the same reasons, ground (ii) is also
      arguable as the reliance on these matters  could  affect  the  overall
      conclusion that the appellant would not be at risk on return from  her
      family. I therefore grant permission to appeal on these grounds.


      The first ground of appeal is  a  general  challenge  to  the  overall
      conclusion which is not clearly particularised - it is not  inevitable
      that a person who is found to be credible on their claim is also found
      to be at risk on return and this  ground  adds  little  to  the  other
      grounds  that  follow.  However,  I  do  not  restrict  the  grant  of
      permission to exclude this ground.


      As to the final ground of appeal, Judge Hillis  has  given  clear  and
      cogent reasons as to his findings that the appellant's  partner  would
      not be at risk on return to  Pakistan  and  there  was  unarguably  no
      reliable evidence in support of such a claim. However, it is  arguable
      that Judge Hillis did not  go  so  far  as  to  consider  whether  the
      appellant's partner would be at risk because of his relationship  with
      the appellant and the conclusions reached as to risk on return to  her
      from her family may be relevant here, such that this  ground  is  also
      arguable for the reasons above.


      The First-tier Tribunal's decision contains  arguable  errors  of  law
      capable of affecting the outcome  of  the  appeal  and  permission  to
      appeal is therefore granted on all grounds.


The Hearing

5. For the appellant, Ms Ashraf moved the grounds of  appeal.  She  told  me
that the decision is tainted by disregard  for  the  evidence,  tinged  with
speculation and a lack of reasoning. She told me that the  Judge  failed  to
make a finding about whether or not the appellant would be at  risk  because
she now has an illegitimate child. She told me  that  the  Judge  failed  to
make a finding about  any  risk  which  might  be  created  because  of  her
relationship with her unmarried  partner,  the  father  of  the  child.  She
reminded me that, although the appellant had a previous appeal in 2015,  the
decision in the 2015 case did not relate to a protection  claim  but  was  a
refusal of an application for  leave  to  remain  on  an  entirely  separate
basis. She urged  me  to  set  the  decision  aside,  but  to  preserve  the
credibility findings which favour the appellant and to remit  this  case  to
the First-tier Tribunal.

6. For the respondent, Ms Petterson told  me  that  the  decision  does  not
contain errors of law, material or  otherwise.  She  told  me  that  in  the
decision  promulgated  in  2015  the  First-tier  Tribunal  found  that  the
appellant could safely return to Pakistan. She told with is at [50]  of  the
decision under appeal  the  Judge  bemoans  the  lack  of  support  for  the
appellant's appeal from the  appellant's  partner.  She  told  me  that  the
appellant has divorced her abusive first husband and is free  to  marry,  so
that there is no risk to the appellant from her ex-husband  or  his  family.
She  told  me  that  the  Judge's  decision  contains   sufficiently   clear
reasoning. She took me to [38] where the  Judge  finds  that  the  appellant
would not be accepted back into the family, but told me that  the  appellant
has a partner. She can return to Pakistan with a male protector.  She  urged
me to dismiss the appeal and allow the decision to stand.

Analysis

7.  In SM (lone women - ostracism) Pakistan [2016] UKUT 00067  it  was  held
that (i) Save as herein set out, the existing country guidance in SN and  HM
(Divorced women - risk on return) Pakistan CG [2004]  UKIAT 00283 and in  KA
and Others (domestic violence - risk on return) Pakistan CG [2010] UKUT  216
(IAC) remains valid; (ii)  Where a  risk  of  persecution  or  serious  harm
exists in her home area for a single woman or a female  head  of  household,
there may be an internal relocation  option  to  one  of  Pakistan's  larger
cities, depending on the family, social and  educational  situation  of  the
woman in question; (iii) It will not be normally be unduly harsh  to  expect
a single woman or female head of household  to  relocate  internally  within
Pakistan if she can access support from family members or  a  male  guardian
in the place of relocation; (iv) It will not normally be  unduly  harsh  for
educated, better off, or older women to seek internal relocation to a  city.
 It helps if a woman  has  qualifications  enabling  her  to  get  well-paid
employment and pay for accommodation and childcare if required; (v) Where  a
single woman, with or without children, is ostracised by family members  and
other sources of possible social support because  she  is  in  an  irregular
situation, internal relocation will be more  difficult  and  whether  it  is
unduly harsh will be a question of fact in each case; (vi)  a  single  woman
or female head of household who has no male protector or social network  may
be able to use the state domestic violence shelters for a  short  time,  but
the focus of such shelters  is  on  reconciling  people  with  their  family
networks, and places are in short supply and  time  limited.  Privately  run
shelters may be more flexible,  providing  longer  term  support  while  the
woman regularises her social  situation,  but  again,  places  are  limited;
(vii) Domestic violence shelters are available for women at risk  but  where
they are used by women with children, such  shelters  do  not  always  allow
older children to enter and stay with their mothers.  The risk of  temporary
separation, and the proportionality of such separation, is likely to  differ
depending on the age and sex of a woman's children:  male  children  may  be
removed from their mothers at the age of 5 and placed in an orphanage  or  a
madrasa until the family situation  has  been  regularised.  Such  temporary
separation will not always be disproportionate or unduly harsh:  that  is  a
question of fact  in  each  case;  (viii)  Women  in  Pakistan  are  legally
permitted to divorce their husbands and may  institute  divorce  proceedings
from the country of refuge, via a third party and with the help  of  lawyers
in Pakistan, reducing the risk of family reprisals. A woman who does so  and
returns with a new partner or husband will have access  to  male  protection
and is unlikely, outside her home area, to be at risk  of  ostracism,  still
less of persecution or serious harm.

8. The Judge's analysis of the evidence is sometimes a little  difficult  to
follow but his crucial findings are made  at  [37],  [38],  [39],  [45]  and
[46]. There the Judge finds  that  the  appellant  is  not  married  to  her
current partner and they have a child together. The  Judge  finds  that  the
appellant is estranged from her family of origin and has  been  disinherited
by them.

9. Although the Judge does not accept that  the  appellant  is  at  risk  of
honour killing, his findings are that the appellant  cannot  return  to  her
family of origin, that there is a degree of animosity  from  her  family  of
origin and that the appellant will return as a divorced woman  who  has  not
remarried, but is  living  in  a  relationship  akin  to  marriage  and  has
delivered a child.

10. With that profile  the  Judge  finds  that  there  is  no  risk  to  the
appellant because she will return to Pakistan with  a  male  protector.  The
crucial conclusion is at [52] of the decision. That conclusion is  supported
by the Judge's findings of fact. That conclusion is entirely  in  line  with
country guidance and the background information.  The  conclusion  that  the
Judge reaches is a conclusion which is well within the range  of  reasonable
conclusions available to the Judge.

11. In Shizad (sufficiency of reasons: set aside) [2013] UKUT 85  (IAC)  the
Tribunal held that the  Upper  Tribunal  would  not  normally  set  aside  a
decision of the First-tier Tribunal where there has been no misdirection  of
law, the fact-finding process cannot be criticised and the relevant  Country
Guidance has been taken into  account,  unless  the  conclusions  the  Judge
draws from the primary data were not reasonably open to him.

12. In this case, there  is  no  misdirection  in  law  &  the  fact-finding
exercise is beyond criticism.  The decision is not  tainted  by  a  material
error of law.



CONCLUSION

13. No errors of law have been established. The Judge's decision stands.

DECISION

14. The appeal  is  dismissed.  The  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
stands.


Signed                 Paul Doyle
  Date  8 May 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle
