
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11952/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 13th September 2017                |On 22nd September 2017                |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J G MACDONALD


                                   Between

                                   Ms HNSS
                           (ANONYMITY order MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Saifolahi, Counsel, instructed by Indra
Sebastian Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Iraq whose appeal was  heard  by  First-
    tier Tribunal  Judge  Andonian  and  dismissed  on  all  grounds  in  a
    determination promulgated on 23rd June 2017.

 2. Extensive grounds in support of an application for permission to appeal
    were lodged.   In  particular,  it  was  said  that  the  judge  whilst
    recording some of the Appellant's mother's evidence makes  no  findings
    on her evidence.  In addition, her claim that her mother's husband  had
    written the Statement of Additional Grounds and she was  not  aware  of
    all the contents failed to take account of material evidence  -  namely
    that the errors in the Statement of  Additional  Grounds  were  obvious
    ones and the Appellant's explanation as to why she  was  not  aware  of
    what was written had  not  been  considered.   Importantly,  there  was
    expert evidence which the judge had not considered.  In particular, the
    judge had failed to engage with the report of Dr Lawrence and had  also
    failed to engage with  the  report  from  Dr  Fatah.   The  Appellant's
    explanation for  her  loss  of  virginity  was  given  in  her  witness
    statement but this had not been considered.  It was also said that  the
    judge had been wrong to conclude that the report  of  Sonya  Landesmaan
    was "hugely subjective" and "not objectively well-balanced".  The judge
    had failed to address the contents of Dr Fatah's report other than with
    reference to the loss of virginity.  Dr Fatah had addressed  the  issue
    of risk on return and being the victim of honour crime and  risk  as  a
    westernised woman.  The judge had  completely  failed  to  address  the
    second issue which was material to the issue of risk on return.

 3. In terms of Article 8 the judge had failed to  consider  whether  there
    was family life between the Appellant and her half-siblings.  This  had
    not been addressed anywhere within the decision and the  conclusion  on
    Article 8 was confined only to  a  consideration  of  the  relationship
    between the Appellant and her mother.

 4. Permission to appeal was granted.  The Secretary of State lodged a Rule
    24 notice opposing the appeal and saying that the grounds were  lengthy
    and seek to attack  the  judge  on  every  conceivable  aspect  of  his
    findings and reasons, which  was  unwarranted.   The  judge  had  given
    cogent reasons for rejecting the Appellant's account and the Grounds of
    Appeal essentially sought to relitigate the hearing and amounted to  no
    more than a lengthy disagreement with the findings open to the judge on
    the evidence.

 5. Before me Ms Saifolahi relied  on  her  grounds.   The  judge  had  not
    rejected or accepted the mother's evidence.  He had  failed  to  engage
    with the expert reports.  The important point about  the  Statement  of
    Additional Grounds was that the Appellant did not know what the grounds
    contained - that was her evidence and the  judge  had  not  dealt  with
    that.  All the grounds were relied on including  Article  8  where  the
    judge had simply not engaged with the submissions and the evidence laid
    before him.

 6. For the Home Office Mr Clarke stated that the decision of the judge was
    strangely laid out but argued that it was sustainable.  The  judge  had
    found that the mother's evidence did corroborate that of the Appellant.
     The judge had dealt with Dr Fatah's report.  In terms of paragraph  50
    of the decision the judge had noted that she  was  aware  of  what  the
    mother's husband was writing down.  Reliance was placed on the Rule  24
    notice and I was asked to uphold the decision.

 7. I reserved my decision.







    Conclusions

 8. I agree with Mr Clarke that this decision is a strangely laid  out  one
    and would add that the reasoning  is not easy to follow.  It  seems  to
    me that the first Ground of Appeal is well stated - the judge does  say
    that the mother's evidence corroborated that of the Appellant but  goes
    no further than that.  Accordingly, what we have  is  corroboration  of
    the Appellant's account by the mother but no finding on whether or  not
    the mother's evidence is true or  otherwise  and  the  account  of  the
    Appellant being rejected.  It was open, of course,  for  the  judge  to
    reject the mother's evidence if he considered that appropriate  but  if
    that was the case reasons were required.

 9. Plainly, there are other difficulties  in  this  decision.   The  point
    about the statement of grounds is that the Appellant says she  was  not
    aware of all the contents.  In my view the terms of paragraph 50 of the
    decision do not fully connect with the Appellant's  evidence  on  this.
    He does say she was aware of what he was writing down and  goes  on  to
    say that he does not find the Appellant credible.  He was  required  to
    specifically deal with the fact that the Appellant maintains  that  she
    was not aware of all the contents and, in my view, the judge failed  to
    make a clear finding in that regard and failed to give proper  reasons.
    There are other concerns about the expert evidence, all set out in  the
    grounds.  I note that in Ground 9 it is said  that  there  was  clearly
    evidence from the Appellant that she had lost  her  virginity  -  which
    there was - see her witness statement at paragraphs 16 and 17   and  it
    was clearly a material issue.  Dr  Fatah  dealt  with  this  matter  in
    detail. When the judge said in paragraph 45 that there was no  evidence
    on this aspect he was proceeding on a  misunderstanding  of  the  facts
    presented to him. It is clear that the judge failed to deal  with  this
    issue which amounts to a material error of law.

10. In my view there is also an error of law issue under  Article  8  ECHR.
    The fact of the matter is that the judge was bound to consider  whether
    there was family life between the Appellant and her half-siblings  with
    whom she has resided for seven and a half years.  This is not addressed
    within the decision.  It was necessary for the judge  to  have  made  a
    finding in this regard and this  was  material  evidence  on  which  no
    assessment was made.

11. For all these reasons it seems clear to me that  the  judgment  is  not
    safe and cannot stand.  The Appellant has not had a fair  hearing.   It
    therefore seems to me that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  has
    to be set aside  in  its  entirety.   No  findings  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal are to stand.  Under Section 12(2)(b)(i) of the 2007  Act  and
    of practice statement 7.2 the nature  the  nature  and  extent  of  the
    judicial fact-finding necessary for the decision to be remade  is  such
    that it is appropriate to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.
















    Decision

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

    I set aside the decision.

    I remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.

    I shall continue the anonymity order.


Order Regarding Anonymity  -  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her or any member of her  family.   This  order  applies
both to the Appellant and to the Respondent.  Failure to  comply  with  this
order could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed    J Macdonald                            Date   22nd September 2017

    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J G Macdonald
