
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11913/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 18 January 2019                            |On 20 February 2019           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

                                  Yunus [B]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs S Panaciotopolou, Counsel instructed by Montague
                    Solicitors LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

1.   The appellant, a national of Turkey, has permission  to  challenge  the
    decision of Judge Paul of the First-tier  Tribunal  (FtT)  sent  on  21
    November 2018 dismissing his appeal against the decision  made  by  the
    respondent on 26 September 2018 refusing to grant protection.

2.    The  grounds  assail  the  judge's  treatment  of  the  issue  of  the
    credibility of the appellant's  account.   Having  noted  that  it  was
    accepted by the respondent that the appellant was a member of  the  HDP
    (paragraph 5), the  judge  set  out  his  conclusions  and  reasons  at
    paragraphs 20-23 as follows:

         "20. The core  issue  in  this  case  relates  to  the  appellant's
             credibility as to his assertion that he has been detained on 2
             occasions.  In assessing  the  credibility,  I  have  to  have
             regard to such independent  and/or  collateral  evidence  that
             might or might not be available.  I find  the  fact  that  the
             appellant's brother was at the hearing but  was  not  able  or
             willing to give evidence,  utterly  incredible.   Here  was  a
             close member of the family who would have been  able  to  give
             direct evidence as to what  his  brother  experienced  as  the
             result of what he had been told over the  years.   Whilst,  on
             the one hand, perhaps it could be said that that  is  evidence
             in itself that was not independent but the mere fact that  the
             appellant's brother was not available for cross-examination on
             this, in my view, is highly significant.

         21.   Similarly,  there  is  another  brother  who  was  apparently
             involved in similar political activities to the appellant, but
             whose whereabouts is completely unknown.  This is in  my  view
             incredible.  Close family ties would normally be  expected  to
             be maintained, and in my view the fact that the  appellant  is
             unprepared to disclose this brother's whereabouts  is  further
             reflection on the weakness of his case.

         22.  The next thing I find of concern is  that  the  appellant  was
             contending that,  notwithstanding  he  had  been  out  of  the
             country since October 2017, it was only 3-4 days ago that  his
             parents had told him that the home had been raided.  If he was
             due  to  inform  or  report  on  a  regular  basis,  then  the
             authorities would have come looking for him well  before  now.
             The fact that he was relying on his parents to  say  that  3-4
             days previously they had raided the home looking for  him,  in
             my view, was as Ms John observed and attempt to embellish  the
             claim.

         23.  I have considered  the  objective  material  provided  by  the
             appellant's representative, including the Country  Information
             Guidance report for the HTP, as well as generic  reports  from
             Amnesty International, Human  Rights  Watch,  and  the  United
             Nations report.  The political situation in  Turkey  is  dire.
             The current President clearly has any potential member of  the
             opposition within his  sight.   Furthermore,  as  the  Country
             Information Guidance report in relation to the HTP  shows,  it
             has been the victim of concerted attempts by  the  authorities
             who undermine its attempt to claim democratic  legitimacy.   I
             have also had regard to the other Country Guidance case of  IK
             (Returnees' records - IFA) Turkey CG [2004]  0312.   The  risk
             factors  there  depend,  in  the  first  instance,  upon   the
             appellant being able to give a credible account as  to  arrest
             and detention, and any related ill-treatment.  In my view, the
             appellant had not demonstrated this in his case.   I  consider
             his  account  to  be  generic   and   formulaic.    And   most
             importantly,  it  is  not  supported,  by  any   corroborative
             evidence from family members."

3.   The grounds contend that these conclusions were defective because  they
    wholly failed to analyse or evaluate  the  appellant's  evidence  about
    having been arrested twice  in  July  2015  and  August  2017  or  more
    generally to assess the quality of the appellant's account as  set  out
    in his lengthy asylum interview.   It  was  submitted  that  the  judge
    failed to address the current situation in Turkey.

4.   I heard a well-presented submission from Mrs Panaciotopolou at the  end
    of which Mr Tarlow said that he no longer wished to defend the  judge's
    decision.

5.   In my judgment Mr Tarlow was realistic not to pursue  the  respondent's
    defence of the judge's decision in this appeal.

6.   That is  not  to  say  I  agree  with  every  ground.  As  regards  the
    contention in the grounds that the judge ignored the background country
    information, that is belied by paragraph 23 and if the judge's  adverse
    credibility findings had been sound, then it could not have been  said,
    dire as the situation in Turkey may be for Kurdish activists, that  the
    judge erred in dismissing his appeal.

7.   Clearly, however, that  depends  on  whether  his  adverse  credibility
    findings are sound.

8.   Why I have concluded they are  not  sound  is  principally  neither  in
    paragraphs 20-23 or elsewhere does the judge engage adequately with the
    factual matrix of the appellant's claim.  In particular,  there  is  no
    assessment of whether the account given by the appellant in his  asylum
    interview  was  internally  or  externally   consistent,   sufficiently
    detailed and plausible  or  not.   There  is  no  engagement  with  the
    respondent's reasons for finding the appellant not credible or with the
    appellant's evidence at the  hearing  about  his  past  experiences  in
    Turkey.

9.   Potentially the  (only)  two  reasons  given  by  the  judge  in  these
    paragraphs for rejecting credibility (the unexplained  failure  of  the
    brother to give evidence; the appellant  t's  reliance  on  last-minute
    information from his parents about a  raid  on  his  parents'  home  in
    Turkey three or four days ago) were capable of significantly  affecting
    the outcome of a credibility assessment. Without any  consideration  of
    whether the appellant's claims about his past experiences in Turkey  or
    analysis of their relevant weight, it cannot be  said  that  the  judge
    carried out a rounded or holistic assessment of the evidence.

10.  For the above reasons I  set  aside  the  decision  of  the  judge  for
    material error of law.

11.  The crux of the challenge being to credibility, I  see  no  alternative
    to the case being remitted to the FtT (not before Judge Paul).

Directions

12.  In view of the uncertainty  surrounding  the  appellant's  brother  and
    whether he was prepared or not to give evidence at the FtT  hearing,  I
    direct that:

    (1)  the appellant's representatives produce by end of  February  2019,
         with a copy to the respondent, a witness statement from the brother
         (i) detailing his own immigration history and (ii) stating whether,
         and if so on what basis, he supports his  brother's  asylum  claim;
         and (iii) stating whether he (the brother) has any medical problems
         and if so producing independent evidence of the same.

         In the same response the appellant's representatives are  to  state
         whether or not they intend  to  call  him  (the  brother)  to  give
         evidence at the new hearing.

13.  To conclude:

    The decision of the FtT Judge is set aside for material error of law.

    The case is remitted to the FtT (not before Judge Paul) with Directions
    as above.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date: 19 February 2019

              [pic]
Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

