
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11356/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 13 March 2018                       |On 21 November 2018                 |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS


                                   Between

                                     J.
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms J Fisher of Counsel instructed by Duncan Lewis &
Co.
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  T.
    Jones promulgated on 9 November 2017 dismissing the Appellant's  appeal
    against a decision of the Respondent dated 6  October  2016  to  refuse
    asylum in the UK.



2.   The Appellant is a national of Nigeria. Her date of birth and  personal
    details are a matter of record on file, and are not reproduced here  in
    keeping with the anonymity  direction  that  has  been  made  in  these
    proceedings.



3.   The Appellant's immigration history is also a matter of record  and  is
    set out in the papers on file: see in particular paragraphs 4-20 of the
    'reasons for refusal' letter ('RFRL') dated 6 October  2016.  In  brief
    summary: the Appellant visited the UK for 3 months  in  2004;  she  re-
    entered the UK in October 2007 pursuant to a  family  visit  visa;  the
    Appellant became an overstayer before making  an  application  in  July
    2015 for leave to remain; the application was refused in  January  2016
    with an out-of-country right of appeal; removal directions were  issued
    on 19 January 2016; the Appellant appears to have sought  to  challenge
    or  avoid  removal  by  way  of  attempts  to  issue  judicial   review
    proceedings and making EEA applications without  success.  On  7  April
    2016 she claimed asylum.



4.   The Appellant's claim for protection was advanced on the basis  of  her
    sexuality and her conversion from Islam to Christianity.



5.   The Respondent refused the application for asylum for reasons  set  out
    in the RFRL. The Respondent did not accept that  the  Appellant  was  a
    lesbian (RFRL at paragraph  47),  and  did  not  accept  that  she  had
    converted from  Islam  to  Christianity.  In  this  latter  regard  the
    Respondent considered that the Appellant had always  been  a  Christian
    (RFRL at paragraph 55).



6.   The Appellant appealed to the IAC.



7.   The appeal was dismissed for  reasons  set  out  in  the  Decision  and
    Reasons of First-tier Tribunal Jones.



8.   The Appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  which
    was granted by Resident Judge Phillips on 28 December 2017. In material
    part the grant of permission to appeal was in these terms:

         "This is a difficult decision to assess.  In  the  first  place  it
         appears that this is an Appellant with a poor  immigration  history
         whose claim raises  a  potentially  contrived  plethora  of  issues
         including  FGM,  sexuality,  religious  conversion   and   domestic
         violence. It is not helped by a significant number  of  typing  and
         grammatical errors in the decision (see for example paragraphs  63,
         68 and 69).

         Although  it  is  clear  that  the  Judge  rejected  much  of   the
         Appellant's claim due to lack of corroboration where  corroboration
         could rightly be expected (religious conversion and sexuality)  and
         this discloses no arguable error of law it is also clear  that  the
         Judge was mistaken when rejecting her claim not to have raised  her
         deafness at interview as a reason for misunderstanding some of  the
         questions raised. The rejection of her claim to be Muslim, confused
         as it is with the acceptance that FGM has taken place (at paragraph
         61) is arguably inadequately reasoned and is certainly difficult to
         understand. Similarly, the conclusion that "It  appears  only  that
         which is no (sic) favourable to her claim stands to be rejected  or
         denied" (paragraph 63) seems to display inadequate reasoning."



9.   In the event the ground of challenge based upon  the  supposed  tension
    between the rejection of the Appellant's claim to have been brought  up
    as a Muslim and the finding that she had been a victim of FGM  was  not
    pursued by Ms Fisher. During the course of submissions I  queried  with
    the representatives whether the practice of FGM in Nigeria was confined
    to Muslim communities. During the lunch adjournment the representatives
    identified with  reference  to  the  Respondent's  Country  Policy  and
    Information Note 'Nigeria: Female  Genital  Mutilation'  (version  1.0,
    February 2017) that  the  practice  was  not  confined  to  the  Muslim
    community. See in particular paragraph 7.5.1  quoting  from  a  Harvard
    University project - "In Nigeria FGM is slightly  more  common  in  the
    southern, predominantly Christian regions, but it is  practised  within
    both Christian and Muslim communities  across  the  country".  On  this
    basis Ms Fisher acknowledged that she could not rely upon the fact that
    the Appellant had undergone FGM as indicative  of  her  having  been  a
    Muslim.



10.  Once this point falls away in respect of  the  claimed  conversion  and
    risk by reason of being an apostate, the grant of permission to  appeal
    takes on a very different  complexion.  Judge  Phillips  observed  that
    there was no arguable error of law on the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's
    rejection  of  much  of  the  Appellant's  claim  due  to  a  lack   of
    corroboration  where  corroboration  might  be  expected  including  in
    respect of religious conversion. What is left in terms of  the  reasons
    for granting permission is the issue of the  Appellant's  deafness  and
    criticisms of the typing and grammar of the Decision.



11.  In respect of deafness criticism is made on behalf of the Appellant  in
    respect of the following passage at  paragraph  62  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision:

         "I have noted the Appellant's claim she could not hear well at  the
         asylum interview, and yet there is a lot of  information  imparted.
         She seemingly didn't  raise  that  (her  deafness)  at  the  time."
         (Grounds of Appeal at paragraph 2).



12.  It seems to me that there is an ambiguity in that latter  sentence.  Ms
    Fisher would have me read the sentence as  indicating  that  the  judge
    erroneously formed the view that the Appellant had not raised the  fact
    of a hearing impairment at interview and that this was a material error
    of fact  that  may  have  influenced  the  Judge's  evaluation  of  the
    Appellant's overall credibility and in particular  her  assertion  that
    she may have not heard properly certain questions at the interview.  It
    seems to me that that would only make sense if the Judge were in denial
    that there was any issue in respect of hearing loss and had, in effect,
    formed the view that it was an invention to explain deficiencies in the
    interview. In my judgement the sentence quoted above is to be  read  as
    indicating that the Judge was mindful that the Appellant did not  raise
    at the asylum interview that her hearing impairment was  such  that  it
    had occasioned her any difficulties during the course of the interview.
    It seems to me that such a reading is to be preferred upon  an  overall
    consideration of both the paragraph in which that sentence appears, and
    the Judge's decision as a whole.



13.  The full paragraph at 62 is in these terms:

         "I have noted the Appellant's claim she could not hear well at  the
         asylum interview, and yet there is a lot of  information  imparted.
         She seemingly didn't raise that (her deafness) at the time. I don't
         doubt she had treatment of later to improve the hearing, but  I  am
         mindful  of  supportive  correspondence   from   community   groups
         reporting  her  active  participation  without   mention   of   any
         communication  difficulties.  At  the  hearing,  she  "blames"  her
         solicitors for not reading that interview back to the. There is  no
         evidence she has complained of this to them, or of any response  on
         their part. In light of this, I set little if any  weight  by  that
         claim."



14.  Over and above the Judge is overt reference to this issue at  paragraph
    62, it is clear that the Judge was  aware  that  there  was  a  hearing
    issue: adjustments were made at the hearing on  14  September  2017  to
    accommodate such a disability: see paragraph 3 - "I made adjustments of
    the hearing so that the Appellant might be able  to  sit  with  parties
    speaking towards her right side which is her better ear...".  There  is
    no suggestion that the Judge thought the ehring impairment was in  some
    way fabricated or even exaggerated.



15.  However, it is also to be noted that in the same  paragraph  the  Judge
    comments  that  the  Appellant  confirmed  that  she   had   understood
    everything. This reinforces the notion also identified by the Judge  at
    paragraph 62 with reference to her active  participation  in  community
    groups without any apparent difficulties, that whilst there might be  a
    hearing impairment it did not significantly impact  upon  communication
    to an extent that adequate communication was not possible.



16.  Similarly, at the interview  -  in  which  undisputedly  the  Appellant
    mentioned her hearing difficulties (question  2)  -  she  confirmed  at
    every point when asked that she understood and was content to  proceed.
    In this context I am conscious that in some  cases  where  there  is  a
    language difficulty an interviewee or appellant may  not  be  the  best
    person to assess their objective  level  of  understanding.  I  do  not
    consider that the same applies to issues of hearing  impairment  -  the
    interviewee or appellant can either hear and  make  sense  of  what  is
    being said or cannot; there is not the same element of subjectivity  as
    there is in evaluating whether an interpreter has translated  into  the
    listener's  own  language  accurately  what  has  been  said   by   the
    interlocutor.



17.  More particularly nothing is readily identifiable  in  the  answers  at
    interview to suggest that any particular  question  was  misunderstood.
    Whilst it may well be that the Appellant  has  subsequently  wished  to
    offer different answers, any  difficulty  with  the  answers  given  at
    interview has not been shown to me to relate to miscomprehension of the
    question.



18.  In this context it is to be noted that the Judge recorded  examples  of
    the Appellant seeking to blame her hearing  impairment  for  discrepant
    answers at interview  at  paragraphs  36  and  41,  with  reference  to
    questions 36 and 117 of the interview. Indeed at paragraph 41 the Judge
    comments that he afforded the parties time to pause  and  consider  how
    the answer to question 117 - which the Appellant now wished to deny and
    blame on  a  hearing  impairment  -  might  have  arisen.  Nothing  was
    forthcoming to explain what  it  was  that  the  Appellant  might  have
    thought she was giving an answer to, what she might  have  thought  the
    question what was.



19.  It seems to me that in  all  the  circumstances  the  Judge  was  fully
    cognisant of the fact that the Appellant had a hearing  impairment  and
    had raised that hearing impairment at the interview. However, what  the
    Judge was stating - in  my  judgement  very  clearly  -  was  that  the
    Appellant had not raised at the interview that her  hearing  impairment
    was such that it had impeded her in the conduct of the interview.  That
    was an evaluation open to him and indeed  clearly  sustainable  on  the
    basis of her full involvement and engagement with the interview, and  a
    contextual analysis of those questions where  she  was  now  suggesting
    hearing impairment had impeded her in understanding the questions.



20.  I find no substance in this basis of challenge.



21.  Moreover the meaning of the words at paragraph 63 which are queried  in
    the grant of permission to appeal are readily understandable coming  as
    they do immediately after the analysis at paragraph 62 (cited above)  -
    and allowing for the addition of the letter 't' after  the  word  'no':
    "It appears only that which is no[t] favourable to her claim stands  to
    be rejected  or  denied".  in  my  judgement  it  is  clear  from  what
    immediately precedes and what immediately follows  that  the  Judge  is
    commenting on the Appellant seeking to distance herself - by  rejecting
    or  denying  -  from  aspects  of  her  earlier  statements  when  such
    statements do not match the narrative now being relied  upon.  This  is
    also consistent with the Judge's observations at paragraph 74 -  "I  am
    drawn to the view the Appellant will simply say anything,  at  anytime,
    that suits her purpose".



22.  Whilst there are otherwise some criticisms to be duly made  in  respect
    of typing and grammatical errors I am not remotely persuaded that these
    are material to the overall conclusions in the appeal.



23.  Beyond the point identified in the grant of permission to  appeal,  the
    remainder of the Grounds of Appeal are, in my  judgement,  little  more
    than assertions  of  disagreement  with  the  analysis,  findings,  and
    conclusion of the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  and  do  not  constitute
    allegations of error of law.



24.  In this latter context I note that there was some discussion before  me
    in respect  of  the  adequacy  of  the  Judge's  consideration  of  the
    supporting evidence from the Appellant's church. However, it  seems  to
    me that irrespective of what might be made of those documents  they  do
    not assist in establishing that the Appellant was a convert from  Islam
    - a matter in respect of  which  the  grant  of  permission  to  appeal
    observed that  there  was  no  arguable  error  of  law  in  the  Judge
    concluding that there was no corroborative evidence of conversion  when
    one might reasonably have expected such evidence to  be  available.  In
    this context it is to be recalled also that in so far  as  issues  were
    raised in  respect  of  the  Appellant's  son's  conversion  the  Judge
    identified significant difficulties with his evidence; it is also to be
    borne in mind that the Judge rejected outright the notion that a  fatwa
    had been issued. Similarly it was open to the Judge  to  reach  adverse
    conclusions on  the  extremely  limited  evidence  in  respect  of  the
    Appellant's claimed relationship with another woman.



25.  In summary: those matters that informed  the  grant  of  permission  to
    appeal on closer analysis do not demonstrate any error  of  law;  those
    further grounds pleaded in the application  for  permission  to  appeal
    (whilst not directly commented upon in the grant of permission, but  in
    respect of  which  permission  to  appeal  was  not  expressly  denied)
    essentially constitute an attempt  to  reargue  the  case  and  do  not
    identify any error  of  law.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  reached
    sustainable  conclusions  in  respect  of  the  core  elements  of  the
    Appellant's protection claim, and  also  in  respect  of  the  residual
    pleadings with regard to Article 3.



26.  In all the circumstances I find that there is no material error of  law
    in the Decision of the First-tier Tribunal and it stands.



Notice of Decision

27.  There is no material error of law in the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and it stands.


28.  The Appellant's appeal is dismissed.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify the Appellant or a member of her family. This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to the Respondent. Failure to comply  with
this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.




Signed:                                 Date: 14 November 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis




