
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11818/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 16 December 2020                           |On 13 January 2021            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL
                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STOUT


                                   Between

                               MRB (PAKISTAN)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms E Griffiths, instructed by Milestone Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules  2008,
the appellant as an asylum applicant whose case involves sensitive  personal
information is granted anonymity throughout these proceedings. No report  of
these proceedings (in whatever form) shall directly or  indirectly  identify
the appellant. Failure to comply with this order could lead  to  a  contempt
of court.
                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is  a  citizen  of  Pakistan  whose  appeal  against  the
    decision of the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department  (the
    Secretary of State) refusing his asylum,  humanitarian  protection  and
    human rights claims was dismissed in a decision by First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Verghis (the FtTJ) promulgated on 28 January 2020. Permission  to
    appeal on all grounds was granted by Judge  Macdonald  on  28  February
    2020.

 2. The basis of the appellant's claims is that he is a gay man  and  fears
    persecution on grounds of his  sexual  orientation  if  he  returns  to
    Pakistan.

 3. The FtTJ found that the appellant was not gay and  therefore  dismissed
    his appeal on all grounds.

 4. In Grounds of Appeal dated 10 February 2020 and further in  a  Skeleton
    Argument dated 18 May 2020, Ms Griffiths on  behalf  of  the  appellant
    raises a number of grounds of appeal, on which she elaborated orally at
    the hearing. Those grounds overlap to an extent, but may be  summarised
    as follows:-

      i) Ground 1 - error of law in finding the Appellant's claim not to  be
         credible on the basis that it lacked corroboration;

     ii) Ground 2 - mis-stating the evidence  as  to  the  reaction  of  A's
         housemates to his relationship with another man, fails to  consider
         the evidence  given  and  makes  findings  based  on  stereotypical
         assumptions;

    iii) Ground 3 - failure to give any or  adequate  reasons  for  material
         findings, including: rejecting the A's claim that he did  not  know
         that he could claim asylum  in  the  UK  based  on  his  sexuality;
         rejecting the evidence of A's witnesses; finding that A should have
         been able to produce other evidence of life as an openly gay man in
         the UK since 2014 and his failure to do so damaged his credibility;
         finding that A had given 'weak and vague' evidence about his sexual
         orientation;

     iv) Ground 4 - failure to put  material  matters  to  witnesses  before
         making adverse findings;

      v) Ground 5 - failure to consider all evidence in the  round  (Mibanga
         [2005] EWCA Civ 367).

 5. Mr Whitwell for the Respondent  resisted  the  appeal,  maintaining  in
    summary that: when the decision is read as a whole it is apparent  that
    it is adequately reasoned; this is not a case  where  the  FtTJ  merely
    relied on the lack of corroborative evidence  as  the  FtTJ  also  took
    account in particular the appellant's delay in claiming asylum (and s 8
    of the 2004 Act); and that the decision is well-structured so that  all
    the evidence is considered before a conclusion is reached.

 6. We take each Ground in turn:-

 7. As to Ground 1, Ms Griffiths for the appellant argued  in  the  Grounds
    and Skeleton Argument that it would be an error of law for  a  tribunal
    to require corroboration for an appellant's account, but  she  did  not
    press this point at the hearing, and we understood her to  accept  that
    the relevant principles are  to  be  found,  so  far  as  the  European
    jurisprudence is concerned, in A v Staatssecretaris van  Veiligheid  en
    Justitie  (United  Nations  High  Commissioner  for   Refugees   (UNHCR
    intervening) [2014] EUECJ C-148/13 ("ABC") and, so far as the  domestic
    jurisprudence is concerned, in SB (Sri Lanka) v The Secretary of  State
    for the Home Department [2019] EWCA Civ 160.

 8. Those cases make clear that a lack of corroboration for an  appellant's
    account may be a relevant factor to take into account when assessing an
    asylum claim, including a claim based on sexual orientation. In ABC the
    CJEU held (at paragraph 58) that, in accordance with  Article  4(5)  of
    Directive 2004/83, a lack of corroborative evidence can be  taken  into
    account where (among other things) the applicant has not made a genuine
    effort  to  substantiate  his  application,  or  has  not  provided   a
    satisfactory explanation for any relevant elements that are missing, or
    where the applicant has (without  good  reason)  failed  to  apply  for
    international protection at the earliest  possible  time.   In  SB  the
    Court of Appeal held (at paragraph 46) that  a  lack  of  corroborative
    evidence could be taken into  account  where  the  applicant  fails  to
    produce supporting evidence on relevant issues  where  "logically"  the
    applicant should be able to do so, although a material error  in  logic
    would be an error of law (paragraph 48).

 9. As such, we do not consider that the judge erred in law in taking  into
    account that aspects  of  the  appellant's  case  lacked  corroborative
    documentary evidence and Ground 1 fails.

10. As to Ground 2, we accept the appellant's submission that the  FtTJ  in
    paragraph 45 of the decision overstates the evidence in relation to the
    reaction of the appellant's housemates to his commencing  a  homosexual
    relationship  with  Khalid.  In  that  paragraph,  the  FtTJ  gave  the
    following reasons for finding the appellant's account in  this  respect
    not credible: "Given the other occupants were  all  from  Pakistan  and
    subject to the same societal and religious expectations,  the  tribunal
    found it less than reasonably likely that all the occupants would  have
    accepted the news that the appellant and Khalid  were  in  a  same  sex
    relationship without question or reservation". The  FtTJ  here  wrongly
    recorded the appellant's evidence. It does not follow that because  the
    appellant said in his witness statement that "Everyone was really happy
    for us" that his housemates had accepted the news "without question  or
    reservation". They may have had questions or reservations that they did
    not communicate to the appellant. However, this is not in our  judgment
    a material error because we cannot see that  it  would  have  made  any
    difference to the FtTJ's reasoning at this point if  she  had  directly
    quoted the appellant's witness statement.

11. Nonetheless, we do find that there is an error of law in  the  judgment
    at this point, as a result of the FtTJ's reliance on the stereotype  as
    to  the  attitude  of  Pakistani  nationals  to  homosexuality.  It  is
    legitimate (as the CJEU indicated at paragraph 62 of ABC) to take  into
    account as part of the  factual  matrix  in  an  asylum  claim  certain
    "stereotyped notions", and general attitudes towards homosexuality in a
    particular country are the sort of stereotypes that may be relevant (at
    least where there is good evidence on which such a  stereotype  may  be
    based, such as  there  is  for  Pakistan  in  the  Country  Policy  and
    Information Notes). However, care must always be taken  where  reliance
    is placed on stereotypes. In particular, it must be remembered  that  a
    stereotype is a generalisation and it is always necessary  to  consider
    whether that stereotype is applicable in the particular case.

12. In this case, it does not appear  that  the  FtTJ  when  applying  this
    stereotype considered the evidence before her as to why the  stereotype
    might not apply in the particular  case.  That  evidence  included  the
    appellant's explanation for his housemates' reaction (as given  in  his
    asylum interview), which was that his housemates' experience of  living
    in the UK  had  changed  their  attitudes  towards  homosexuality.  His
    evidence in  that  regard  was  supported  by  the  evidence  from  the
    appellant's elderly friend, Mr Malik (who had grown  up  in  Pakistan),
    that his own attitudes to homosexuality had  changed  as  a  result  of
    living in the UK.

13. As such, the FtTJ in paragraph 45 left a relevant factor out of account
    in deciding that the appellant's account of his housemates' reaction to
    his relationship with Khalid was not credible. Alternatively, the  FtTJ
    failed to give adequate reasons for that finding. This was an error  of
    law and Ground 2 succeeds.

14. As to Ground 3, it is well established that an appellate  court  "needs
    to be able to  satisfy  itself  that  the  fact  finder  has  at  least
    identified the most relevant pieces of evidence  and  given  sufficient
    reasons (which might be quite concise) for accepting or rejecting  it":
    see SB (Sri Lanka) (ibid) at paragraph 44. In this case, the  appellant
    criticised a number of parts of the FtTJ's reasons and  those  we  have
    found to be made out are as follows:-

      i) The appellant entered the UK in 2011 on a Tier 4 student  visa  but
         overstayed from November 2012. He did not claim asylum until  April
         2019. In his witness statement  he  gave  evidence  that  this  was
         because he was not aware prior to 2019 that he could  claim  asylum
         on the basis of his sexuality, and that he learned  of  this  as  a
         possibility from a friend (Qaisar Ali) at  a  gay  club.  The  FtTJ
         rejected the appellant's evidence in this regard  at  paragraph  49
         because it was "trifling" and "on his own evidence, he  was  living
         openly as a gay man and for some months in 2014 he  claims  he  was
         openly in a relationship with another gay man". However, a claim to
         ignorance of rights is not "trifling", it is fundamental to whether
         someone might be expected to make a claim, and it is irrelevant  to
         the credibility of claim to be ignorant of legal  rights  that  the
         appellant  was  living  openly  as  a  gay  man  and  had   a   gay
         relationship. It is not logical  to  suggest  (without  more)  that
         being openly gay gives you knowledge of asylum  processes  and  the
         grounds for claiming asylum.

     ii) The FtTJ rejected the evidence of the two  witnesses  who  attended
         tribunal on behalf of the appellant (Mr Malik and Md Saifullah), in
         both cases concluding that they "had given evidence to  assist  the
         appellant and there was  in  fact  no  substance  to  the  evidence
         given". Although the FtTJ  does  not  say  so,  it  is  in  context
         apparent that the FtTJ was  here  finding  that  Mr  Malik  and  Md
         Saifullah had both come to tribunal to lie in order to bolster  the
         appellant's claim. However, there is nothing to suggest that it was
         put to either witness that they were  lying.  Further,  the  FtTJ's
         reasons  for  finding  their  evidence  not  to  be  credible  were
         inadequate as in relation  to  both  the  FtTJ  simply  said  their
         evidence was "brief and vague". That might be a  sufficient  reason
         if it was patently the case that a witness' evidence was "brief and
         vague", but that is not the position with the evidence of either of
         these witnesses. Their witness statements may be relatively  brief,
         but they are not vague. Mr Malik's account in his witness statement
         of his relationship with the appellant contains dates  and  details
         of his coming out as a gay  man.  Likewise,  the  statement  of  Md
         Saifullah contains dates and details of his seeing the appellant at
         gay clubs (which he identifies by name) and  in  oral  evidence  he
         also said that he had seen the appellant kissing men in  gay  bars.
         Given that the issue  before  the  judge  was  simply  whether  the
         appellant was gay, the evidence given by these witnesses could  not
         reasonably be described as "vague"  information:  it  was  evidence
         that in each case went directly to the question of the  appellant's
         sexuality. Describing it as "vague" was an  inadequate  reason  for
         rejecting their evidence.

    iii) For similar reasons, the FtTJ's finding at paragraph  51  that  the
         appellant's evidence "provided  little  insight  into  his  claimed
         sexual orientation" because it was "bland and lacking in detail" is
         not adequate given the length of the appellant's  witness  evidence
         and the detailed information it contains about:  his  feelings  for
         his cousin; how  those  feelings  developed  as  he  grew  up;  his
         reaction to seeing him at a family gathering after a break of three
         years; how he continued to think about  him  after  that;  how  his
         cousin getting married was the worst night  of  his  life;  or  his
         evidence about his relationship with Khalid. Moreover,  the  FtTJ's
         reasoning at this point with regard to the appellant's feelings for
         his cousin is internally inconsistent because in paragraph  43  she
         had accepted that the appellant's evidence about his  feelings  for
         his cousin and his sexual awakening on its own "seems plausible".

     iv) Further, we also accept the appellant's submission  that  the  FtTJ
         erred at paragraph 45 in finding that the appellant ought  to  have
         been able to produce corroborating evidence  himself  or  from  his
         other housemates about his relationship with Khalid. The  reasoning
         in relation to the appellant  itself  is  insufficient  because  it
         fails to deal with the appellant's evidence that he  did  not  keep
         photographs or other evidence because he did not know he would need
         to. The reasoning in relation to  the  housemates  is  insufficient
         because it is founded on  speculation  by  the  FtTJ  that  "it  is
         conceivable that he might have kept in contact with some of  them".
         That is of course not a finding that he had kept in touch with  his
         housemates and it is certainly not a sufficient basis on  which  to
         find  that  the  appellant  ought  to  have  been  able  to  obtain
         corroborating evidence from his housemates.

15. We therefore find that Ground 3 succeeds.

16. As to Ground 4, as noted above, we accept that the FtTJ found Mr  Malik
    and Md Saifallah to be lying without putting that point to  them.  That
    was procedurally unfair, and an error of law, although on  its  own  we
    would not have found this to be material  as  the  likelihood  is  they
    would simply  have  denied  that  allegation  and  it  would  still  in
    principle have been open to the FtTJ to reject that evidence -  if  she
    gave sufficient reasons for doing so.

17. As to Ground 5, the appellant relies on Mibanga v SSHD [2005] EWCA  Civ
    367, and in particular the principle that it is "axiomatic that a fact-
    finder must not reach his or her conclusion before  surveying  all  the
    evidence relevant thereto". There is  some  force  in  the  appellant's
    submission in this respect since our overall impression is that this is
    a case where the FtTJ proceeded by finding (what in our  judgment  were
    in many cases insufficient) reasons to reject the various planks of the
    appellant's case without standing back and fairly assessing  the  whole
    picture. However, the FtTJ has at a number of points on the face of the
    decision indicated that she has considered each piece of evidence  with
    reference to the whole (see, for example, paragraphs 43 and 44) and has
    structured her decision so that her conclusion is not  expressed  until
    paragraph  55  after  consideration  of  all  the  evidence.   In   the
    circumstances, we do not consider that the FtTJ fell into  the  Mibanga
    error.

18. For all these reasons, we we are satisfied that  the  decision  of  the
    first-tier tribunal involved the making of an error of law and  we  set
    it aside.

19. We announced our decision at the hearing and the parties indicated that
    they were in agreement that if there was  an  error  of  law  the  case
    should be  remitted  to  the  first-tier  tribunal.  In  the  light  of
    paragraph 7.2 of the 2012 Practice Direction, and the nature and extent
    of the judicial fact finding which is necessary  in   order   for   the
    decision  in  the   appeal   to  be   re-made,  we  agree  that  it  is
    appropriate for the matter to be remitted.

    Notice of Decision

 1. The decision of the First-Tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law, and we set it aside .

 2. We remit the appeal to the First-Tier Tribunal.


Signed                                  Date 17 December 2020

Jeremy K H Rintoul
Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul

Holly Stout
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Stout
