


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/11275/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Manchester Civil Justice Centre     |Decision Promulgated         |
|On: 9th October 2018                          |On 9th November 2018         |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                                     MWL
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr Semega-Janneh, Counsel instructed by Direct
                       Access
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Pakistan born in 1986. He  appeals  with
    permission the decision of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge  Ford)  dated
    14th December 2017 to dismiss his protection appeal.


 2. The Appellant had asserted a real risk of persecution in  Pakistan  for
    reasons  of  his  membership  of  a  particular  social  group,  namely
    homosexual men. The Respondent had refused protection  on  the  grounds
    that it was not accepted that the Appellant was in fact gay.

 3. When the appeal came before the First-tier Tribunal it was  determined,
    at the request of the Appellant, on the papers before the Judge. Having
    had regard to the transcripts of the Appellant's screening  and  asylum
    interviews, and a bundle of further evidence supplied by the Appellant,
    the Tribunal found that the  Appellant  had  failed  to  discharge  the
    burden of proof in establishing that he was in fact gay.

 4. In this onward appeal the Appellant seeks to challenge  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's findings on the grounds that they are vitiated for  material
    error of law. In particular it is submitted that:

              i) The First-tier Tribunal applied a higher standard of  proof
                 than that applicable in protection appeals;


             ii) The Tribunal failed  to  have  regard  to  the  Appellant's
                 cultural origins and vulnerability.

 5. In granting permission to appeal First-tier Tribunal  Keane  considered
    in arguable that Judge Ford had acted irrationally in that he  rejected
    the Appellant's claimed sexual orientation with reference  to  his  own
    perception about how gay men might behave.

 6. For the Respondent Mr McVeety defended the decision on all grounds.  It
    was submitted that the Tribunal had reached findings open to it on  the
    evidence, and it had at  all  times  applied  the  appropriate,  lower,
    standard of proof.



    Discussion and Findings


 7. I am not satisfied  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  applied  a  higher
    standard of proof than that applicable in  this  protection  claim.  At
    paragraphs 14-16 the determination  sets  out  the  applicable,  lower,
    standard of 'real risk'. It is apparent from the body of the  reasoning
    that this was the standard in fact applied: "Having considered all  the
    evidence provided by [the Appellant] I am not satisfied even to the low
    level of proof applicable in this appeal that [the Appellant] has  told
    the truth about his sexuality ... I am not satisfied that he is at real
    risk of persecution".


 8. The determination sets out five reasons why the Appellant was found not
    to have discharged the burden of proof.


 9. The first is that there  was  a  significant  delay  in  the  Appellant
    seeking international protection. He had been a student in  the  United
    Kingdom since June 2012, and since that  date  had  maintained  contact
    with the Home Office, and indeed  had  appeals  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal. During the entire  period  the  Appellant  had,  on  his  own
    evidence, been aware that he was gay. His family had known he  was  gay
    since 2014 and had allegedly been threatening him with  violence  since
    that date. Yet the claim was not made until February 2017. The Tribunal
    held this delay to undermine the Appellant's claim to have a subjective
    fear of persecution in Pakistan. There can  be  no  quarrel  with  that
    finding, which the First-tier Tribunal was plainly entitled to make. It
    was a finding in accordance with the view expressed by parliament in s8
    of the Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of Claimants  etc)  Act  2004.
    Mr Semega-Janneh submitted that the Tribunal had failed to consider the
    Appellant's explanation for the delay:  I reject  this  ground  because
    the explanation is specifically considered, and rejected, at  paragraph
    25 of the decision.

10. The second reason was that the Appellant had produced no  witnesses  to
    support his claim to have been in frequent contact with members of  the
    gay community in Manchester, including three men with whom  he  claimed
    to  have  directly  associated  with.   He  claimed  to  have   had   a
    relationship with at least one of these men and to have lived with  him
    for four months.  Mr  Semega-Janneh  pointed  out  that  in  protection
    claims there is no obligation of  claimants  to  produce  corroborative
    evidence, and it may be an error of law to require them  to  do  so.  I
    accept that general principle.  The reason underpinning that  principle
    is that where people have fled for their lives it would  be  irrational
    and unfair to expect them to  produce  documentary  evidence  of  their
    persecution; repressive regimes are unlikely to provide  their  victims
    with proof of their crimes.   Where however  the  evidence  is  readily
    available to the claimant, for instance because it is evidence stemming
    from their life in this country, that  principle  is  not  so  directly
    applicable: see  TK  (Burundi)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2009] EWCA Civ 40.   I agree with Mr McVeety that it  would
    have been a straightforward matter to produce some  evidence,  even  it
    was only in the form of a letter or  a  photograph.  The  Tribunal  was
    entitled to take into account the absence of  this  TK  (Burundi)  type
    evidence.

11. The third reason was that there were contradictions  in  the  evidence.
    The Appellant had said at his interview that he had  a  sexual  partner
    called Mark, and that when "Mark becomes comfortable they would  become
    partners". Printed-out text messages between the two men indicated that
    in fact Mark was keen to have a relationship, and it was the  Appellant
    who was being evasive.

12. The determination further notes that the medical  records  obtained  by
    the GP, (which make frequent reference to  the  Appellant  telling  the
    doctor that he is gay) record that he has had multiple sexual partners;
    this is to be contrasted with his  evidence  in  the  asylum  interview
    where he only mentioned one man. Fifthly the Tribunal notes that all of
    that 'medical evidence' in fact amounts to no more than  the  Appellant
    telling his doctor something and his doctor writing it down.

13. All of  those  reasons  were  manifestly  open  to  the  Tribunal,  and
    considered cumulatively were a sufficient basis upon which to find that
    the Appellant had not discharged the burden of proof. There is  nothing
    in the material before me to suggest that the Tribunal somehow erred in
    failing to consider the Appellant's cultural origins; nor  can  I  find
    any support for the contention that the Tribunal  erred  in  conducting
    its evaluation through the lens of how it thought gay men might behave.

14. For those reasons I dismiss the appeal. As I explained to the Appellant
    at the hearing, it may have been that  the  decision  of  the  Tribunal
    would have been  otherwise  had  it  been  provided  with  rather  more
    evidence than it had.  It was however the Appellant's decision to  have
    his appeal determined on the papers and the  Tribunal  cannot  be  held
    responsible for the evidence - or lack of it - that it is given.




    Anonymity Order

15. This appeal concerns a claim for protection.  Having had regard to Rule
    14 of the Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008  and  the
    Presidential Guidance Note No 1 of 2013: Anonymity Orders  I  therefore
    consider it appropriate to make an order in the following terms:


         "Unless and until a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
        Appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
        shall directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his
        family.  This  direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  both  the
        Appellant  and  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply  with   this
        direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings"



      Decisions


16. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contains no error  of  law
    and it is upheld.


17. There is an order for anonymity.


                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                                     31st
                                October 2018
