
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11844/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard remotely at Field House        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 7 October 2020 via Skype for      |On 5 November 2020                   |
|Business                             |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STEPHEN SMITH


                                   Between

                                  MA (iraq)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms E. Rutherford, Counsel instructed by Rodman
Pearce Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T. Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DECISION AND REASONS (V)

This has been a remote hearing  which  has  not  been  objected  to  by  the
parties.  The form of remote hearing was V (video). A face to  face  hearing
was not held because  it  was  not  practicable  and  all  issues  could  be
determined in a remote hearing.

The documents that I was referred to are in a  bundle  of  [60]  pages,  the
respondent's bundle. the grounds of appeal and the grant  of  permission  to
appeal,  the  appellant's  skeleton  argument  from  before  the  First-tier
Tribunal, and a skeleton argument from Mr Melvin, the contents  of  which  I
have recorded.

The order made is described at the end of these reasons.

The parties said this about the process: they were content that it had  been
conducted fairly in its remote form.

 1. This is an appeal against  a  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Watson promulgated on  21  April  2020  dismissing  an  appeal  by  the
    appellant against the decision of the respondent dated 20 November 2019
    to refuse his asylum and humanitarian protection claim.

Factual background

 2. The appellant is an Iraqi citizen of Kurdish ethnicity born in 1980. He
    left Iraq in 2010  following  the  targeting  of  his  village  by  the
    terrorist group Hashad al-Shaabi, and was granted asylum in Belgium for
    a period of one year,  before  being  returned  to  Iraq  in  2012.  He
    remained in Iraq until September 2017, staying for  a  month  in  Erbil
    before living with his aunt in Kirkuk, until his departure  for  Europe
    in September 2017.  He  arrived  in  this  country  on  18  April  2018
    clandestinely and claimed asylum the next day.

 3. The appellant's case before the First-tier Tribunal was that he  feared
    returning to Iraq as he had no family  to  assist  him,  and  would  be
    unable to secure a CSID card.  Hashad  al-Shaabi  continue  to  have  a
    significant presence in Kirkuk, and he would be at risk  from  them  if
    returned. He claimed he could not be returned to Baghdad,  as  a  Kurd,
    and that relocation to the Iraqi Kurdish region ("the IKR")  would  not
    be possible as he had no access to his CSID.

 4. It was not disputed by the respondent that the appellant fled his  home
    village due to the attacks conducted by  Hashad  al-Shaabi.  The  issue
    before the First-tier Tribunal was whether the appellant  would  be  at
    risk on that account, and broader human rights issues relating  to  his
    return.

 5. The judge found that the appellant was aware of the  essential  details
    of his family registration, pursuant to the guidance given in SMO,  KSP
    & IM (Article 15(c); identity documents) Iraq CG [2019] UKUT 400  (IAC)
    [22]. She accepted that the only remaining family the appellant had  in
    Iraq was his aunt, with whom he used to live, but that he had not  been
    in contact with her since speaking to her in  January  2018  concerning
    the death of his cousin. The judge found that he had  no  contact  with
    anyone in Iraq at present, and that he had no male relatives. See [23].

 6. Overall, the judge found the appellant to be a credible  witness  [24].
    Although he had passed through safe countries en route  to  the  United
    Kingdom, that did not harm his credibility, for reasons  given  by  the
    judge and not challenged by the respondent.

 7. Concerning the risk on return to the appellant, the judge found at [29]
    that the appellant was a Kurd with no high profile and had  not  worked
    for any Western or security organisation. He would not  be  at  greater
    risk of kidnap or other ill-treatment or death than other returnees.

 8. At [32], the judge found that the appellant would  be  able  to  obtain
    CSID card upon his return, thereby enabling him to make a safe  journey
    from Baghdad to Kirkuk or the IKR upon his return.  She then added:

         "Whilst I accept that he has no male relatives,  he  does  have  an
         aunt and I find it likely that he will be able to  contact  her  to
         obtain some form of emotional and perhaps practical support. He was
         aware that she had returned to live with her husband's family and I
         find it likely that he will be able  to  contact  her  again  on  a
         return."

Permission to appeal

 9. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Feeney on
    the basis that the judge  arguably  failed  to  consider  the  criteria
    enunciated by SMO concerning whether it would be reasonable  to  expect
    an individual to relocate to the IKR. Judge Feeney  granted  permission
    on all grounds.

Discussion

10. Pursuant to ground one, Ms Rutherford submits that the judge failed  to
    make findings concerning the risk to  the  appellant  from  Hashad  al-
    Shaabi. She submits that there were materials before the  judge  which,
    properly analysed, demonstrated that the appellant  may  have  been  at
    risk from Hashad al-Shaabi upon his return, such that it was  an  error
    of law for the judge to fail to make findings on this  issue.  For  the
    respondent, Mr Melvin argues that there was  no  basis  upon  which  it
    could properly be said that this appellant would ever be at  risk  from
    Hashad al-Shaabi; while the respondent accepted that he had  been  part
    of a generalised target from the group in 2010, there  was  nothing  to
    suggest that he was  personally  at  risk.  His  involvement  had  been
    limited to being in the wrong place, at the wrong time, ten years ago.

11. I find the judge did address the risk to the appellant on  this  basis.
    She plainly had in mind the risk the appellant claimed to be subject to
    from Hashad al-Shaabi: see [7] where she referred to the  claimed  risk
    as forming part of the appellant's case. It is necessary  to  read  the
    judge's decision as  a  whole,  and  when  one  does  so,  the  judge's
    discussion at [29] is contextualised. In that paragraph, the judge  set
    out findings to the effect that the  appellant  would  not  be  at  any
    greater risk of kidnap or other ill-treatment, or death, than any other
    returnee, upon his return. These findings encompass any risk that would
    be posed to the appellant by Hashad  al-Shaabi,  thereby  covering  the
    point the appellant contends was erroneously overlooked.

12. Ms Rutherford took me to the following  materials  in  the  appellant's
    bundle which, she contended, demonstrate  that  he  was  at  risk  from
    Hashad al-Shaabi, and which the judge failed to consider.

        a. At pages 19 to 20,  there  features  a  news  article  dated  15
           September  2019,  Clash  between  ISIS  and   Hashd   al-Shaabi,
           published online.  The article describes a  clash  between  ISIS
           fighters and Hashad al-Shaabi which  resulted  from  cars  being
           stopped at night on the highway between Baghdad and Kirkuk,  and
           being asked for money  by  ISIS.    This  article  went  to  the
           general presence of Hashad al-Shaabi, submitted Ms Rutherford.

        b. At pages 28 to 30, there is an article dated 28 June 2019 from a
           website called rojname.com titled Hashd al-Shaabi  Smuggles  Oil
           in Kirkuk, Khanaqin: Former MP.   The  single  sentence  of  the
           report which is visible across the three pages  relied  upon  by
           the  appellant  states  that  a  former  member  of  the   Iraqi
           Parliament had  "revealed"  that  pro-Iranian  Hashad  al-Shaabi
           militia continued to smuggle oil from the  province  of  Kirkuk.
           This article also demonstrated the general presence of Hashad al-
           Shaabi, submitted Ms Rutherford.

        c. At pages 31-35, there is an undated article,  which  appears  to
           have been accessed on 29 January 2020, titled Hashd al-Shaabi  /
           Hashd Shaabi Popular Mobilisation Units / People's  Mobilisation
           Forces.  It is published by www.globalsecurity.org.  It is  said
           by Ms Rutherford to demonstrate that  Hashad  al-Shaabi  militia
           are being incorporated into government forces.

13. Considering these articles in the round, with  the  remaining  evidence
    that was before the judge, in light of the extant country  guidance  in
    SMO, I do not consider that they could properly be said to provide  any
    support for the proposition that the appellant is  personally  at  risk
    upon his return, still less that they demonstrate it was irrational  or
    otherwise perverse for the judge not to reach that finding. There being
    no appeal to this Tribunal on the point of  fact,  that  would  be  the
    threshold the appellant would need to reach  in  order  to  demonstrate
    that the judge fell into error by not finding in  his  favour  on  this
    point.

14. The article Clash between ISIS and  Hashd  al-Shaabi  does  nothing  to
    demonstrate individualised risk. At its highest, it reports that  there
    was a single incident  between  ISIS  and  Hashad  al-Shaabi  fighters,
    catalysed by an attempted highway theft. The appellant has no  link  to
    either group, and this article demonstrates that there is no basis upon
    which he has a well-founded fear of being persecuted, or  is  otherwise
    at risk, on account of his Kurdish  ethnicity  or  any  other  specific
    basis.

15. The article Hashd al-Shaabi Smuggles Oil in Kirkuk, Khanaqin: Former MP
    is so brief that it cannot possibly be said that the  judge  fell  into
    error by not referring to it or otherwise relying on it.  There  is  no
    suggestion the  opponent  is  involved  in  the  oil  trade,  or  would
    otherwise be involved in  oil  smuggling  activities.  It  provides  no
    support for the proposition that he is at any form of risk from  Hashad
    al-Shaabi.

16. Finally, the article at pages 31 to 35 does not  demonstrate  that  the
    appellant is at any  risk  personally.  The  events  discussed  in  the
    article take place over the previous few years, and  without  exception
    pre-date the country guidance given  in  SMO.   Its  contents  were  of
    peripheral relevance to the appeal, if any.

17. While the judge did not address the  risk  emanating  from  Hashad  al-
    Shaabi directly, there was no basis in the materials that  were  before
    her for her properly to have found that there was  such  a  risk.   The
    judge addressed the global risk posed to the appellant at [29]; nothing
    submitted by Ms Rutherford demonstrates that that  was  a  finding  not
    properly open to the judge,  still  less  that  it  was  irrational  or
    otherwise unlawful for her not to find in favour of  the  appellant  on
    this point.

18. The second ground of appeal contends that the judge erred in failing to
    apply the factors in SMO concerning whether internal  relocation  would
    be unduly harsh.  Ms  Rutherford  accepts  that  the  judge's  findings
    concerning the appellant's ability to obtain a CSID were open to her on
    the evidence, and accordingly does not challenge  that  aspect  of  the
    case.

19. Mr Melvin submits that Ground 2 falls with Ground 1, as, if there is no
    risk to the appellant, the issue of internal relocation does not arise.
     While there is some force to that contention, the appellant's  general
    circumstances on return do need to be engaged with, even in the absence
    of a specific risk that would require consideration of  the  option  of
    internal flight.

20. The headnote to SMO outlines a series of considerations to which regard
    must be had when considering an appellant's circumstances upon  return.
    Ms Rutherford submits that the judge failed  to  consider  whether  the
    appellant would, for example, be able to obtain  work,  and  failed  to
    address the considerations listed at paragraph 28 of the Headnote, such
    as the role of patronage and nepotism, the skills and experience of the
    appellant, and whether he is from an area  with  a  marked  association
    with ISIL.  This, she contends, was an error of law.

21. Ms Rutherford also submits that it was not open to the  judge  to  find
    that  the  appellant  would  return  to  the  "emotional  and   perhaps
    practical" support of his aunt.  While she confirmed during submissions
    that she does not challenge  the  judge's  finding  at  [32]  that  the
    appellant would be able to resurrect contact with her, she submits that
    the practical reality of the situation on the ground is such  that  the
    aunt will not be able to provide the appellant with anything  like  the
    support necessary to facilitate his  proper  return.   The  appellant's
    evidence was that the aunt had moved to live with her husband's family,
    and no longer had her own home.

22. Paragraph 26 of the headnote to SMO, addressing the position of Kurdish
    returnees, provides:

         "If P has family members living in the  IKR  cultural  norms  would
         require that family to  accommodate  P.  In  such  circumstances  P
         would, in general, have sufficient assistance from the family so as
         to lead a 'relatively normal  life',  which  would  not  be  unduly
         harsh.  It  is  nevertheless  important  for   decision-makers   to
         determine the extent of any assistance likely to be provided by P's
         family on a case by case basis."


23. The judge's findings were consistent with  the  guidance  in  SMO  that
    Kurdish cultural norms  would  require  the  remaining  family  of  the
    appellant, namely his aunt, to provide sufficient assistance such  that
    it would be possible for the appellant to  lead  a  "relatively  normal
    life".  It was open  to  the  judge  to  reach  that  finding.   As  Ms
    Rutherford confirmed, there was no challenge to the  finding  that  the
    appellant would be able to resume contact with his  aunt.   That  being
    so, and in the absence of any evidence to the  contrary,  the  cultural
    norms governing the appellant's  return  are  such  that  he  would  be
    provided with assistance by his aunt.  He lived with his aunt from 2014
    to 2017, and the mere fact that his  aunt  has  moved  house  does  not
    render the judge's findings irrational, perverse or mean that they were
    otherwise not open to her.

24. It follows, therefore, that the separate  guidance  in  SMO  addressing
    those who, unlike this appellant, will not return to  the  support  and
    assistance of family members, was not engaged.  It  was  not  necessary
    for the judge to consider those factors and she  did  not  err  by  not
    doing so.

25. Ground 2 is without merit.

26. The appeal is dismissed.

27. I maintain the order for anonymity made by Judge Watson.


Notice of Decision

The decision of Judge Watson did not involve the making of an error of law.

This appeal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Stephen H Smith                              Date 13 October 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Stephen Smith

