
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11979/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 6th April 2018                     |On 12th April 2018                   |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER


                                   Between

                                     A A
                                     Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Walker instructed by Hersi & Co solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
(SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal or a
Court directs otherwise, no report of these proceedings or any form of
publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the original
Appellant/parties in this determination identified as AA. This direction
applies to, amongst others, all parties. Any failure to comply with this
direction could give rise to contempt of court proceedings

      1. First-tier Tribunal Judge Walker allowed AA's appeal on  Article  8
         human  rights  grounds  but  dismissed  his  appeal  on  protection
         grounds. AA  sought  and  was  granted  permission  to  appeal  the
         dismissal of his protection claim on the grounds:

         (1)  It was arguable the First-tier Tribunal Judge failed  to  have
             adequate regard to the evidence before him that AA was from  a
             minority clan;


         (2)  It was arguable the First-tier Tribunal Judge  had  failed  to
             have adequate regard to the deteriorating  security  situation
             in Somalia.



         Ground 1


      2. AA is married to a  British  citizen  of  Somali  heritage.  It  is
         accepted by AA that she did not identify her  clan  either  at  the
         hearing before the First-tier Tribunal hearing  (PA/00223/2016)  on
         10th August 2016 or at the hearing which led to  the  decision  the
         subject of this appeal on 18th  December  2017.   In  PA/00223/2016
         First-tier Tribunal Judge Maciel found:





         23. Taking into account the circumstances of the family as claimed
             by [AA], I find it incredible that [AA's]  mother  would  take
             her children to Mogadishu and through militia  checkpoints.  I
             find that this assertion undermines [AA's] assertion that  the
             family are from a minority clan with no  links  to  Mogadishu.
             The journey, even in 2006, would not be one without difficulty
             and danger with each checkpoint being a source of  opportunity
             for trouble for the family. I reject [AA's] account that he is
             from a minority clan with no links to Mogadishu. I  find  that
             [AA] is not from a minority clan.  I  further  find  that  the
             family  would  not  have  sought  to  spend  three  months  in
             Mogadishu unless there were relatives or some other source  of
             support there. I reject [AA's] account  that  his  mother  and
             siblings were killed in this way. I reject [AA's] account that
             they were on a holiday intended to last three  months  without
             knowing anyone there.


         24. ... [AA] was at pains to explain these  two  sisters  left  in
             Somalia with his neighbour are still children albeit there  is
             no evidence before me as to their ages. They must be at  least
             10 years old as [AA's] claim is that they survived the bomb in
             the house on account of being out of the house  in  Mogadishu.
             However, there is no  explanation  as  to  where  these  young
             children were at the time. If they were infants, why were they
             not with the family at the time given that  the  assertion  is
             that the family knew no one in Mogadishu and had no  relatives
             there. If on the other hand they were older and able to be out
             of the house on their own, the likelihood is that they are now
             adults as the incident took place 10 years ago.


         25. I find it incredible that [AA]  maintains  that  he  only  has
             contact with his sisters on 2 occasions since his  arrival  in
             the UK via the telephone owned by the  neighbour  who  look(s)
             after them. I find that no reason has been put forward  as  to
             why he was not having regular contact  with  them  as  he  had
             maintained that he had been responsible for them for the  last
             10 years and they were now living with  an  elderly  neighbour
             with no protection.


             ....


         28. I reject [AA's] account that his uncle  is  not  a  source  of
             support. When asked how he lived since the death of his mother
             if he never worked, he said that he did the best he could  and
             neighbours assisted him when he had a problem, however, he was
             able to contact his uncle. [AA] maintained that the uncle paid
             the agent directly and made the arrangements  with  the  agent
             directly. Accordingly, he  was  not  aware  of  how  much  was
             expended on securing his safe passage to the UK. However, [AA]
             asserted that he was expected to repay his uncle.  I  find  it
             inconsistent that [AA] is not aware of how much he owes yet is
             required to repay the sum. I find that his uncle in Canada has
             been supporting him and his family in Somalia.





      3. First-tier Tribunal Judge R  L  Walker  in  the  determination  the
         subject of this appeal found:





         33. ... First-tier Tribunal Judge Maciel ... held  that  [AA]  was
             not a member of a  minority  clan,  that  Al  Shabaab  had  no
             interest in him, that he would have  strong  family  and  clan
             links to Mogadishu, that he would have financial  support  and
             so could relocate there. [AA's] claims were not  found  to  be
             credible. This is a very recent decision and  there  has  been
             nothing raised today to show any fresh  evidence  which  would
             affect this. It has been suggested that [AA's] wife is from  a
             minority clan but...this has not been corroborated in any way.
             I conclude that the earlier  findings  still  apply  and  [AA]
             alone has no claim to refugee status.





      4. The only evidence relied upon by AA in this appeal  to  distinguish
         the findings in the earlier appeal is a witness  statement  from  a
         cousin who stated that he was Reer Hamar and evidence that his wife
         had been granted asylum as a minority clan member in  2002.   There
         was no evidence before the First-tier Tribunal Judge  to  undermine
         the findings of the Judge regarding the provision of  support  from
         the uncle in Canada, that there were relatives or some other source
         of support in Mogadishu, that he had been in contact with  his  two
         sisters or that his mother and two siblings had  not  died  in  the
         manner claimed.


      5. It was reiterated before the First-tier  Tribunal  in  this  appeal
         that he had been at risk from Al Shabaab despite  the  findings  of
         First-tier Tribunal Judge  Maciel  and  despite  the  lack  of  any
         evidence relied upon to  undermine  those  findings.  The  skeleton
         argument before the First-tier Tribunal did not seek  to  challenge
         any of those findings and the grounds of  appeal  relied  upon  the
         wife and cousin's evidence to support the contention that AA was  a
         minority clan member. No further evidence was given regarding  AA's
         claim that he had not worked in Somalia and had not gone to school,
         despite First-tier Tribunal Judge Maciel's comments as to the  lack
         of evidence to support what appeared to be unlikely scenarios.


      6. Although there was some evidence about Reer Hamar  from  AA's  wife
         and  cousin,  First-tier  Tribunal   Judge   Maciel   reached   his
         conclusions as to clan membership based on the evidence as a whole.
         When considered, the  evidence  before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
         Walker cannot be seen as enabling a departure from the finding that
         AA is not from a minority clan. The fact that a cousin says  he  is
         Reer Hamar and his wife was recognised as a refugee some  16  years
         ago as a minority clan member does not, without more, mean that  AA
         is a minority clan member when considered in the context of all the
         other findings of First-tier Tribunal Judge Maciel which  have  not
         been the subject of successful challenge in the past  and  are  not
         the subject of challenge now. There is no material error of law  by
         First-tier Tribunal Judge Walker in his finding that AA  is  not  a
         minority clan member.


      7. However, taking AA's claim that he is a  minority  clan  member  as
         true, there is still  no  material  error  of  law.  Ms  Walker  in
         submissions and in her skeleton continued to claim that AA had come
         to the adverse attention of Al Shabaab  because  of  his  volunteer
         work and that his mother and two siblings  had  been  killed.  This
         runs contrary to the unchallenged findings of  First-tier  Tribunal
         Judge Maciel and is unsustainable.


      8. Ms Walker submitted that the  economic  boom  referred  to  in  MOJ
         (Return to Mogadishu) Somalia CG [2014] UKUT  00442  (IAC)  was  no
         more. She submitted that clan  membership  was  now  important  and
         particularly so because AA  would  not  have  access  to  financial
         support or accommodation; he would be at serious risk of ending  up
         in an IDP camp. She said his only "work" had been handing out  food
         for an NGO and he had no relatives upon whom  he  could  call.  His
         wife, she submitted, could support him and the two children because
         he cared for the children daily. If he were to  leave  the  UK  she
         would have to give up her employment and she would not be  able  to
         send him any  money  to  financially  support  himself.  Ms  Walker
         admitted she could not point to any evidence that it was no  longer
         possible to consider there to be an economic boom in Mogadishu  but
         that it was reasonable to conclude that to be the case  because  of
         the drought, the increased attacks by Al Shabaab and that he had no
         skills.


      9. AA has not worked in the UK. There was no evidence why he could not
         work or why unskilled labour would not be available  to  him  given
         the position as set out in MOJ and  the  lack  of  any  sustainable
         evidence to counter-act that. As a minority clan member, he may not
         have access to the kind of support  that  a  majority  clan  member
         would have but the findings of First-tier Tribunal Judge Maciel are
         that there is family or other support available  and  he  has  been
         able to call upon his uncle to support him  when  needed.  That  he
         chose not to work in paid employment prior to coming to the UK is a
         matter from him. That there is access to significant sums of  money
         is evidenced by the fact that his  uncle  could  provide  funds  to
         enable him to travel to the  UK.  The  evidence  before  First-tier
         Tribunal Judge Maciel was such that he did not  accept  his  mother
         and siblings had died and there remain two sisters  in  Somalia  in
         any event. There was no evidence that  he  would  not  be  able  to
         obtain employment as a minority clan member  even  if  he  has  not
         worked for many years.


     10. Even if First-tier Tribunal Judge Walker erred in  finding  AA  was
         not a minority clan member, such  error  was  not  material  -  the
         evidence as it stood was that AA could  return  to  Mogadishu  with
         being at risk of persecution from  Al  Shabaab  and  the  situation
         there was not such as to render such relocation there unduly  harsh
         on a personal basis. There is no  material  error  of  law  in  the
         finding by First-tier Tribunal Judge Walker  that  there  had  been
         "nothing raised today to show any fresh evidence that would affect"
         the findings by First-tier Tribunal Judge Maciel. As  to  this  see
         also Ground 2 below.


         Ground 2


     11. Ms Walker submits that although evidence was placed  before  First-
         tier Tribunal Judge Walker on the changed situation  in  Mogadishu,
         the Judge failed to engage with  that  evidence  as  shown  by  his
         failure to consider the expert documents relied upon and mistakenly
         referring to AA's proposed country of return as  Iran/Iraq.  Whilst
         it is regrettable that the Judge does not appear to have  carefully
         proof read his decision prior to  promulgation  and  the  paragraph
         regarding humanitarian protection appears, as a result, to be a cut
         and paste paragraph, it is incumbent  upon  AA  to  show  that  the
         combination of these two matters amounts to  a  material  error  of
         law.


     12. The three documents relied upon by  Ms  Walker  which  were  before
         First-tier Tribunal Judge Walker and not referred to by him were  a
         UNSOM  report  titled  Protection  of   Civilians:   Building   the
         Foundation for Peace,  security  and  human  Rights  in  Somalia  -
         December  2017,  US  Counterterrorism  Objectives  in  Somalia:  Is
         mission failure likely dated March 2017 and a  UNHCR  report  dated
         November 2017. MOJ makes clear that it  is  not  simply  those  who
         originate from Mogadishu  who  can  live  there  without  being  at
         Article 15(c) risk. Ms Walker relied upon references in  the  UNSOM
         report including:





             A.2  The  security  situation  remained  volatile  during  the
             reporting period.  The  main  conflict  was  between  national
             security forces - supported by ANISOM - and  Al  Shabaab,  the
             major  armed  group  controlling  significant   territory   in
             Jubbaland, South west State and HirShabelle.  Other  conflicts
             resulting in civilian causalities included  recurrent  clashes
             between clan militia aligned to power holders,  especially  in
             areas where national and state security forces were absent.






             E.56.    from January 2016 to 14 October 2017,  eight  complex
             attacks attributed to  Al  Shabaab  took  place  in  Mogadishu
             (seven) and  Baidoa  (one)  which  resulted  in  363  civilian
             casualties...





     13. She relied  upon  the  internal  displacement  figures  in  the  US
         Counterterrorism  document  showing   increased   drought   related
         displacement figures and conflict related displacement. Figures for
         Mogadishu were not provided and there was no indication from  these
         documents that individuals were leaving Mogadishu or there had been
         a  significant  reduction  in  people  arriving  or  a  significant
         reduction in economic activity.


     14. MOJ refers to the significant level of inward  investment  and  the
         economic opportunities that stem from that investment in areas such
         as construction and leisure. Ms Walker did not  direct  me  to  any
         evidence that had been before the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  that
         could have led to a departure from the country  guidance.  Although
         there  have  been  terrible  incidents  of  violence  and  civilian
         casualties, the point is made in  MOJ  that  the  areas  that  such
         atrocities happen is delineated. There has been a relatively recent
         outrage that Al Shabaab have not claimed responsibility for but one
         incident of that nature is insufficient to enable a departure  from
         Country Guidance in the absence of anything more.


     15. Here is a dearth of evidence relied upon to show that the situation
         in Mogadishu has destabilised, that there are  no  longer  adequate
         economic opportunities or that the violence  has  become  prevalent
         such that any individual going there would be at risk. The evidence
         I was directed to, which was presumably the same evidence as First-
         tier Tribunal Judge Walker was directed to, simply does not support
         a claim that AA would be at serious or significant disadvantage  or
         is in need of Article 15(c) protection. There is  no  justification
         from departing from the guidance in MOJ.


     16. Although the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  failed  to  refer  to  the
         background material to which he was  directed,  the  error  is  not
         material.


         Ground 1 and 2


     17. Although there is some overlap between the two grounds relied upon;
         the claimed  inability  to  access  economic  opportunity  and  the
         increase in violence having an effect on that, the evidence  relied
         upon by AA was inadequate to justify either a  departure  from  the
         Country Guidance or from the findings of First-tier Tribunal  Judge
         Walker.


     18. It follows  that  although  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  could
         perhaps have provided more detail, the outcome would have been  the
         same and could not have been any different.


     19. There are no material errors of law in the decision  by  First-tier
         Tribunal Judge Walker.


    Conclusions:


    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.


    I do not set aside the decision


    The decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  dismissing  the  appeal  on
    protection grounds stands.

[pic]
                                    Date 9th April 2018
Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
