
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
PA/11252/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                   |             Decision & Reasons       |
|                                    |Promulgated                           |
|On 7th December 2017                |             On 2nd January 2018      |
|                                    |                                      |

                                   Before

                      Deputy upper tribunal JUDGE Kelly

                                   Between

                               MR SHIRWAN AMIN
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Riffat Hussain, Solicitor
For the Respondent: Mr M Diwyncz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by Mr Shirwan Ali Amin against the decision of  Judge
    Saffer, promulgated on the 22nd  March  2017,  to  dismiss  his  appeal
    against refusal of his Protection Claim.

 2. The appellant was born on the 1st January 1995 and hails from the  town
    of Tuz Khurmtu in the province of Salahuddin (Salah al-din) in Iraq. He
    left there when his home was shelled and all his  documents,  including
    his Civil Status Identification Document [CSID],  were  destroyed.  His
    case has always been that his home town is contested by ISIS and  Iraqi
    national forces and that it would be  unreasonable  to  expect  him  to
    relocate elsewhere given his lack of identity documents.

 3. The position of  the  Secretary  of  State  concerning  the  safety  or
    otherwise of  the  appellant  returning  to  Tuz  Khurmtu  has  changed
    repeatedly throughout these proceedings.  The  original  decision-maker
    conceded  that  Tuz  Khurmtu  was  a  so-called  "contested  area"  but
    nevertheless refused the claim  for  international  protection  on  the
    ground that it was feasible for the appellant to relocate  to  an  area
    within Iraq that was not contested. That decision was made on the  29th
    September 2016. This concession was withdrawn by the Presenting Officer
    (Mrs Brewer) at the hearing in the  First-tier  Tribunal  on  the  22nd
    March 2017, and Judge Saffer duly found  that  the  background  country
    information justified his departure from the guidance  in  this  regard
    that is to be found in AA (Aricle 15(c)) Iraq  [2015]  UKUT  00544.  It
    will be recalled that the Upper Tribunal found in that  case  that  Tuz
    Khurmtu was a contested area. On  the  26th  July  2017,  Judge  Shaerf
    granted permission to appeal on the ground that Judge Saffer had  given
    inadequate reasons for departing from the decision in AA. By way  of  a
    notice served on the 7th August  2017,  under  Rule  24  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal Procedure Rules, the Secretary of State indicated that she did
    not oppose the appeal and invited the Tribunal "to determine the appeal
    with a fresh oral (continuance) hearing and  to  consider  whether  the
    appellant would be at risk on  return  as  per  AA  (Iraq)."  [Emphasis
    added]. Given the terms of the notice, Mr Diwnyncz felt constrained  to
    concede that there had been an error of law and that  the  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal should be set aside and  remade  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal. This did not however prevent him  from  arguing  that  I  too
    should depart from the guidance in AA. The position of the Secretary of
    State has thus come full circle since Judge Saffer  made  his  decision
    for reasons that seem to  have  little  if  anything  to  do  with  the
    changing situation on the ground in Tuz Khurmtu.

 4. In granting permission to appeal, Judge Shaerf appeared to suggest that
    the amendments made by the Court of Appeal  to  the  original  guidance
    issued by the Upper  Tribunal  in  AA  might  be  relevant  to  Judge's
    Saffer's decision  to  depart  from  that  guidance.  It  is  therefore
    appropriate to note from the outset that the Court of  Appeal  did  not
    make any amendments to the original guidance concerning those areas  of
    Iraq within which the Upper Tribunal found  there  to  be  a  state  of
    internal armed conflict giving rise to a risk of serious harm (see  the
    Annex to the judgement in AA (Article 15(c)) Iraq [2017] EWCA  Civ  944
    at paragraph A]. It thus remains the starting point that the  intensity
    of the  armed  conflict  in  the  so-called  "contested  areas",  which
    includes the governate of Salah al-din, is  such  that,  as  a  general
    matter, there are substantial grounds for believing that  any  civilian
    returned there, solely on account of his or her presence, faces a  real
    risk of being subjected to indiscriminate violence amounting to serious
    harm within the scope of Article 15(c) of the Qualification  Directive.
    It was thus for the Secretary of State to persuade  Judge  Saffer,  and
    now me, that the background  country  information  justifies  departure
    from that position.

 5. Both Mrs Brewer (in the First-tier Tribunal) and Mr Diwyncz (before me)
    placed substantial reliance upon the UK Home Office Country Information
    and Guidance Note (Iraq), "Security situation in the 'contested'  areas
    (August 2016)". That Guidance contains  the  following  conclusion,  at
    paragraph 2.3.14:

      Diyala, Kirkuk (except Hawlja and the surrounding areas) and Salah al-
      din no longer meet the threshold of Article 15(c).

    Mr Dwyncz additionally relied upon printouts of maps of  northern  Iraq
    that were taken from a website  entitled  "isis.livemuamap.com",  which
    are dated the 6th December 2017. These appear to show that Tuz Khurmatu
    was under Iraqi government control as at that date.

 6. The Country Information and Guidance Note states that within  the  last
    year (that is to say, in the year  preceding  August  2016)  Daesh  had
    suffered significant losses, with Government and associated forces  now
    controlling "most" of Salah al-din. Since the situation was  considered
    in AA in mid-2015, the number of security incidents  had  declined  and
    the number of civilian fatalities and injuries had either decreased  or
    remained steady within relatively low levels. However,  as  Ms  Hussain
    rightly pointed out, the Guidance Note paints a picture  of  a  general
    decline in the intensity of violence rather than one of cessation.  The
    question thus remains whether the intensity of that violence is such as
    to meet the threshold of Article 15(c). In this regard, Ms Hussain drew
    my attention  to  reports  of  a  suicide  car-bomber  who  killed  six
    civilians in Tuz Khurmatu on the 3rd September 2016 [pages 31 and 32 of
    the appellant's bundle of documents] and of Sunnis  and  Kurds  fleeing
    sectarian violence from Shiite militia in Tuz Khurmatu on the 25th June
    2016 [pages 140 to 143 of the appellant's bundle of documents].

 7. Standing back and looking at the background country information in  the
    round, I am not satisfied that it establishes that the intensity of the
    violence that it reports in Tuz Khumatu had fallen below the  threshold
    necessary for Article 15(c) to cease to be operative. I note  that  the
    material relied upon by both sides  relates  to  the  situation  as  it
    appertained more than 12 months' ago, at a time when  Iraqi  Government
    and associated forces had but recently regained control  of  the  area.
    This does not however mean that it had ceased to be a contested area at
    that time, any more than it could be said to have been uncontested area
    when ISIS were in overall control  of  it.  Thus,  whilst  the  current
    situation  may  now  be  very  different  from  that  reported  in  the
    background country information that has been  placed  before  me,  that
    information does not in my judgement justify departing from the finding
    in AA that there are substantial grounds for believing that there is  a
    situation of internal armed conflict in Salah al-din that gives rise to
    a real risk of serious harm as a result of indiscriminate violence.

 8. Following on from the above, and  applying  the  guidance  in  AA   (as
    amended by the Court of Appeal), I find  that  the  appellant  will  be
    unable to go to the Civil Status Affairs Office  of  the  Salah  al-din
    governate because it continues  to  be  an  area  where  Article  15(c)
    serious harm is occurring. Whilst alternative CSA Offices for Salah al-
    din have been  established  in  Baghdad  and  Kerbala,  this  does  not
    demonstrate that the "Central Archive" is in practice able  to  provide
    CSID to those in need of them. Given that the precise operation of  the
    National Status Court in Baghdad is unclear, I am satisfied that it  is
    not reasonably likely that the appellant would  be  able  to  obtain  a
    replacement CSID card. Whilst Judge Saffer  considered  it  unnecessary
    (because he found that the appellant would have  little  difficulty  in
    obtaining  a  replacement  CSID)  he  nevertheless  accepted  that  the
    appellant would unable to call upon familial support as an  alternative
    to the financial and other services that are provided to those who  are
    in possession of a CSID. I therefore find that there  is  a  real  risk
    that the appellant would become destitute once the  funds  provided  to
    him by the Secretary of State became exhausted.

Notice of Decision

 9. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal to dismiss the  appeal  is  set
    aside and is substituted by a decision to allow the appeal.

No anonymity direction is made.





Judge Kelly                             Date: 26th December 2017

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal





