
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11313/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|on 21 February 2019                  |On 14 March 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

               DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SUTHERLAND WILLIAMS


                                   Between

                             MR ABDUL AZIZ NADER
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Jones, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms J Bond, Counsel, instructed by Freemans
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. This is an appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
         Stedman ('the judge'), promulgated on 31 October  2018,  dismissing
         the appellant's appeal against the respondent's decision to  refuse
         the appellant's asylum, humanitarian protection  and  human  rights
         claims.

Overview

      2. The appellant  is  a  Palestinian  national  (Occupied  Palestinian
         Territories). He was born in 1998. On 17 March 2018 he applied  for
         asylum and humanitarian protection in the  United  Kingdom  on  the
         grounds  of  imputed  political  opinion  and   nationality.   That
         application was refused by the respondent on 13 September 2018.

      3. The appellant appealed  the  respondent's  decision  under  section
         82(1)(a) and (b) of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
         2002; namely, that he was a refugee whose removal from  the  United
         Kingdom would breach the United  Kingdom's  obligations  under  the
         1951 Geneva Convention relating to the  status  of  refugees  ('the
         Refugee Convention'); and further that his removal would breach the
         United Kingdom's obligations in relation to persons eligible for  a
         grant of humanitarian protection under Council Directive 2004/83/EC
         (the qualification directive); and that his  removal  would  breach
         the 1950 European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and
         Fundamental Freedoms.

      4. The appeal was listed before the First-tier Tribunal on 23  October
         2018; and thereafter dismissed by Judge Stedman.

      5. The judge's decision provides the following factual findings:

               i. The appellant was born and has lived virtually all of  his
                  life in Saudi  Arabia,  where  his  parents  and  siblings
                  continue to live and work.

              ii. The appellant moved to Lebanon on 11  September  2016  and
                  studied there for nearly a year.

             iii. He lived in student accommodation, but on  weekends  would
                  stay with his grandmother within the United Nations Relief
                  and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the  Near  East
                  ('UNRWA') Al-Rashidiya Refugee Camp.

              iv. The appellant was not habitually resident in the  occupied
                  territories or in one of its neighbouring states.

               v. The appellant had not experienced any  problems  in  Saudi
                  Arabia until he returned there from Lebanon on  14  August
                  2017.

              vi. Upon return, he was  interrogated  by  the  Saudi  Arabian
                  authorities twice  and  on  the  second  occasion,  on  26
                  November 2017, he  was  detained  for  4  days  and  badly
                  mistreated.

             vii. His residency was revoked and  he  was  deported  back  to
                  Lebanon.

            viii. The appellant  then  resided  at  the  UNRWA  Al-Rashidiya
                  Refugee Camp for a period of 2 months with his grandmother
                  prior to embarking on his journey to the UK.

              ix. He  travelled  to  the  UK  on  his  own  Lebanese  travel
                  document.

               x. The appellant has 3 uncles and some cousins in the UK.

      6. I do not understand the above facts to be contested by either party
         in the appeal before me, (indeed, they reflect the summary set  out
         by the appellant's counsel in the grounds of appeal application).

      7. Importantly for these purposes, the respondent  accepted  that  the
         appellant  could  not  be  returned  to  Saudi  Arabia,  where  his
         residency had been revoked and where he had been detained and  ill-
         treated by the authorities.

      8. The central issue in the appeal at first instance was  whether  the
         appellant could be returned to Lebanon and  the  UNRWA  Al-Rashidya
         Refugee Camp without breaching any of  his  protected  rights  (per
         paragraph 10 of the judge's determination).

      9. On 21 January 2019, Upper Tribunal Judge Grubb gave  permission  to
         appeal on receipt of the following grounds:

         Ground 1 - the judge had erred as the appellant is a  refugee  from
         Saudi Arabia, who should not be expected to relocate to Lebanon, as
         Lebanon is not a signatory to the Refugee Convention;

         Ground 2 - the judge had erred in finding that Article  1D  of  the
         Refugee Convention applied, as the  appellant  was  not  habitually
         resident in Lebanon;

         Ground 3 - the judge had erred in finding that there were not 'very
         significant obstacles to integration' under paragraph  276  ADE(vi)
         of the Immigration Rules.

     10. It is against the above background  that  this  matter  was  listed
         before me.

Ground 1 - the judge had erred as the appellant  is  a  refugee  from  Saudi
Arabia, who should not be expected to relocate to  Lebanon,  as  Lebanon  is
not a signatory to the 1951 Refugee Convention

     11. This first ground of appeal is partly founded on  what  appears  to
         have been a mistaken concession made by counsel for  the  appellant
         at the First-tier Tribunal stage. Counsel now  (correctly)  accepts
         that Lebanon is not a signatory to the Refugee Convention; and  she
         was in error in previously suggesting it was. It is  advanced  that
         this error was potentially  capable  of  materially  affecting  the
         outcome of the appeal, as Lebanon could not be a first safe country
         of asylum for this appellant and that Lebanon generally  is  not  a
         reasonable alternative for the appellant.

     12. It is necessary to take this ground of appeal in two stages: first,
         is the appellant correctly characterised as a refugee falling under
         the Refugee Convention? Secondly, should he be expected to relocate
         to a country that has not signed the Refugee Convention?

     13. Article 1D of the Refugee Convention states as follows:

             "This Convention shall not apply to persons who are at present
             receiving from organs or agencies of the United Nations  other
             than  the  United  Nations  High  Commissioner  for   Refugees
             protection or assistance.

             When such protection or assistance has ceased for any  reason,
             without  the  position  of  such  persons  being  definitively
             settled in accordance with the relevant resolutions adopted by
             the General Assembly of  the  United  Nations,  these  persons
             shall  ipso  facto  be  entitled  to  the  benefits  of   this
             Convention."

     14. This assists in answering the  first  question:  is  the  appellant
         correctly characterised as a  refugee  falling  under  the  Refugee
         Convention? If an individual is receiving protection or  assistance
         from a UN agency, then per Article 1D, the Refugee  Convention  has
         no application. UNRWA is one such agency.

     15. In the instant matter, it was not accepted by the  respondent  that
         assistance offered by UNRWA  had  ceased  to  be  available.  As  a
         result, the respondent found that the appellant  was  not  eligible
         for refugee status.

     16. The judge makes a clear finding that the appellant was a documented
         refugee in Lebanon with UNRWA, and a registered refugee  with  both
         UNRWA and the Lebanese authorities. The judge also found  that  the
         appellant had not shown that the protection offered  by  UNRWA  had
         ceased to be available.

     17. It is not the role of this Upper Tribunal to unpick the findings of
         fact made in the tribunal below. That was not the basis upon  which
         permission to appeal was granted. However,  for  completeness,  and
         because this issue is central to this appeal, I should add that  it
         is apparent from the bundles I  was  provided  that  the  appellant
         completed a one-year course in care and body  management  organised
         by UNRWA and received his diploma on 31 July 2017,  (the  appellant
         explained in interview  that  this  was  a  form  of  physiotherapy
         course). There is a further certificate that appears to  have  been
         issued under the auspices of the Innovation Labs  Network,  bearing
         logos for UNICEF,  UNRWA,  and  the  Kingdom  of  the  Netherlands.
         Furthermore, within the bundle  is  a  document  from  the  General
         Directorate for the Political Affairs and Refugees of the  Republic
         of Lebanon, showing the appellant  as  being  resident  at  the  Al
         Rachidieh Camp, where his grandmother also lives. Further, there is
         a special ID card for Palestinian refugees issued by  the  Lebanese
         authorities  confirming  that  the  appellant  was  a   Palestinian
         residing in Lebanon on 16 September 2016; there is  also  a  family
         record issued by UNRWA for the Nader family, printed on 15 May 2017
         (contained on that document are the details of this appellant).  In
         addition,  the  appellant  was  previously  in  possession   of   a
         Lebanese/Palestinian travel document.  There  is  also  information
         within the bundle to confirm that the Al Rashidiya camp  was  built
         by UNRWA and continues to have services provided by  it  (save  for
         the  administration  or  policing  of  the  camps,  which  is   the
         responsibility of the host nation).

     18. The reason I have set out the above is to place  into  context  the
         judge's finding that the appellant had been under the protection of
         UNRWA and was a recognised refugee by them. It appears to me to  be
         a finding the judge, on balance,  was  entitled  to  make  for  the
         reasons he gives. While the appellant's representative submits that
         the fact he bore documentation issued by UNRWA is not sufficient to
         trigger the operation of the exclusion clause under Article  1D,  I
         remind myself that the appellant also bears an evidential burden in
         this regard. Other than his counsel's repeated  assertion  that  he
         was not under UNRWA protection and  what  can  be  drawn  from  the
         appellant's statement, the evidence on one view points in the other
         direction. I do bear in mind that demonstrating  the  opposite  may
         have been difficult, but the appellant has done little  to  explain
         the documents, what efforts he took  at  the  First-tier  stage  to
         clarify the position or why he says protection and  assistance  did
         not follow.

     19. The above is central to the understanding of this case, because  as
         the  judge  correctly  observes,  Article  1D  has  the  effect  of
         excluding from the Refugee Convention those  Palestinians  who  are
         receiving UNRWA protection  (as  set  out  in  the  Country  Policy
         Information Note, cited  by  the  judge  at  paragraph  18  of  his
         determination). That  being  so,  the  Refugee  Convention  has  no
         application and the submissions in relation to internal  relocation
         also have no proper application.

     20. Even if the judge had been wrong about that,  the  notion  that  he
         could not be returned to the Lebanon because he was a refugee  from
         Saudi Arabia and not Lebanon (the second question),  overlooks  the
         nature of the  Convention  itself,  which  precludes  expulsion  or
         return to a territory where the appellant's life or  freedom  would
         be threatened  on  account  of  his  race,  religion,  nationality,
         membership of a particular social  group  or  political  opinion  -
         Article 33.

     21. While it is correct to observe that Lebanon is not a party  to  the
         Refugee Convention or its 1967 Protocol; it is not the  destination
         in terms of the country of return that concerns the  tribunal,  but
         the risks and protection or assistance the individual would receive
         upon return, viewed through the  lens  of  the  UK's  international
         obligations and the protections available.

     22. In the instant matter, the  decision  discloses  cogent,  evidence-
         based reasons for concluding that the appellant  would  not  be  at
         risk on return to Lebanon and that there was therefore no breach of
         Article  15C  of Council   Directive   2011/95/EU (the   recast
         Qualification  Directive,  "serious  and  individual  threat  to  a
         civilian's life or person by reason of indiscriminate  violence  in
         situations of international or internal armed conflict"), or of his
         Article 8 human rights.

     23. As a result, I dismiss this ground of appeal.

Ground 2 - the judge has erred in finding that Article 1D  applied,  as  the
appellant was not habitually resident in Lebanon

     24. It appears that there may be a typographical error in  this  ground
         of appeal. The appellant was arguing that the judge made a material
         error of law in finding that the appellant was  excluded  from  the
         protection of the Refugee Convention under Article 1D.

     25. This ground overlaps with Ground 1, and to an  extent  repeats  the
         arguments  in  relation  to  the  applicability  of   the   Refugee
         Convention, which I have dealt with above.

     26. In Ground 2, the  appellant's  counsel  submits  that  because  the
         appellant was not  habitually  resident  in  Lebanon,  but  instead
         originated from Saudi Arabia, it was  indisputable  that  while  in
         Saudi Arabia he did  not  receive  protection  or  assistance  from
         UNRWA.

     27. This submission overlooks the judge's finding that the appellant is
         a Palestinian refugee recognised and protected in Lebanon by UNRWA.
         The appellant had not been living in  Saudi  Arabia  prior  to  his
         departure (via South America and Europe) to the United Kingdom.  He
         had been living for two months in Lebanon in a  refugee  camp  with
         UNRWA services.

     28. I am satisfied that the judge was entitled to take the view he  did
         that the fact the appellant was not previously habitually  resident
         in Lebanon had no significant bearing on  the  approach  he  should
         take to his return there, save only by reference  to  consideration
         of his Article 8 European Convention on Human Rights ('ECHR').

     29. Part of the further  difficulty  I  suspect  the  judge  at  first-
         instance faced is that Counsel has provided no  authority  for  her
         proposition that habitual residence is central to the operation  of
         Article 1D. Indeed, much of what is  stated  in  these  grounds  of
         appeal  do  not  carry  any  case  law  authority  other  than  the
         assertions of the representative and a hypothesis of what  the  law
         should be.

     30. The United Nations High  Commissioner  for  Refugees  Note  on  the
         UNHC's interpretation of Article 1D of the 1951 Convention relating
         to  the  Status  of  Refugees  in  article  12(1)(a)  of   the   EU
         Qualification Direction in  the  context  of  Palestinian  Refugees
         seeking international protection, dated 9 May 2013, (handed  to  me
         during the course of the hearing) sets the above into  context.  It
         confirms  that  UNRWA  provides  assistance  to  some   5   million
         registered Palestinian refugees in places, including  the  Lebanon.
         Part of the purpose is to ensure the continuity of  protection  and
         assistance for Palestinian refugees  in  circumstances  where  that
         protection ceases as a result of Article 1D. It is the UNHCR's view
         that  those  who  are  eligible  as  well  as  actually   receiving
         protection are considered to be receiving protection or  assistance
         from the UNRWA. I do not need to resolve that point, but  I  simply
         observe that the appellant on one view would be caught either way.

     31. The asylum policy instructions on Article 1D (paragraph 17  of  the
         determination) suggest that UNRWA continues to  provide  protection
         and assistance to Palestinian refugees in the occupied  territories
         and   in   neighbouring   countries   within   its   mandate.   The
         interpretation the judge gives does  not  lead  to  the  denial  of
         protection for the appellant, it simply places the appellant in the
         same position  as  many  other  Palestinians  who  fall  under  the
         protection of UNRWA.

     32. The issue is whether or not returning the  appellant  would  breach
         the U.K.'s international obligations. The Refugee  Convention  does
         not apply to individuals in circumstances where the  protection  of
         another state  is  unnecessary.  The  appellant  is  a  Palestinian
         national. He is not a national of Saudi Arabia. He  may  have  been
         resident there for most of his life, but his status in that country
         was to a degree perilous - as demonstrated by events.

     33. In the instant matter, there is no  evidence  the  appellant  would
         suffer deprivation of human rights that were fundamental to him  if
         he was returned to Lebanon or the UNRWA camp. While  the  appellant
         may not be able to avail himself of protection in Saudi Arabia,  he
         can have the protection of UNRWA in Lebanon, and indeed has done so
         previously.

     34. Article 1D of the Refugee Convention provides that refugees who are
         in receipt of assistance under the UN are outside the terms of  the
         Convention until such assistance ceases. Simply electing to  depart
         a territory where  an  individual  has  UNWRA  protection  (or  the
         opportunity of UNRWA protection) cannot be  sufficient  to  advance
         that the Article 1D exclusion  does  not  apply,  unless  there  is
         something more (for example, if the appellant had left for  reasons
         relating to his personal safety or because of circumstances  beyond
         his control. I do not see that as applying here: 'The appellant did
         not  give  evidence  of  experiencing  any  specific  problems   or
         protection needs').

     35. There is no evidence to suggest that  the  authorities  in  Lebanon
         would refuse his admission or refuse  the  renewal  of  his  travel
         documents. The appellant voluntarily left an area under the control
         or assistance of UNRWA. There is no evidence to suggest that he was
         prevented from leaving. There is  no  evidence  that  he  would  be
         prevented from returning.

     36. I therefore dismiss this ground of appeal.

Ground 3 - the judge  has  erred  in  finding  that  there  were  not  'very
significant obstacles to integration' under paragraph  276  ADE(vi)  of  the
Immigration Rules.

     37. Counsel for the appellant appeared to accept that the appellant did
         not have a well-founded fear of persecution in Lebanon and that  it
         had never been  his  case  that  he  had  a  well-founded  fear  of
         persecution in Lebanon. His case was that  he  had  a  well-founded
         fear of persecution in Saudi Arabia and that the judge had erred by
         not considering more fully the Saudi position.

     38. This was a different approach to the one  that  the  representative
         had taken in her grounds of appeal,  where  it  was  submitted  the
         judge had erred as he had failed  to  apply  the  correct  test  of
         whether the appellant was enough of an insider  in  Lebanon  to  be
         able to build up a variety of human relationships to give substance
         to his private or family life, citing Kamara v Secretary  of  State
         for the Home Department 2016 EWCA Civ 813:

             '14.  ...  The  idea  of  'integration'  calls  for  a   broad
             evaluative judgement to be made as to whether  the  individual
             will be enough of an insider in  terms  of  understanding  how
             life in the society in that other country is carried on and  a
             capacity to participate in it, so  as  to  have  a  reasonable
             opportunity to be accepted there, to be able to operate  on  a
             day-to-day basis in that society and  to  build  up  within  a
             reasonable time a  variety  of  human  relationships  to  give
             substance to the individual's private or family life'.

     39. The concept of  integration  is  broad  and  largely  factual,  and
         therefore needs to be looked at through the circumstances  of  this
         particular case. That is what the judge did. The  judge  held  that
         the appellant was able to leave his  home  and  family  and  go  to
         Lebanon and study for one year, living in student accommodation. He
         had chosen to embark on this path because he was able to study  for
         free  in  Lebanon.  The  judge  referenced  that  at  weekends  the
         appellant chose to go to the UNRWA Al Rashidiya camp to be with his
         grandmother. The judge found that the appellant did not  experience
         any particular difficulties there during that time  (something  his
         counsel conceded before me) and although it was only on a temporary
         basis, he was nevertheless going there  quite  frequently  to  stay
         over.

     40. While it was submitted that the judge failed to consider  the  test
         of  significant  obstacles  under  paragraph  276  ADE,  that   the
         appellant  was  not  an  'insider',  and  failed  to  consider  the
         appellant's history  in  Lebanon  or  the  fact  that  he  was  not
         habitually resident there, in my finding the judge  has  adequately
         considered those aspects of the evidence at paragraph 30 -  33  and
         through reading his judgement as a whole.

     41. The judge accepted that returning there on a permanent basis  would
         give rise to a  completely  different  reality  and  have  its  own
         challenges:

             '... But his experience of life there during his studies, even
             if of short duration in the scheme of his whole life, as  well
             as the presence of his grandmother there, and in  the  context
             of having no history of any specific problems, means  that  he
             will not face significant obstacles to his integration there.'

     42. The judge correctly observes that the appellant is no  stranger  to
         Lebanon, having lived there before, and was able to participate and
         be  accepted  there   after   a   short   period   of   time.   His
         representative's suggestion that he  would  not  be  enough  of  an
         insider is in my view misplaced. He has lived in  the  Lebanon,  he
         has adapted to life there, he has studied there.  It  seems  to  me
         that the judge has said as much as he  needs  to  in  that  regard,
         particularly  bearing  in  mind  counsel's  concession  about   the
         appellant's life in Lebanon.

     43. I am more than satisfied that the judge has carried out  the  broad
         evaluative judgement as envisaged in Kamara.

     44. There is in my judgement nothing in the point  about  returning  to
         Saudi Arabia and having a well-founded fear in that country.  There
         was never any question of him being returned to Saudi Arabia.

     45. In terms of the appellant's Article 8 ECHR rights and in  terms  of
         his rights outside of Article 8, the  judge  adequately  considered
         the issue of whether he can return to Lebanon/the  UNRWA  camp.  He
         has found that he would be able to do so, and it is not the role of
         this Upper Tribunal  to  go  behind  that  determination  unless  a
         material error of law has occurred. I find no such  error  in  this
         case. This ground amounts to mere  disagreement  with  the  judge's
         conclusions on the evidence.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.

No application was made for anonymity in this appeal. The  general  rule  is
that hearings are held in public and judicial decisions are published  (A  v
BBC [2014] UKSC 25) and I saw no reason to depart from the general  rule  in
this case.   Neither representative invited me to take a different course.


Signed   [pic]
     Date 11 March 2019
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sutherland Williams

