
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11423/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 30th October 2018                         |On 13th February 2019         |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARy OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     MAG
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. A Tan, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr. G Brown.  Counsel instructed by Citizens
Advice Bureau (Bolton)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The First-tier Tribunal ("FtT) judge declined to make an anonymity
      order.   Although no application is made before me, the appeal
      concerns a claim for asylum and international protection and in my
      judgement, it is appropriate for an anonymity order to be made under
      Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.  MAG is
      granted anonymity throughout these proceedings. No report of these
      proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify him.  This direction
      applies both to the appellant and to the respondent. Failure to comply
      with this direction could lead to proceedings being brought for
      contempt of court.


   2. The appellant in the appeal before me is the Secretary  of  State  for
      the Home Department and the respondent to this appeal is MAG.  However
      for ease of reference, in the course of  this  determination  I  shall
      adopt the parties' status as it was before the FtT.  I shall  in  this
      determination, refer to MAG as the appellant,  and  the  Secretary  of
      State as the respondent.


   3. The respondent appeals against the decision of First-tier Tribunal
      ("FtT") Judge Chowdhury promulgated on 27th July 2018, allowing the
      appellant's appeal on Article 3 grounds.


   4. The background to the appellant's claim is set out at paragraphs [3]
      to [5] of the decision of the FtT Judge.  The appellant claimed to
      have lived in Makhmur, Iraq, until the area was invaded by ISIS in or
      about July / August 2014.  The appellant, his mother, two brothers and
      two sisters then fled the area, and escaped to Erbil.  The appellant's
      mother found a small flat in Erbil that was rented from a private
      landlord.  The appellant claimed that between 2014 and December 2015,
      he would go to Kirkuk and Sulaymaniyah, where he stayed with strangers
      who allowed him to stay with them because they understood that the
      appellant was at risk because of his age and medical condition.  The
      appellant claimed that he left Iraq with his younger brother, at the
      end of 2015.


   5.  The Judge's findings of fact and conclusions are set out at
      paragraphs [21] to [36] of the decision. Having heard the evidence,
      the FtT Judge found the appellant to be a credible witness. The Judge
      stated, at [24], that "I accept on the lower standard of proof that
      the core of the appellant's claim is credible.".


   6. The Judge accepted that the appellant's father was killed by ISIS and
      that the appellant fled Makhmur, and that his father's body was found
      in Shahidan "... which may well be in the Erbil province..".  The
      Judge found that the appellant and his family fled to Erbil.  At
      paragraph [29], the Judge states:


         "On the lower standard of proof I find that this Appellant is from
         Makhmur and does not originate from the IKR."


   7. The Judge refers to the Country Guidance set out in AAH (Iraqi Kurds -
      internal relocation) Iraq CG UKUT 00212 (IAC).  At paragraph [33] of
      her decision, the Judge states:


         "... I find that his family who remain in the IKR are likely to be
         IDPs of Kurdish origin.   His account which I find on the lower
         standard to be credible, lends itself to a finding that this
         appellant was unable to secure employment whilst he was in IKR and
         hence he lived a life of moving from one home to another. He openly
         stated in cross examination that he had a paternal uncle in the IKR
         who had passed away."


   8. At paragraph [34], the Judge accepts that the appellant has no CSID or
      other documentation.  She states:


         "... I have accepted the Appellant's place of origin and I find
         that it is unlikely, on the lower standard of proof, given that it
         was in a contested area, that there would be a Civil Status Affairs
         Office in the Appellant's governorate.   Further or alternatively,
         I do not find that there is a reasonable degree of likelihood that
         his relatives who remain in the IKR would be able to obtain
         replacements on his behalf and to do so in a reasonable time frame
         ..."


   9. The Judge found that the appellant has no identity documents and that
      the appellant would be returned to Baghdad.  At paragraph [36], the
      Judge states:


         "I do not find that this Appellant will be able to make the onward
         journey to Erbil from Baghdad within a reasonable time frame.  He
         is single, and has mobility issues due to his elephantitis who does
         not speak Arabic and is of Kurdish ethnicity.  I do not find that
         he is likely to find assistance in Baghdad. I find that there is a
         real risk he will face destitution and as per the respondent
         concession I have quoted above at paragraph 31 above I find that
         his return will be in breach of his Article 3 rights. It is on this
         basis I allow the appeal."


The appeal before me


  10. The respondent claims that the Judge has neither given any reasons for
      dismissing the asylum appeal, nor given any adequate reasons for
      allowing the appeal under Article 3 of the ECHR. It is said that the
      Judge has not given any clear reasons for accepting that the appellant
      is from Makhmur.  There were inconsistencies in his evidence, and the
      appellant got many of the questions wrong at interview.  The
      respondent submits that it is irrational to conclude that the
      appellant's lack of geographical awareness of the area can be put down
      to his health, when on his own account, he had freely travelled
      between the IKR and other areas of Iraq.


  11. The respondent also claims that the appellant has not made any
      reasonable efforts to locate his family, and the Judge fails to make
      any adequate or rational findings as to the whereabouts of the
      appellant's family.  The respondent submits that this failure is
      material to the outcome of the appeal because the appellant's ability
      to obtain the necessary identity documents is relevant to the question
      of whether the appellant could return to the IKR.  Finally, the
      respondent submits that the FtT Judge failed to have any proper regard
      to s8 Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of Claimants, etc) Act 2004,
      having noted that the appellant travelled through a number of European
      countries without explaining why no claim for asylum was made in any
      of those countries.


  12. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Chamberlain on
      28th August 2018. The matter comes before me to consider whether or
      not the decision of FtT Judge Chowdhury involved the making of a
      material error of law, and if the decision is set aside, to re-make
      the decision.





Discussion


  13. As Brooke LJ observed in the course of his decision in R (Iran) v  The
      Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  [2005]  EWCA  Civ  982,
      "unjustified complaints" as to an alleged  failure  to  give  adequate
      reasons are all too frequent.  The obligation on a Tribunal is to give
      reasons in sufficient detail to  show  the  principles  on  which  the
      Tribunal has acted and the reasons that  have  led  to  the  decision.
      Such reasons need not be elaborate, and do not need to  address  every
      argument or every factor which weighed in the decision.  If a Tribunal
      has not expressly addressed an argument, but if there are  grounds  on
      which the argument could properly have been  rejected,  it  should  be
      assumed that the Tribunal acted on such  grounds.   It  is  sufficient
      that the critical reasons to the decision are recorded.


  14. The Court of Appeal held that a finding might only be set aside for
      error of law on the grounds of perversity if it was irrational or
      unreasonable in the Wednesbury sense, or one that was wholly
      unsupported by the evidence.  A finding that is "perverse" embraces
      findings that are irrational or unreasonable in the Wednesbury sense,
      and findings of fact that are wholly unsupported by the evidence.  On
      appeal, the Upper Tribunal should not overturn a judgment at first
      instance, unless it really could not understand the original judge's
      thought process when she was making material findings.


  15. The Judge found, at [29] and [33], that the appellant is from Makhmur,
      Iraq, as claimed.  Two reasons for reaching that decision are
      apparent.  First, the Judge noted, at [25], that although the
      respondent found the appellant had provided a number of incorrect
      responses with regard to his knowledge of Makhmur, nevertheless,
      "...there is a not insignificant number of questions wherein no
      comment is made as to whether he got the answers wrong or right.".
      The questions concerned, and the responses given by the appellant are
      not referred to in the decision.  The Judge did not address whether
      the answers were in fact correct, but appears to have inferred that
      they were correct because the respondent had not claimed that
      incorrect answers were given.  Second, at paragraph [26], the Judge
      accepted that the appellant suffers from congenital elephantiasis.
      The Judge considered that the appellant's mobility is hindered and
      that he would not necessarily know in great geographical detail, the
      features of Makhmur or its surrounding places of interest.


  16. If that were the only criticism of the decision, I would accept, as Mr
      Brown submits, that the respondent's challenge is nothing more than a
      disagreement as to the finding made by the Judge that the appellant is
      from Makhmur.  The Judge however proceeds upon the basis that Makhmur
      is not in the IKR.  Mr Tan submits that, Makhmur is in fact part of
      the Erbil Governorate and that is important because it impacts upon
      the appellant's ability to obtain the necessary CSID or other identity
      documents.  Mr Brown did not challenge that submission, and I accept
      that Makhmur, is within the Erbil Governorate and therefore, is in a
      Kurdish area.


  17. The Court of Appeal in AA (Iraq) -v- SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 944
      confirmed that Return of former residents of the Iraqi Kurdish Region
      (IKR) will be to the IKR and all other Iraqis will be to Baghdad.
      With regard to the IKP, the Country Guidance establishes that the
      respondent will only return a person to the IKR if that person
      originates from there, and his identity has been "pre-cleared" with
      the IKR authorities. The authorities in the IKR do not require the
      person to have an expired or current passport, or Laissez Passer. The
      Tribunal had found in AA that the IKR is virtually violence free.


  18. In AAH, the Upper Tribunal replaced section E of the Country Guidance
      annexed to the Court of Appeal's decision in AA.  The Upper Tribunal
      confirmed that whilst it remains possible for an Iraqi national
      returnee to obtain a new CSID whether the individual is able to do so,
      or do so within a reasonable time frame, will depend on the individual
      circumstances. The Tribunal set out the relevant factors, including
      inter alia whether the individual has any other form of documentation,
      or information about the location of his entry in the civil register,
      and the location of the relevant civil registry office and whether it
      is operational.


  19. The Country guidance confirms that even a Kurd who does not originate
      from the IKR may enter the IKR lawfully for up to 10 days, and then
      extend his stay to settle there, having found employment.  There is a
      need to consider wider issues such as travel between Baghdad and the
      IKR, the documents that will be available to an individual, whether
      the individual will be at particular risk of ill treatment during the
      security screening process, and the options available for
      accommodation and employment.


  20. In my judgement, although it was open to the FtT Judge to find that
      the appellant is from Makhmur, the FtT Judge has failed to give
      adequate reasons for finding that the appellant's family, who the
      Judge appears to find, remain in the IKR, are likely to be IDP's of
      Kurdish origin, or that the appellant's family would not be able to
      assist the appellant obtain replacements of the appellant's CSID or
      other documentation.  The Judge appears to proceed upon the premise
      that Makhmur is in a contested area and it is unlikely that there
      would be a Civil Status Affairs Office in the appellant's governorate.
       As I have said, Makhmur, is within the Erbil Governorate and is in a
      Kurdish area.


  21. The appellant's own case was that his mother had been able to secure a
      small flat to rent in Erbil from a private landlord.  At paragraph
      [33], the FtT Judge finds that the appellant's family who remain in
      the IKR are "likely to be IDP's of Kurdish origin.".  Having found
      that the appellant's family are in the IKR, the FtT Judge fails to
      give any or any adequate reasons for finding that they are likely to
      be IDP's, or why they cannot assist the appellant secure the necessary
      documents.


  22. In my judgement, the FtT Judge appears to proceed upon a mistake as to
      where Makhmur is, and in any event, fails to undertake the very
      careful fact sensitive analysis of relevant factors, that is required
      to enable a reader of the decision to understand the basis upon which
      the Judge reached her decision, correctly applying the relevant
      country guidance.


  23. It follows that in my judgment, the decision of the FtT Judge is
      infected by a material error of law and must be set aside.  As to the
      disposal of the appeal, both Mr Tan and Mr Brown submit that the
      appropriate course is for the matter to be remitted to the FtT for
      hearing afresh. I have decided that it is appropriate to remit this
      appeal back to the First-tier Tribunal, having taken into account
      paragraph 7.2 of the Senior President's Practice Statement of 25th
      September 2012.  In my view, in determining the appeal, the nature and
      extent of any judicial fact-finding necessary will be extensive. The
      parties will be advised of the date of the First-tier Tribunal hearing
      in due course.


Notice of Decision


  24. The appeal is allowed and the appeal is remitted the FtT for a fresh
      hearing of the appeal with no findings preserved.


  25. I have made an anonymity direction.


Signed                                  Date          28th December 2018


 Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia




TO THE RESPONDENT

FEE AWARD

I have allowed the appeal and remitted the matter for re-hearing before the
FtT.  In any event, no fee was paid and there can be no fee award.




Signed                                  Date          28th December 2018


 Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia

