

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11471/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided Under Rule 34 (P)                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 28 September 2020                          |On 01 October 2020            |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                     OIH
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS




     1. The appellant appeals with  permission  a  decision  of  First-tier
        Tribunal Judge Fox ('the Judge') promulgated  on  the  13  February
        2020 in  which  the  Judge  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal  on
        protection and human rights grounds.
     2. Permission to appeal was refused by another judge of the First-tier
        Tribunal  but  granted  on  a  renewed  application  by  the  Upper
        Tribunal.
     3. Following the grant of  permission  directions  were  sent  to  the
        parties indicating a provisional that  the  error  of  law  hearing
        could be considered and disposed of without a  face  to  face  oral
        hearing, inviting the parties observations upon  such  a  proposal,
        and providing time for the submission  of  additional  material  in
        support of their respective cases.
     4. The  Overriding  Objective  is  contained  in  the  Upper  Tribunal
        Procedure Rules. Rule  2(2)  explains  that  dealing  with  a  case
         fairly  and  justly  includes:  dealing with  it   in   ways  that
        are  proportionate   to   the   importance   of   the   case,   the
        complexity   of   the    issues,    etc;    avoiding    unnecessary
        formality   and   seeking  flexibility    in    the    proceedings;
        ensuring,  so  far  as  practicable,  that the parties are able  to
        participate fully in the proceedings; using any  special  expertise
        of the Upper Tribunal effectively; and avoiding delay,  so  far  as
        compatible with proper consideration of the issues.
     5. Rule 2(4) puts a duty on the parties to help the Upper Tribunal  to
        further the overriding objective; and to cooperate with  the  Upper
        Tribunal generally.
     6. Rule 34 of The  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
        provides:


        34.-
        (1)  Subject to paragraphs (2) and (3), the Upper Tribunal may make
             any decision without a hearing.
        (2)  The Upper Tribunal must have regard to any view expressed by a
             party when deciding whether to hold a hearing to consider  any
             matter, and the form of any such hearing.
        (3)  In immigration judicial review proceedings, the Upper Tribunal
             must hold a hearing before making a decision which disposes of
             proceedings.
        (4)  Paragraph (3) does not affect the power of the Upper  Tribunal
             to-


             (a)  strike out a party's case, pursuant to  rule  8(1)(b)  or
             8(2);
             (b)  consent to withdrawal, pursuant to rule 17;
             (c)  determine an application for permission to bring judicial
                  review proceedings, pursuant to rule 30; or
             (d)  make a consent order disposing of  proceedings,  pursuant
                  to rule 39, without a hearing.


     7. The only party to have expressed a view is the Secretary of  State.
        The directions, sent on the 23 July 2020, indicated the view of the
        judge who issued the same that the error  of  law  issue  could  be
        disposed of remotely, via Skype for Business or any other  platform
        on a date to be fixed, but it is not made out there is any need for
        an oral hearing, whether remotely or otherwise.  It  has  not  been
        shown to be inappropriate or  unfair  to  exercise  the  discretion
        provided in Rule 34 by enabling the error of  law  question  to  be
        determined on the papers. There is nothing on the facts or  in  law
        that makes consideration  of  the  issues  on  the  papers  not  in
        accordance with overriding objectives at this stage.



Background


     8. The appellant is a citizen of Iraq who entered the United Kingdom
        illegally on 5 August 2009 claiming asylum shortly thereafter. The
        asylum claim was refused but the appellant granted a period of
        leave to remain in accordance with the respondent's discretionary
        policy relating to Unaccompanied Asylum-Seeking Children. That
        leave was valid to 18 February 2010. An application for further
        leave made on 18 February 2010 was refused and an appeal against
        that decision dismissed leaving the appellant 'appeal rights
        exhausted' on 8 June 2011. A series of further representations were
        all refused including the most recent representations dated 13
        August 2019 which were refused in the decision appealed to the
        First-tier Tribunal.
     9. Having considered the written and oral evidence the Judge sets out
        his findings of fact at [45] of the decision under challenge. The
        Judge finds the appellant had failed to discharge the burden of
        proof upon him, even to the lower standard, and found no reason to
        go behind an earlier decision of the Tribunal which dismissed a
        previous appeal in accordance with the Devaseelan principles.
    10. The Judge specifically finds the appellant, his activities, and
        alleged political ideology not credible, with there being no
        reliable evidence of any meaningful political activity that would
        create a real risk for the appellant on return to Iraq.
    11. The Judge considers the allegation of alleged barriers to
        redocumentation from [51]. The Judge does not accept the appellant
        is unable to engage with the redocumentation process either in Iraq
        or the UK and agrees with the decision of the earlier Tribunal to
        this effect.
    12. The Judge notes the appellant has a male relative, an uncle, in
        Iraq and that the only alleged barrier to redocumentation was the
        appellant's absence from Iraq. The Judge notes, however, there is
        no reliable evidence to demonstrate the appellant had taken
        reasonable steps to approach the Iraqi Embassy or engaged with the
        redocumentation process. The appellant's evidence that he took his
        CSID with him when he left Iraq and that other documents were at
        his mother's house when she relocated to Kirkuk was noted by the
        Judge, as was the fact the appellant attended school, and had been
        issued with a passport in the past. The Judge noted at [56] that it
        therefore follows that official documents do exist to demonstrate
        the appellant's identity and that it is the appellant who seeks to
        create barriers to the redocumentation process to bolster his
        appeal.
    13. The Judge considers the country guidance decision in SMO, making
        specific reference to it at [57]. At [58] the Judge writes:


        58.  The appellant remains in contact with family members in Iraq
             and he is free to return there as part of the repatriations
             process. There is no dispute that the appellant can travel to
             Baghdad, Erbil or Sulaimaniyah. For all the reasons stated the
             appellant has also failed to demonstrate insurmountable
             obstacle to his return.


    14. The appellant sought permission to appeal claiming the Judge paid
        little regard to the country guidance caselaw, erred in the
        application of the Devaseelan principles by failing to assess to
        what extent a 2011 determination can be permitted to stand without
        more as it predates the country guidance caselaw, in finding that
        SMO did not assist the appellant, in failing to note that the
        appellant's CSID was confiscated by his agent when he reached the
        Turkish/Greek order and never returned, and in making contradictory
        findings, for the reasons set out application seeking permission to
        appeal.



Error of law


    15. I do not find arguable merit in the assertion the Judge failed to
        properly consider the country guidance in SMO. Whilst that may post-
        date the 2011 determination factual findings made in that earlier
        decision have not been shown to be affected by later country
        conditions. The grounds fail to make out that all the earlier
        country guidance relied upon in 2011 is no longer applicable or
        that any change in country guidance has any material impact upon
        the factual analysis and adverse credibility findings even if
        relevant to the assessment of risk on return or the redocumentation
        process.
    16. The Upper Tribunal in SMO find most people would know their family
        book details which is the source enabling an individual to obtain
        necessary identity documents. There is arguable merit in the
        respondent's written submissions that it was not for the Secretary
        of State or the First-tier Tribunal to prove the appellant's case
        for him, in an appeal in which he was represented. The Judge notes
        that the appellant had been issued with a CSID in the past, had
        attended school for which a valid CSID will have been required and
        where such details could be obtained, and was issued with an Iraqi
        passport. The appellant's mother remains in Iraq as does a male
        relative, his uncle, and it was not made out before the Judge that
        these sources would not enable the appellant to obtain the
        necessary details to enable him to redocument himself.
    17. Whilst it is accepted earlier forms of identification have been
        replaced in Iraq by the biometric identity cards for which personal
        attendance at an assigned centre is required, the current CPIN
        country material clearly refers to the existence of an identity
        document issued by the Iraqi authorities which will allow a
        national to obtain a document sufficient to enable him to re-enter
        Iraq where he will be able to attend the relevant centre.
    18. It was not made out before the Judge that the appellant is an
        undocumented asylum seeker unable to return to Baghdad. It was not
        made out he will be unable to travel within Iraq, especially in
        circumstances in which he has a male relative. It was not made out
        his uncle would not be able to meet him at the airport to assist in
        travel back to his home area or, in accordance with Kurdish custom
        and tradition, to provide him with the necessary accommodation and
        support to enable him to re-establish himself.
    19. It was an important finding at [28] that it was the appellant's own
        case that his maternal uncle could have obtained the documents for
        him in his home area.
    20. It was found the appellant would not be able to return safely to
        his home area of Diyala at [57] making the issue that internal
        relocation but it was not made out that it was unreasonable in all
        the circumstances for the appellant to have relocated with the
        assistance of family members.
    21. The appellant did not establish before the Judge, in accordance
        with SMO, that he will be unable to re-document himself in Iraq.
        In any event, the current CPIN clearly refers to the considerable
        experience the authorities and NGOs have in Iraq of assisting
        displaced persons in obtaining the necessary identity documents. It
        was not shown this service will be unavailable or will not assist
        the appellant.
    22. It was not made out the appellant would have to seek accommodation
        one of the IDP camps as he has family members in Iraq and had not
        established before the Judge that they will be unable or unwilling
        to provide him with the required degree of support.
    23. The Judge makes clear findings supported by adequate reasons that
        the appellant had not discharged the burden of proof upon him to
        show he was entitled to a grant of international protection or
        leave to remain in the United Kingdom on any basis. The pleadings
        do not establish this is a finding outside the range of those
        reasonably available to you the Judge on the evidence sufficient to
        warrant the Upper Tribunal interfering any further in relation to
        this matter.


Decision

    24. There is no material error of law in the Immigration Judge's
        decision. The determination shall stand.

   Anonymity.


    25. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of
        the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


I make such order pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure    (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008.










Signed
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson
Dated the 28 September 2020












