
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/11026/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 20 November 2018                  |On 7 December 2018                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SYMES


                                   Between

                                MEDHANIE [T]
                          (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Dakora (for Barnes Harrild Dyer Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Ms K Everett (Specialist Appeals Unit)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. The Appellant is a citizen of Eritrea  born  [~]  1984,  who  appeals
       against the decision of the First-tier tribunal of 5  March  2018  to
       dismiss his appeal, itself brought against the decision to refuse him
       asylum of 24 September 2016.

    2. The Appellant's asylum claim can be summarised thus. He was  born  in
       Adisagdo. He attended school until grade 5. When he  left  school  he
       went into hiding to avoid military service, sometimes  in  Asmara  at
       his grandfather's home,  and  at  other  times  with  other  paternal
       relations.  In 2006 his mother died. His brother had previously  been
       called up and wounded in battle, around 2007.

    3. The Appellant was arrested at  his  place  of  abode  and  taken  for
       military service  in  the  Third  Brigade.  He  absconded  whilst  on
       training and travelled, with a friend, to Sudan, in  2007,  where  he
       stayed for around four months. In December 2007  he  left  Sudan  and
       travelled to Libya, and onwards to Italy (where he  lived  rough  for
       some five months over  a  period  when  his  asylum  application  was
       apparently not being processed)  and  France  (where  he  was  poorly
       treated), where he spent several months before  finally  arriving  in
       the UK.

    4. He claimed asylum on 29 June 2009. His asylum claim  was  treated  as
       withdrawn when he was recorded as an absconder, on 8 July 2011.  Over
       this period he had been supported by the  Eritrean  community  and  a
       female friend  with  mobility  problems  who  helped  with  household
       chores. He subsequently applied for a residence card  as  the  family
       member of an EEA national, though that application was refused  on  6
       September 2011. Further submissions were made in June  2014  relating
       to his asylum claim and these were refused,  though  acknowledged  as
       raising a fresh claim meriting the right of appeal.  His  appeal  was
       originally heard and  dismissed  on  16  January  2017,  though  that
       decision was found legally flawed and the matter was remitted by  the
       Upper Tribunal  on  4  August  2017  for  re-hearing,  the  resulting
       dismissal of the appeal giving rise to the instant appeal before  the
       Upper Tribunal.

    5. The First-tier tribunal noted the Appellant had  a  poor  immigration
       history,  having  travelled  through  many  safe  countries,   before
       absconding having submitted an asylum claim in the UK and pursued  an
       apparently unmeritorious EEA claim; "a  genuine  refugee  would  have
       claimed asylum at the first opportunity when he  arrived  in  a  safe
       country." His journey across Europe  indicated  that  he  was  forum-
       shopping and his having absconded in the UK also counted against  his
       credibility having regard to the considerations in section 8  of  the
       2004 Act.

    6. The First-tier Tribunal found the core events underlying  his  asylum
       claim to lack credibility because several  aspects  of  that  account
       were considered implausible: namely the  possibility  that  he  would
       have returned to his family home having previously  lived  in  hiding
       had he truly feared conscription, his  claim  to  have  escaped  from
       "under the noses" of armed soldiers guarding the Sawa  military  camp
       in Eritrea, and the ability of himself and his friend to enter  Sudan
       and then be released by  the  Sudanese  authorities,  notwithstanding
       their lack of immigration status.

    7. Given those credibility findings, the Judge found that he  would  not
       be subject to repressive treatment on a return to Eritrea.  At  worst
       he would have to pay the diaspora tax which represented  a  means  by
       which asylum seekers might return and avoid  persecution.  There  was
       some disquiet over its administration but generally returnees who had
       left the country illegally appeared to have gone unpunished.

    8. The First-tier Tribunal noted the effect of the CG  decisions,  which
       it summarised as holding that lawful exit from Eritrea was difficult,
       and that those above draft age and below  retirement  age,  and  some
       government officials and their families, were allowed  to  leave  the
       country;  otherwise  individuals  who  departed,  particularly  after
       August/September 2008, might well face hostility on return.

    9. Overall his account wholly lacked credibility and thus the  Appellant
       did not fall within the class of person at risk. He  was  not  to  be
       presumed to have left Eritrea illegally, given that  only  after  his
       departure, in  2008,  was  there  a  turning  point  when  exit  visa
       facilities were suspended. In conclusion, the negative credibility to
       which the Judge came were,  in  his  own  estimation,  sufficient  to
       remove any real chance that the Appellant had  departed  the  country
       unlawfully.

   10. Grounds of appeal argued that

        a) There was no express reference to the correct standard of  proof
           or to the Adimi principle regarding choice  of  forum  to  claim
           asylum;

        b) There was no express evidence  justifying  a  finding  that  the
           Appellant  had  left  Eritrea  lawfully,  and  the  findings  on
           plausibility were not a sufficiently compelling basis  for  such
           an inference - MST warned such findings should  not  be  lightly
           made, and in GM the Tribunal had found that the rejection of the
           individual account of illegal exit did not necessarily justify a
           finding  of  unlawful  departure  more   generally   where   the
           individual was of an age for military service, had  been  called
           up, and did not obviously fall  within  the  very  limited  risk
           categories who did not require exit permission  -  MST  had  not
           accepted that paying the diaspora tax counteracted  the  dangers
           otherwise present;

        c) Material  evidence  was  overlooked  that  might  have  arguably
           established that the abuse  that  took  place  in  the  military
           service regime could itself be persecution;

        d)  A  material  conclusion  of  the  Tribunal  in  MST  had   been
           overlooked, namely its finding that  a  person  who  had  exited
           Eritrea lawfully might nevertheless have to re-commence military
           service on a return, which whilst likely to be a rare  scenario,
           would where it arose lead to persecution for reasons of  imputed
           political opinion.

   11. Although the First-tier tribunal refused permission to appeal  on  28
       March 2018, the Upper Tribunal granted permission on 8 October  2018.
       The Judge granting permission considered that the findings  based  on
       not claiming asylum in a safe third country failed to take account of
       the well-documented difficulties faced  by  asylum  seekers  in  some
       European countries, and  both  those  conclusions,  and  the  express
       reasons for disbelieving the Appellant, all amounted to  plausibility
       factors, which might not suffice  to  counteract  the  likelihood  of
       illegal exit; furthermore the risk categories in MST appeared to have
       not been adequately assessed.

   12. Mr Dakora submitted that the findings did not justify  the  inference
       that the Appellant had left Eritrea illegally.  Ms  Everett  accepted
       that the findings were not sufficiently clear cut to dispose  of  the
       Appellant's fear of persecution. Whilst there were negative findings,
       she acknowledged that it was difficult to see how it  was  that  they
       could justify a finding of lawful rather than illegal departure.

Findings and reasons - Error of law hearing

   13. The Tribunal gave Country Guidelines in MO (illegal exit  -  risk  on
       return) Eritrea CG [2011] UKUT 190 (IAC) on 27 May 2011, though in so
       far as those findings remain relevant they are in fact summarised  in
       the subsequent Country Guidelines case, MST Eritrea  CG  [2016]  UKUT
       443 (IAC), the headnote of which it is  necessary  to  cite  at  some
       length:

           "2.   The Eritrean system of military/national  service  remains
           indefinite and since 2012 has expanded  to  include  a  people's
           militia programme, which although not part of national  service,
           constitutes military service.

           3.    The age limits for national service are likely  to  remain
           the same as stated in MO, namely 54 for men  and  47  for  women
           except that for children the limit is now likely to  be  5  save
           for adolescents in the  context  of  family  reunification.  For
           peoples' militia the age limits are likely to be  60  for  women
           and 70 for men.

           4.    The categories  of  lawful  exit  have  not  significantly
           changed since MO and are likely to be as follows:

                (i)    Men aged over 54

                (ii)   Women aged over 47

                (iii)   Children  aged  under  five  (with  some  scope  for
                adolescents in family reunification cases

                (iv)    People  exempt  from  national  service  on  medical
                grounds

                (v)    People travelling abroad for medical treatment

                (vi)    People  travelling  abroad  for  studies  or  for  a
                conference

                (vii)  Business and sportsmen

                (viii) Former freedom fighters (Tegadelti) and their  family
                members

                (ix)   Authority representatives in  leading  positions  and
                their family members

           5.    It continues to be the case (as in MO) that most Eritreans
           who have  left  Eritrea  since  1991  have  done  so  illegally.
           However,  since  there  are  viable,   albeit   still   limited,
           categories of lawful exit especially for those of draft age  for
           national service, the position remains as it was in  MO,  namely
           that a person whose asylum claim has  not  been  found  credible
           cannot be assumed to have  left  illegally.  The  position  also
           remains nonetheless (as in MO) that if such a person is found to
           have left Eritrea on or after August/September 2008, it  may  be
           that inferences can be drawn from their health history or  level
           of education or their skills profile as to whether legal exit on
           their part was feasible, provided that such  inferences  can  be
           drawn in the light of adverse credibility  findings.  For  these
           purposes a lengthy period performing national service is  likely
           to enhance a person's skill profile.

           6.    It remains the case (as in MO) that failed asylum  seekers
           as such are not at  risk  of  persecution  or  serious  harm  on
           return.

           7.    Notwithstanding that the round-ups (giffas)  of  suspected
           evaders/deserters, the "shoot to kill" policy and the  targeting
           of relatives of evaders and deserters are now significantly less
           likely occurrences,  it  remains  the  case,  subject  to  three
           limited exceptions set out in (iii) below, that if a  person  of
           or approaching draft age will be perceived on return as a  draft
           evader or  deserter,  he  or  she  will  face  a  real  risk  of
           persecution, serious harm or ill-treatment contrary to Article 3
           or 4 of the ECHR.

                (i)     A  person  who  is  likely  to  be  perceived  as  a
                deserter/evader will not be able to avoid exposure  to  such
                real risk merely by showing they have paid (or  are  willing
                to pay) the diaspora tax and/have signed (or are willing  to
                sign) the letter of regret.

                (ii)   Even if such a person may  avoid  punishment  in  the
                form of detention and ill-treatment it is likely that he  or
                she will be assigned to perform (further) national  service,
                which, is likely to amount to treatment contrary to Articles
                3 and 4 of the ECHR unless he or she  falls  within  one  or
                more of the three limited  exceptions  set  out  immediately
                below in (iii).

                (iii)  It remains the case (as in MO) that there are persons
                likely not to face a real risk  of  persecution  or  serious
                harm notwithstanding that they will be perceived  on  return
                as draft evaders and deserters, namely: (1) persons whom the
                regime's military  and  political  leadership  perceives  as
                having given them valuable service  (either  in  Eritrea  or
                abroad); (2) persons who are trusted family members  of,  or
                are themselves part of, the regime's military  or  political
                leadership.  A further possible exception, requiring a  more
                case specific analysis is (3) persons  (and  their  children
                born afterwards) who fled (what later became  the  territory
                of) Eritrea during the War of Independence.

           8.     Notwithstanding  that  many  Eritreans  are   effectively
           reservists having been discharged/released from national service
           and unlikely to face recall, it remains unlikely that they  will
           have received or be able to  receive  official  confirmation  of
           completion of national service. Thus it remains the case, as  in
           MO that "(iv) The general position adopted in MA, that a  person
           of or approaching draft and not medically unfit who is  accepted
           as having left Eritrea illegally  is  reasonably  likely  to  be
           regarded with  serious  hostility  on  return,  is  reconfirmed,
           subject to limited exceptions..."

           9.    A person liable to perform service in the people's militia
           and who is assessed to  have  left  Eritrea  illegally,  is  not
           likely on return to face a real risk of persecution  or  serious
           harm.

           10.   Accordingly, a person whose  asylum  claim  has  not  been
           found credible, but who is able to satisfy a decision-maker  (i)
           that he or she left illegally, and (ii) that he or she is of  or
           approaching draft age, is likely to be perceived on return as  a
           draft evader or deserter from national service and as  a  result
           face a real risk of persecution or serious harm.

           11.   While likely to be a rare case,  it  is  possible  that  a
           person who has exited  lawfully  may  on  forcible  return  face
           having to resume or commence national service. In  such  a  case
           there is a real risk of persecution or serious harm by virtue of
           such service constituting forced labour contrary to Article 4(2)
           and Article 3 of the ECHR.

           12.   Where it is specified above that there is a real  risk  of
           persecution in the context of performance  of  military/national
           service, it is highly likely that it will be persecution  for  a
           Convention reason based on imputed political opinion."

   14. There are certain features of the Appellant's profile that cannot  be
       gainsaid. He is clearly of draft age and there is no evidence of  any
       unfitness for military duties. The Tribunal appeared to  accept  that
       he had been conscripted (anything else would be surprising given  the
       universality of the draft). It is very difficult to  see  any  basis,
       from the  reasoning  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  from  which  the
       Eritrean security forces could reasonably be predicted to infer  that
       he is a person who had travelled abroad for  medical  treatment,  for
       studies, business or  sporting  purposes,  or  as  a  former  freedom
       fighter; there is no overt evidence  that  he  is  from  a  prominent
       family.

   15. In these circumstances,  only  the  very  clearest  and  unanswerable
       adverse credibility findings could prevent the inference that he  had
       left Eritrea illegally. I do not think that the  findings  here  fell
       into that category. Findings on the plausibility  of  aspects  of  an
       asylum claim must always be made with some care, and findings made by
       reference to the  statutory  criteria  relevant  to  credibility  via
       section 8  of  the  2004  Act  must  take  account  of  all  relevant
       circumstances. The correlation between a person's  failure  to  claim
       asylum in Italy or France and an inference  that  they  left  Eritrea
       unlawfully is a rather distant one.

   16. Furthermore, the Tribunal below appeared  to  misunderstand  critical
       aspects of the Country Guidelines.

        a) Given the prevalence  of  enforced  military  service,  its  own
           finding that the  Appellant  had  not  absconded  from  military
           service would seem to imply that he had not so far performed any
           such service notwithstanding that  he  was  plainly  of  an  age
           liable for it. The only reason for him so avoiding service would
           appear to have been a need to live in hiding in order  to  avoid
           it, unless he had been permitted to undergo some other  form  of
           national service. However no consideration  was  given  to  this
           issue below.

        b) Payment of the diaspora tax is not in fact seen by  MST  Eritrea
           as removing all risk of serious harm on return (headnote 7(i)).

        c) As shown for example by MO  �104,  "since  2006  -  particularly
           since August/September 2008  -  it  has  become  gradually  more
           difficult for Eritreans to  obtain  lawful  exit  from  Eritrea"
           (emphasis  added).  So   it   cannot   simply   be   said   that
           August/September 2018 represented a watershed moment.

   17. In the light of the various considerations identified above, this  is
       a case where it is appropriate  to  endorse  Ms  Everett's  realistic
       concession that the adverse findings were not  sufficiently  sweeping
       to remove a real possibility of unlawful departure.

   18. In those circumstances, the  appeal  must  be  re-determined.  It  is
       unfortunate that it requires a third hearing on its merits.  However,
       the assessment of the Appellant's claim  overall  must  be  conducted
       fairly and lawfully in order for the appropriate platform of facts to
       be found from which inferences as to unlawful departure can be drawn.



   19. The appeal is accordingly remitted for  re-hearing  afresh,  with  no
       findings preserved.

Decision:

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained a material  error  of
    law and is set aside.

    The appeal is remitted for hearing afresh.


Signed:                                            Date: 29 November 2018

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Symes

