

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
PA/11756/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Decided on the papers                  |      Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|                                       |      On 30 September 2019          |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH

                                   Between

                                     S A
                         [ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE]

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Anonymity

Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
An anonymity order was not made by  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  However,  as
this  appeal  raises  protection  issues,  it  is  appropriate  to  make  an
anonymity order.  Unless and until a tribunal or  court  directs  otherwise,
the Appellant is granted anonymity. No report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  his  family.  This
direction applies, amongst others, to both parties. Failure to  comply  with
this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


    1. The Appellant appeals against  a  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal
       Judge Cox promulgated on 24 June 2019 dismissing  her  appeal  ("the
       Decision").  By a decision dated 25 June 2019,  First-tier  Tribunal
       Judge Robertson granted permission to appeal on the basis that there
       was an arguable error of law made by Judge Cox when determining  the
       credibility of the Appellant's claim and when dealing with  some  of
       the evidence.   The error of law hearing is  listed  on  16  October
       2019 in Manchester.


    2. The Respondent has filed a rule 24 notice which reads as follows (so
       far as relevant):


            "...2.     The  respondent  does  not  oppose  the  appellant's
           application in line with the grant of permission and invites the
           Tribunal to determine the appeal with a fresh oral (continuance)
           at the First Tier Tribunal."

    3. In light of the Respondent's concession, I find  that  the  Decision
       contains an error of law.  I therefore set aside  the  Decision.   I
       remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for a re-hearing.   When
       deciding whether to agree to the proposal to  remit,  I  have  given
       careful consideration to the Joint Practice Statement of the  First-
       tier Tribunal and Upper Tribunal concerning the disposal of  appeals
       in this Tribunal.  That reads as follows:


           "[7.2]      The Upper Tribunal is likely on each  such  occasion
           to proceed to re-make the decision,  instead  of  remitting  the
           case to the First-tier Tribunal, unless the  Upper  Tribunal  is
           satisfied that:-
                  a) the effect of the error has been to  deprive  a  party
                     before the First-tier Tribunal of a  fair  hearing  or
                     other opportunity for that party's case to be  put  to
                     and considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or
                  b) the nature or extent  of  any  judicial  fact  finding
                     which is necessary in order for the  decision  in  the
                     appeal to be re-made is such that,  having  regard  to
                     the overriding objective in rule 2, it is  appropriate
                     to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal."

            Having regard to the nature  of  the  grounds  of  appeal  which
      challenge the assessment of the credibility of the Appellant's case, I
      am satisfied that it is appropriate to remit the appeal to the  First-
      tier Tribunal for redetermination.


      DECISION

    I am satisfied that the  Decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Cox
    contains a material error of law.  I therefore set aside  his  decision
    and remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for re-hearing before a
    Judge other than Judge Cox.
                            Signed           [pic] Dated:  27 September 2019
      Upper Tribunal Judge Smith
