
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11418/2018 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester CJC via Skype    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 23 November 2020                  |On 27 November 2020                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

                                     NM
                          ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:      Mr Kumar, Consultant Solicitor instructed by
Optimus Law
For the respondent:     Ms Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DECISION AND REASONS (V)

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI2008/269) an Anonymity Order is made. Unless the Upper Tribunal or  Court
orders otherwise, no report of any proceedings or any  form  of  publication
thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the original Appellants.  This
prohibition applies to, amongst others, all parties.


      1. I have anonymised the appellant's name because this decision refers
         to her asylum claim.

      2. The appellant has appealed against a  decision  of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal ('FTT') Judge Young-Harry sent on 18 March 2020 dismissing
         her appeal on international protection and human rights grounds.

      3. In her decision letter  dated  19  September  2018  the  respondent
         accepted the appellant's claims that she was forced to marry a  man
         named Barzan in  an  Islamic  ceremony  because  he  threatened  to
         disclose  compromising  'doctored'  photographs   of   her   in   a
         compromising position if she failed to do so and also accepted  the
         appellant's claim that she has been threatened by Barzan,  who  she
         now regards to be her ex-husband.  These are important  matters  of
         significant relevance to the appellant's claim that she remains  at
         risk in Iran from her own family members, for reasons  relating  to
         this  marriage.   The  FTT  did  not  accept  this  aspect  of  the
         appellant's claim.

      4. When granting permission to appeal in a decision dated 8 July 2020,
         Upper Tribunal ('UT') Judge Sheridan considered  it  arguable  that
         the FTT's adverse factual finding  on  this  aspect  of  the  claim
         overlooked important evidence.  In  particular,  in  rejecting  the
         appellant's account that she felt unable to tell her family members
         about Barzan's threatening behaviour, the FTT  arguably  failed  to
         consider the appellant's explanation at the asylum  interview  that
         Barzan had explicit photographs she did not want her family to know
         about and the country background evidence to the  effect  that  the
         appellant had a strong incentive to conceal this  from  her  family
         members.

      5. Ms Everett conceded that the FTT decision contains an error of  law
         for  the  reasons  identified  by  Judge  Sheridan  when   granting
         permission to appeal, such that it must be set aside and remade  by
         another FTT other than Judge Young-Harry.  Ms Everett  was  correct
         to  make  this  concession.   The   country   background   evidence
         demonstrates a prima facie reasonable  degree  of  likelihood  that
         male family members in the Kurdish areas of Iraq may reject such an
         explanation and view the photographs as bringing dishonour upon the
         family, such that they would not support the appellant.  Indeed,  I
         note the respondent accepted the appellant's claim to be  generally
         externally consistent with the background information on Iraq - see
         [52] of the respondent's decision letter.  In that context, the FTT
         was obliged to carefully scrutinise the explanation  given  by  the
         appellant.  In concluding at [14] that (my emphasis) "the appellant
         has failed to explain why she did not simply inform  her  brothers,
         cousins and uncle that this man was threatening her and forcing her
         into marriage" the FTT has failed to engage with  or  give  reasons
         for  rejecting  the  explanation  the  appellant  has  consistently
         provided since her asylum interview.

      6. This error of law renders the FTT's  credibility  findings  on  the
         issues that are disputed by  the  respondent  unsafe.  In  all  the
         circumstances I consider it appropriate  to  make  my  decision  by
         consent and pursuant to rule 39 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
         Tribunal) Rules 2008.

      7. Both parties consented to the appeal being allowed  and  the  FTT's
         decision being set aside.  They also agreed that the appeal  should
         be remitted to be remade by the FTT de novo.  I have had regard  to
         para 7.2 of the relevant Senior President's Practice Statement  and
         the nature and extent of the factual findings required in  remaking
         the decision, and I have decided that this is an  appropriate  case
         to remit to the FTT to make fresh findings of fact on  the  matters
         that are in dispute.  None  of  the  FTT's  findings  of  fact  are
         preserved.



Decision

      8. The decision of the FTT involved the making of a material error  of
         law.  Its decision cannot stand and is set aside.

      9. The appeal shall be remade by the FTT (a  judge  other  than  Judge
         Young-Harry) de novo, albeit in the light of the  matters  accepted
         by the respondent in the decision letter.


Signed:  Ms M. Plimmer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Dated: 23 November 2020

