






Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/11691/2017


                             THE IMMIGRATION ACT


|Heard at Civil Justice Centre Manchester |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 29th April 2019                       |On 02nd May 2019                  |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCCLURE


                                   Between

                                Ms Iulia [I]
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Rutherford, Counsel instructed by Braitch
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Tan,
 Senior Home Officer Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Bristow promulgated on the 1st November 2018 whereby the
    judge dismissed the appellant's appeal  against  the  decision  of  the
    respondent  to  refuse  the  appellant's  claims   based   on   Asylum,
    Humanitarian Protection and Articles 2 and 3 of the ECHR.

 2. I have considered whether or not it is appropriate to make an anonymity
    direction. Having considered all the circumstances I do not consider it
    necessary to do so.

 3. Leave to appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  was  granted  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Blundell on 29th November 2018. Thus the  case  appeared
    before me to determine whether or not there was a material error of law
    in the decision.

 4. The material part of the grant of leave provides:-

         "It is arguable that the judge overlooked the  photograph  on  page
         131 of the appellant's consolidated bundle (20 September 2018) when
         he  reached  the  conclusions  at  [31]-[33]  that  there  was   no
         independent evidence to show  that  the  man  who  appears  in  the
         appellant's wedding photographs (and is said to be her  uncle)  was
         indeed a prominent member of the Lugansk People's Republic. Whether
         that error can be said to be material in light of  the  quality  of
         the photograph on that page, is a matter which must be resolved  by
         the Upper Tribunal."

 5. Part of the appellant's case is that she was previously active  in  the
    Communist Party; that her uncle is Mr [AT] ([Tx]); that her  uncle  was
    active in the Board of Recovery Management Centre of  Lugansk  People's
    Republic; because of her activities for the Communist party and because
    of her uncle, the appellant claims that she is at risk  from  the  Azoz
    Battalion and the Aidar Battalion in the Ukraine.

 6. To substantiate a connection between  the  appellant  and  Mr  [T]  the
    appellant had produced a number of  photographs,  the  photographs  had
    commentaries  and  translations  connected  to  them.  In  effect   the
    appellant was claiming to be related to Mr [T]; Mr [T] was  purportedly
    pictured in the appellant's wedding  photos;  and  by  comparing  those
    photos with the public photographs of Mr [T], there was support for the
    appellant's claim in evidence that she and Mr [T] were related.

 7. At page 131 of the appellant's bundle there was a photograph of Mr [T].
    There is a commentary connected to that photograph and the  translation
    of the commentary appears at page 125 of the appellant's bundle,  which
    does refer to Mr [T].

 8. It was necessary to compare the wedding photographs with the photograph
    at page 131. The judge at paragraph 31 had stated that he did not  have
    any photographs naming Mr [T] independently to compare with the wedding
    photos. Clearly given the commentary Mr [T] was identified in page 131.



 9. It was conceded by the respondent's representative that  the  judge  on
    the face of the decision had failed to consider the photograph at  page
    131 and that that failure to consider evidence constituted an error  of
    law. It was conceded that that would impact upon the credibility of the
    appellant's whole account.

10. It was accepted  by  both  representatives  that  the  case  should  be
    remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal for hearing afresh.

11. In the circumstances I rule that there is a material error  of  law  in
    the decision and that the decision is set aside. The case will have  to
    be remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal for hearing afresh  on  all
    issues. None of the findings of fact are preserved

    Notice of Decision

12. I allow the appeal to the extent that it is remitted back to the first-
    tier Tribunal for hearing afresh.






Signed

Deputy           Upper           Tribunal           Judge            McClure
Date 29th April 2019


