

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                             Appeal Number:
PA/11310/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                         |Sent to parties on:              |
|On 7 September 2017                       |On 11 October 2017               |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY

                                   Between

                               ALI SALAH AHMED
                        (NO Anonymity DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Hussain (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mrs R Petterson (Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. This is  the  claimant's  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  brought  with
   permission, from a decision of the First-tier Tribunal (hereinafter  "the
   tribunal") dated 28 February 2017,  whereupon  it  dismissed  his  appeal
   against a decision of the Secretary of State  of  29  September  2016  to
   refuse to grant him international protection.

2. The claimant is a national of Iraq of Kurdish  ethnicity.  The  Secretary
   of State accepted that and also accepted that he is from Jalawla which is
   located in the Diyala Governorate and that, more recently, he had spent a
   more limited amount of time in Kirkuk. The claimant  entered  the  United
   Kingdom ("UK") on 7 April 2016.  It appears that he claimed  asylum  upon
   arrival. In pursuing his claim he said that his  father  had  disappeared
   and it was thought that he had been taken by the  organisation  sometimes
   called  "ISIS".  He  said  that  his  mother,  brother  and  sister   had
   subsequently made contact with members of ISIS and had arranged  to  meet
   them and pay a ransom to secure his release.  However,  he  asserts  that
   after they went to meet the ISIS members they too went missing and he has
   not subsequently heard from them. He asserted that if he was returned  to
   Iraq members of ISIS would kill him. He has claimed to have no  remaining
   family in Iraq. He has also argued that conditions in  Jalawla  are  such
   that it would be unsafe for anyone to reside there and that he could  not
   internally relocate to Baghdad  or  to  the  Independent  Kurdish  Region
   ("IKR").

3. The Secretary of State, having given the claimant  the  "benefit  of  the
   doubt", accepted that his "family have  been  taken  by  ISIS"  and  also
   accepted that he is from what has been termed "a contested  area"  within
   Iraq. That would seem to be a reference to Jalawla though Kirkuk has also
   historically been regarded as such an area. In saying that the  Secretary
   of State was, at the time the decision was taken, accepting that  if  the
   claimant was to return to either of those places he would be at  risk  on
   the basis of Article 15(c) of the Qualification Directive.  However,  the
   Secretary of State took the view that  the  claimant  would  be  able  to
   internally relocate to the IKR or to Baghdad. That is why the  claim  for
   international protection was refused.

4. The tribunal heard oral evidence from the claimant.  He  was  represented
   at the hearing as was the Secretary of State. Indeed, it was  Mr  Hussain
   (who appears before me) who represented the claimant before the tribunal.

5. It is very evident from a reading of the written reasons of  28  February
   2017 that the tribunal did not find the claimant to be credible.  Indeed,
   the  tribunal's  disbelief  extended  to  the  contentions  he  had  made
   regarding his mother, brother  and  sister  being  missing  and  presumed
   harmed. The tribunal clearly thought he had family in Iraq or, at  least,
   had failed to show that he did not. I have in mind, in  particular,  what
   is said in paragraphs 18 and 19 of the written  reasons  of  28  February
   2017.  But no challenge is made to the findings in  that  regard  nor  is
   there any challenge on  the  ground  of  fairness  with  respect  to  the
   tribunal disbelieving what was believed by the Secretary  of  State  when
   the original decision was made. The tribunal, though, does not seem to me
   to have made any clear finding as to whether the  claimant's  father  was
   taken by ISIS as claimed nor as  to  where  the  claimant's  Iraqi  based
   family members now reside. In particular, there  is  no  finding  to  the
   effect that they reside in Baghdad or in the IKR.

6. The tribunal, notwithstanding what it thought about any  risk  linked  to
   ISIS and the claimant's father, had to deal with the  argument  that  the
   Article 15(c) threshold was reached in Jalawla and Kirkuk on the basis of
   indiscriminate violence.  Considerations as to that have  been  addressed
   by the Upper Tribunal  in  the  very  thorough  and  well  known  Country
   Guidance decision of AA (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG [2015]  UKUT  00544.  The
   Upper Tribunal had indicated, in that decision, that there was a state of
   internal armed conflict in parts of Iraq including Kirkuk and the  Diyala
   Governorate. So, on the face of it, it might have been thought  that  the
   claimant would have been at Article 15(c) risk in either of those  areas.
   Pausing there though, it seems to  me  that  Jalawla  within  the  Diyala
   Governorate should properly be regarded as his home area  as  opposed  to
   Kirkuk where, on his own account, he had only resided  for  a  relatively
   short period.

7. Indeed when the Secretary of State made  her  decision  it  was  accepted
   that the claimant could not safely return to either of those  places  and
   that is why that decision focused upon the question of  internal  flight.
   But before the tribunal it was argued that the situation had changed.  As
   the tribunal recorded  at  paragraph  12  of  its  written  reasons,  the
   Secretary of State's representative had  contended  before  it  that  the
   situation had eased in both Diyala and Kirkuk  to  the  extent  that  the
   Article 15 (c) threshold was no longer met in either place. Reliance  was
   placed, in that context, upon a "Country Information and Guidance"  (CIG)
   document which had been issued in August on 2016.  I note in passing that
   a "Country Policy and Information Note" issued in September of 2017 gives
   a similar indication. The tribunal, in light of the argument  put  to  it
   had to decide whether or not it should or should not follow  the  Country
   Guidance decision of AA. This is what it said and all it said about  that
   particular question;

             "I  note  that  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  AA  found  that   the
           Governorates of  Diyala  and  of  Kirkuk  were  contested  areas
           reaching the Article 15(c) threshold. However I find that  there
           is now credible evidence that the Country situation has  changed
           in line with the above referred to Country Information  Guidance
           document  of  August  2016,  this  making   clear   that   these
           Governorates no longer meet the Article 15(c) threshold."

8. So, the tribunal decided that the claimant was able to safely  return  to
   his home area of Jalawla (see paragraph 22 of the  written  reasons).  It
   also found that he had, as it put it  "failed  to  show  that  he  cannot
   return to Kirkuk". But nevertheless, it went on to consider the  question
   of internal flight. As to that, it said this;

            "23. I furthermore find that the appellant failed to  show  that
           he cannot return to Kirkuk. Indeed,  according  to  his  witness
           statement he was unsafe anywhere in Iraq, I remind  myself  that
           case law  shows  that  as  a  general  matter  it  will  not  be
           unreasonable or unduly harsh for a person from a contested  area
           of Iraq to relocate to  Baghdad  City  or,  subject  to  certain
           exceptions, to the Baghdad Belts, or to the IKR. I find that the
           appellant failed to credibly address the key issues relating  to
           his return to Iraq, making unsupported assertions, such as shown
           at his witness statement paragraph 6 that 'I would also like  to
           state that the IKR is under threat by Isis as it is a safe area.
           Isis aim will always be to take over parts of  IKR.  I  am  very
           afraid of them, and I really do not wish to return back'. I find
           as follows. Firstly, there is not a shred of  credible  evidence
           that Isis poses any, or any real threat to  the  IKR.  Secondly,
           the appellant stated that he did 'not wish to  return  back'  to
           the IKR,  which  clearly  runs  contrary  to  both  his  witness
           statement  and  to  any  of  his  previous  documented   claims.
           Irrespective however, I note from AA,  ibid,  that  the  IKR  is
           virtually violence free, there being no Article 15(c) risk to an
           ordinary civilian in the IKR. I find that  it  is  open  to  the
           appellant  to  go  to  the  IKR  as,  apart  from   any    other
           considerations, he has no political profile and would  go  there
           as an ordinary civilian.

            24. I find that the appellant failed  to  show  that  he  cannot
           travel to the IKR by air, for example to Erbil, if  returned  to
           Baghdad. I note that AA makes clear that a Kurd not  originating
           from the IKR can nonetheless obtain entry  for  ten  days  as  a
           visitor and then renew the entry permission for  a  further  ten
           days. I find that if the appellant found employment, as  he  has
           previously done in Iraq when selling mobile  phone  accessories,
           he could remain for longer, although he would need  to  register
           with the authorities and provide details of his employer. I find
           that he failed to show that this is not open to him or  that  it
           is not possible. I additionally  note  that  he  stated  at  his
           initial contact interview at 5.1 that he  once  worked  for  the
           Peshmerga, albeit he was inconsistent as to the length  of  time
           he did  so  as  between  his  initial  contact  and  his  asylum
           interviews. With regard to his  witness  statement  paragraph  3
           claim that he required a sponsor in order to enter and remain in
           the IKR, I find that this is unsupported by  evidence  and  runs
           contrary to head note 19 of AA. Importantly, AA also makes clear
           that there is no evidence that the IKR  authorities  proactively
           remove Kurds whose permits have come to an end. I find that  the
           appellant failed to credibly explain why he could not go to  the
           IKR. I furthermore find that he failed to show that  his  return
           to Iraq and his relocation to the IKR is not both  feasible  and
           reasonable and not unduly harsh.

            25. With regard to whether it would be  unreasonable  or  unduly
           harsh for the appellant to relocate outside the IKR and  outside
           the contested areas of Iraq, for example in Baghdad City  or  in
           the Baghdad Belts subject to the exceptions set  out  in  AA,  I
           note there is no evidence that he is anything other than  a  fit
           and  able-bodied  young  man  in  his  early  twenties  with  no
           significant  health  issues.   He   has   clearly   demonstrated
           resourcefulness in making his way to the United Kingdom and has,
           as above mentioned, previously worked  in  Iraq  selling  mobile
           phone accessories, and has worked for the Peshmerga. I find that
           he failed to show that he cannot obtain a  CSID  and  failed  to
           show that he cannot effectively compete for employment  in  Iraq
           and financially support himself, particularly  in  circumstances
           where the United  Kingdom  government  would  provide  him  with
           financial  assistance  if  he  decides  to  take  advantage   of
           voluntary return. AA shows that as a general matter it will  not
           be unreasonable or unduly harsh for a person  from  a  contested
           area to relocate to  Baghdad  City  or  to  the  Baghdad  Belts,
           subject to named exceptions. I  find  that  the  appellant  also
           failed to show that he faces a general or real risk  of  article
           15(c) serious harm as a Kurd outside the IKR, or that  he  would
           be at any greater risk of ill-treatment upon return to the  non-
           contested areas of Iraq than any other members  of  the  general
           Kurdish population."


 9. So, it was finding that there was an internal flight alternative either
    to Baghdad or to the IKR. I  would  add  that,  although  the  tribunal
    seemed quite close to coming to a finding that the claimant was in fact
    from the IKR, (see paragraph 23 above) I do not  regard  it  as  having
    made such a finding. I think it was intending to merely  hint  at  that
    possibility.

10. The claimant sought permission to appeal. He  advanced  three  separate
    written grounds of appeal and I have to say that I found ground 2 to be
    somewhat confusing although Mr Hussain clarified matters for me at  the
    hearing. So, in summary, the propositions contained within the  grounds
    were to the effect that the  tribunal  had  erred  through  failing  to
    follow Country Guidance as contained in AA with respect  to  "contested
    areas"; in failing  to  adequately  consider  the  availability  of  an
    internal flight alternative in Baghdad; and in  failing  to  adequately
    consider the availability of an internal flight alternative to the IKR.
    Mr Hussain, when I sought clarification from him at  the  hearing,  did
    not pursue a specific argument  that  the  tribunal  had  erred  simply
    through concluding the claimant would  be  able  to  obtain  sufficient
    documentation to render his return feasible.

11. At the hearing before me, which was for the purpose of deciding whether
    the tribunal had or had  not  erred  in  law,  Mr  Hussain,  with  that
    clarification,  essentially  relied  upon  the  written  grounds.   Mrs
    Petterson argued that even if the tribunal had  been  wrong  to  depart
    from Country Guidance it had made  clear  findings  regarding  internal
    flight and those were sustainable.

12. I have concluded that the tribunal did err in law but that it  did  not
    do so in a way which was material.

13. There was really no dispute between the representatives before me as to
    when Country Guidance cases are to be followed or  when  what  is  said
    therein may be departed from.  In  this  case  what  the  tribunal  had
    decided was that the Country Guidance in  AA  had  become  outdated  by
    reason of developments in Iraq. As is  stated  in  the  Upper  Tribunal
    Immigration and Asylum Chamber Guidance Note 2011 no. 2, the First-tier
    Tribunal should normally follow  a  Country  Guidance  decision  unless
    there is credible fresh evidence relevant to the issue  and  which  has
    not been considered in the Country Guidance case. It  is  fair  to  say
    that other pertinent  case  law  effectively  requires  the  First-tier
    Tribunal,  when  being  invited  to  depart  from  established  Country
    Guidance on the basis of fresh evidence or material changes in  country
    conditions, to consider whether  there  are  very  strong  grounds  for
    departure which are supported by cogent  evidence  of  well-established
    and durable change. I did not understand Mrs Petterson  to  be  arguing
    anything different before me.

14. I would accept that the CIG document issued in August 2016  did  amount
    to evidence capable of pointing to a change of circumstance in a number
    of the so-called contested areas in Iraq including Diyala  and  Kirkuk.
    In my judgment, in light of what was stated therein, it may  have  been
    open to the tribunal to depart from the  established  Country  Guidance
    contained in AA so long as it gave proper and considered reasons for so
    doing. But I have decided that the tribunal  did  not  give  sufficient
    reasons in that regard. It has to be borne in mind  that  AA  had  been
    decided relatively recently and after much detailed evidence  had  been
    given to it regarding conditions then prevailing in Iraq. Against  that
    background, if the tribunal was departing from what was  said  therein,
    it was incumbent upon it to give  reasons  which  demonstrated  it  had
    properly  considered  matters  such  as  the  nature,  durability   and
    sustainability of any change. However, the explanation it did give was,
    I have concluded, too fleeting and insubstantial. So, it did err due to
    inadequacy of reasoning as to that specific issue.

15. The tribunal though, as already noted,  went  on  to  make  alternative
    findings regarding the availability of internal flight. So, the error I
    have identified  above  could  only  be  material  if  the  alternative
    findings were also erroneous in law.  Mr  Hussain  clearly  appreciated
    that which is why a lot of his focus was upon  the  way  in  which  the
    tribunal had dealt with internal flight. The  tribunal  had  identified
    two possible areas of relocation and it is necessary for me to consider
    what it had to say about both.

16. First of all, it decided that the claimant had, available  to  him,  an
    alternative of internal flight to  Baghdad  City.  Internal  flight  to
    Baghdad was considered in AA. It is right  to  say  that  some  of  the
    Country Guidance given therein was adjusted to a limited  extent  by  a
    judgment of the Court of Appeal in AA (Iraq) [2017] EWCA  Civ  944  but
    what was said about internal flight and Baghdad was untouched by that.

17. In the decision of the Upper Tribunal in AA it  was  said  that,  as  a
    general rule, it would not be unreasonable or unduly harsh for a person
    from a contested area to relocate to Baghdad City. It was said that the
    number of persons who would not be able to  do  so  was  likely  to  be
    small. The Upper Tribunal referred to a number of factors  which  ought
    to be taken  into  account  when  considering  such  relocation.  Those
    matters were whether the particular claimant possessed or could  obtain
    a Civil Status ID ("CSID") card; whether there were family  members  or
    friends available to accommodate and provide  assistance;  whether  any
    other form of support could be accessed; whether  a  sponsor  could  be
    found enabling the claimant to rent accommodation; whether the claimant
    could speak Arabic; whether the claimant is a lone  woman  and  whether
    the claimant is from a minority community.

18. The tribunal's primary reasoning  as  to  internal  flight  to  Baghdad
    appears at paragraph 25 of the written reasons. It is fair  to  say  it
    did not consider and refer to all of the factors which it was  said  in
    AA, ought to be taken into account. Its reasoning, essentially,  rested
    upon its view that the claimant had failed  to  show  an  inability  to
    obtain a CSID, was young and able-bodied, was healthy and had  previous
    work experience in Iraq. Was that adequate?

19. The tribunal did not make a finding or address the issue as to  whether
    or not the claimant was capable of speaking Arabic. I note that in  his
    substantive asylum interview he had claimed not to be able  to  do  so.
    But against the background of an adverse credibility finding which  has
    not of itself been subject to challenge, in my judgment it was open  to
    the tribunal to conclude that  the  claimant  had  failed  to  show  an
    inability to obtain a  CSID.  That,  coupled  with  his  previous  work
    experience, was a matter of significance. The assessment in this regard
    could have been more complete but what was said was adequate.  I  find,
    therefore, that the tribunal did not err in law in concluding that  the
    claimant, in his particular circumstances, would be able to relocate to
    Baghdad.

20. There remains the further conclusion that he could relocate to the IKR.
    The tribunal's key reasoning as to that is to be found at paragraph 24.
    Mr Hussain, before me, argued that the tribunal had failed  to  explain
    how, given that he would be returned to Baghdad, the claimant could get
    to the IKR and that it had failed to conclude, as it should have  done,
    that, even if admitted to the IKR he would have to  live  there  "in  a
    precarious state".

21. Internal flight to the IKR was also addressed by the Upper Tribunal  in
    AA. In short, it was said that it might  be  possible  for  persons  of
    Kurdish ethnicity not from the IKR to relocate there. It was said  that
    such a person could obtain entry for ten days as  a  visitor  and  then
    renew the entry permission for a further ten days. It was said that  if
    such a person is able to find employment he will be able to remain  for
    longer albeit that he will have to register with  the  authorities  and
    provide details of the employment he has found. It was said that  there
    was no evidence to show that the authorities  in  the  IKR  would  pro-
    actively seek to remove Kurds from the IKR whose permits  had  expired.
    It was said that relevant matters, when assessing  the  feasibility  of
    internal flight to the IKR, would be the practicality  of  travel  from
    Baghdad (the point of return); the likelihood of securing employment in
    the IKR; and the availability of assistance from family and friends  in
    the IKR.

22. The tribunal's opening sentence of paragraph 24 of the written  reasons
    is more of an assertion that the claimant could travel to  the  IKR  by
    air rather than an explanation. Nevertheless, it is given  against  the
    background of an adverse credibility finding and a lack  of  any  clear
    explanation from the claimant as to why he could not do so. In his very
    brief witness statement of 8 February 2017, for instance,  he  says  he
    cannot go there, essentially, due to a lack of ID documentation (but of
    course the tribunal decided he could obtain a CSID) and because he does
    not know anyone there. The tribunal clearly did take the view  that  he
    was likely to be able to obtain employment and it is very difficult  to
    read what is said at paragraph 24 in any other way.  It  was  right  to
    conclude, in light of AA, that the absence of a "sponsor"  in  the  IKR
    was not a significant factor. It did not make any finding to the effect
    that he has friends or family in the area but what it did  say,  in  my
    judgment,  amounts  to  a  conclusion   that,   notwithstanding   that,
    relocation was feasible on the basis of his having  good  prospects  of
    finding work.

23. I would conclude, therefore, that the  tribunal  did  not  err  in  its
    conclusion that the claimant would be able  to  take  advantage  of  an
    internal flight alternative in the IKR.

24. For the above reasons, then, I conclude that the tribunal did not  make
    a material error of law and that its decision, therefore, shall stand.

DECISION

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not  involve  the  making  of  a
material error of law. Accordingly, that decision shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made. None was made  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal
and none was sought before me.

Signed

M R Hemingway
Judge of the Upper Tribunal             Date
        11 October 2017


FEE AWARD

I make no fee award.


Signed

M R Hemingway
Judge       of       the       Upper        Tribunal                    Date
        11 October 2017

