
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11450/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 16th November 2018                         |On 27th November 2018         |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                                     p p
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Bazini of Counsel instructed by Jein Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Miss Z Kiss, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant appeals against the decision of Judge Isaacs (the  Judge)
    of the First-tier Tribunal (the FTT), promulgated on 31st August  2018.



 2. The Appellant is a male citizen of Iran born in April 1996.  He claimed
    asylum on the basis of his conversion to Christianity.  The application
    was refused on 31st October 2017.  The appeal was heard on 16th  August
    2018.  The judge did not find the Appellant to be a  credible  witness.
    It was not accepted that the Appellant had converted to Christianity in
    Iran, and it was not accepted that he attended church in Iran,  or  had
    any consequent problems with the authorities in Iran.

 3. The judge found that the Appellant's Christian  activities  in  the  UK
    were a "cynical move to bolster his  asylum  claim."   The  appeal  was
    dismissed on all grounds.

 4. The Appellant applied for permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal.
    The grounds were prepared by Mr Bazini who had not appeared before  the
    FTT.  They are comprehensive, running to eight pages and comprising  27
    paragraphs and will be very briefly summarised below.

 5. It was submitted that the judge had erred in law in the following ways.
     It was submitted that the judge  had  erred  in  applying  conflicting
    standards of proof, and on numerous  occasions  reversed  the  standard
    required.  One example given is paragraph 46 where the judge states  "I
    think it is reasonably likely  that  he  amended  his  story  half  way
    through his asylum interview ...".  It was submitted that this was like
    saying that there is a real risk or possibility that he did  this,  and
    therefore I will not accept his evidence.  It was  contended  that  the
    judge was satisfied to a low standard that the Appellant had  not  told
    the truth rather than whether there was a real possibility that he had.
     Further examples are given at paragraphs 55, 65, 70 and 71.

 6. Reliance was placed upon Demirkaya v SSHD [1999] Imm AR  498  in  which
    Stewart Smith LJ was considering a Tribunal decision which stated;

         "We  believe,  however,  on  the  appropriate  test,  that  it   is
         reasonably likely that he will be released after one  or  two  days
         and allowed to return either to Istanbul or to his home village."

 7. Stewart Smith LJ stated "on  the  face  of  it  that  is  an  incorrect
    statement of the burden of proof.   The  proper  question  is  whether,
    applying the lower standard of proof appropriate in asylum cases, there
    is a real risk that he will not be released."

 8. Mr Bazini submitted that this was  a  serious  error,  made  repeatedly
    throughout the FTT decision, which rendered the decision unsafe.

 9. It was  contended  that  applying  the  wrong  standard  of  proof  was
    sufficient without more to amount to a material error  of  law  and  on
    that basis alone, the decisions should be set aside.  In  addition,  it
    was submitted that the judge had erred in considering evidence relating
    to the Appellant's Christian activities in the UK.   It  was  submitted
    that the judge erred at paragraph 64 in finding the Reverend's evidence
    to  be  of  limited  value.   It  was  submitted  that  the  judge  had
    misunderstood the evidence and the Reverend had  not  stated  that  the
    twelve week study period was conducted with the Appellant's uncle as an
    interpreter.

10. It was also submitted that the judge  had  erred  at  paragraph  52  by
    raising a number of points about  the  Appellant's  lack  of  Christian
    knowledge which had not been raised by the Respondent  in  the  refusal
    decision.  It was submitted that the judge  had  erred  by  relying  on
    issues that had not previously been raised and were  not  supported  by
    background material, and therefore should have put any concerns to  the
    Appellant or the Reverend who was also present at the hearing.

11. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Ford in the following terms;

         "1.  The Appellant seeks permission to appeal in time, against  the
             decision of First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Isaacs)  dated  31st
             August  2018  whereby  it  dismissed  the  Appellant's  appeal
             against the  Secretary  of  State's  decision  to  refuse  his
             protection claim based on Christian conversion.

         2.   It is arguable that the Tribunal may have erred  in  reversing
             the burden of proof at several points in its assessment of the
             claim.

         3.   There is an arguable material error of law."

12. Directions were issued that there should be an oral hearing before  the
    Upper Tribunal to ascertain whether the FTT had erred in law such  that
    the decision must be set aside.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

13. Miss Kiss on behalf of the  Respondent  conceded  that  the  judge  had
    materially erred in law by applying an incorrect burden and standard of
    proof, as contended in the grounds, and referred to  in  the  grant  of
    permission to appeal.

14. It was conceded that the error was material and meant that the decision
    was unsafe.  Both representatives submitted that the decision should be
    set aside, and remitted to the FTT to be heard afresh with no  findings
    preserved.

My Conclusions and Reasons

15. I find the Respondent's concession to be rightly made.  In my view  the
    decision of the FTT was prepared with considerable care, but there is a
    material error in relation to the burden  and  standard  of  proof.   I
    therefore  set  aside  the  decision  of  the  FTT.   No  findings  are
    preserved.

16. I  have  considered  the  Senior  President's  Practice  Statements  at
    paragraph 7, and find that it is appropriate to remit the  appeal  back
    to the FTT because of the nature and extent  of  judicial  fact-finding
    that will be necessary in order for this decision to be remade.

17. The appeal will be heard at the Hatton Cross  Hearing  Centre  and  the
    parties will be advised of the time and date in due course.  The appeal
    is to be heard by an FTT judge other than Judge Isaacs.





Notice of Decision

The decision of the FTT involved the making of an error of law such that  it
is set aside.  The appeal is allowed to the extent that it  is  remitted  to
the FTT with no findings of fact preserved.

The FTT made an anonymity direction. I make an anonymity direction  pursuant
to Rule 14 of The Upper Tribunal Procedure Rules 2008. No  report  of  these
proceedings shall directly or  indirectly  identify  the  Appellant  or  any
member of his family. Failure to comply with this direction  could  lead  to
contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall             16th November 2018

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The issue of any fee award will need to be considered by the FTT.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall             16th November 2018

