
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11875/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Determined without a Hearing         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 17 June 2020                      |On 26 June 2020                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                                     MKM
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
                            DECISION AND REASONS

Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008  I
make an order prohibiting  the  disclosure  or  publication  of  any  matter
likely to lead members of the public to identify the  appellant.  Breach  of
this order can be punished as  a  contempt  of  court.  I  make  this  order
because the appellant is an asylum seeker.

This appeal was determined without a hearing  following  special  directions
sent by the Tribunal because of  the  well-known  "lockdown  provisions"  by
Upper Tribunal Judge Gill.  In response to those directions I  have  written
submissions from the appellant dated 30 April 2020 and  written  submissions
from the respondent dated 28 April 2020 and I have considered them.

This is an appeal by someone who identifies himself as  a  citizen  of  Iran
against a decision of the First-tier Tribunal dismissing his appeal  against
a decision of the Secretary of State refusing him international protection.

Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was  granted  by  Upper  Tribunal
Judge Plimmer who said:

  "For the reasons set out in the renewal grounds of appeal, it is arguable
  that the First-tier Tribunal gave inadequate reasons  for  rejecting  the
  expert evidence regarding  the  appellant's  claimed  identity  card  and
  failing to apply the correct standard of proof."

Upper Tribunal Judge Plimmer gave further  directions  that  the  respondent
ensured that the identity card in her possession was brought  to  the  Upper
Tribunal on the day of the hearing to facilitate a decision in the event  of
an error of law being  established  but  this  has  been  overtaken  by  the
decision to dispense with a hearing.

I begin by considering the First-tier Tribunal's decision.

The judge's task was simplified by two entirely sensible concessions by  the
Secretary of State in the Reasons for  Refusal.   First,  the  Secretary  of
State accepted that by reason  of  his  in-country  activity  the  appellant
would face a real risk of persecution in the event  of  his  being  sent  to
Iran and, second, the expert relied upon by the appellant was an  expert  to
be respected. It follows that the sole point of contention was  whether  the
appellant had established that he is in fact a citizen of Iran.

His case had been determined previously and he had  been  disbelieved.   The
First-tier Tribunal, rightly, took the  existing  decision,  a  decision  of
Immigration Judge Davda dated 8 April 2011, as his starting  point  but  was
alert to  look  for  new  evidence.   The  judge  correctly  summarised  the
appellant's case.  He said that the appellant was  born  in  June  1991  and
left Iran in  October  2007  before  arriving  in  the  United  Kingdom  and
claiming asylum on 11 January 2008.  He was  accepted  to  be  a  minor  and
given leave appropriate for his  minority.   He  then  applied  for  further
leave but that application was refused and a  subsequent  appeal  dismissed.
That is the decision that is the starting point.

In outline it is the appellant's case that he is an  Iranian  Kurd  and  the
son of a Kurdish Democrat Party activist whose father had been arrested  and
punished by the authorities and the appellant was frightened  of  a  similar
fate in the event of his return.

However, as the First-tier Tribunal noted, when the appeal was  first  heard
the Home Office produced evidence that the appellant had not done very  well
in a geography test.  He was  ignorant  of  basic  knowledge  of  Iran,  for
example he could not describe properly the Iranian flag, he  did  not  speak
or appear to understand Farsi and  could  not  answer  questions  about  the
basic  political  organisation  of  the  country.  Additionally  he  had  no
persuasive evidence of his identity.

The judge noted that the appellant had now produced  what  purported  to  be
evidence of his identity.  He  produced  something  described  as  a  "birth
certificate"  and  described  by  the  appellant  in  his  statement  as   a
shanasnameh.

This did not satisfy the Secretary of State.  The  Secretary  of  State  had
the document examined and it was found to be unsatisfactory.  The  Secretary
of State's  evidence  was  set  out  in  a  proforma  Home  Office  document
examination report dated 2  May  2018  of  a  kind  that  is  well-known  to
practitioners in this area of law.  It showed that the document contained  a
substituted photograph and altered or added detail with the explanation,  in
what might be thought to be rather gleeful terms, that

  "the current photograph  found  with  this  document  is  not  the  first
  photograph to be affixed into this document.  There are  multiple  vacant
  staple holes seen behind the current photograph which suggest a  previous
  photograph had been  affixed  to  the  document.   Using  infrared  light
  sources, additional wet ink authenticating stamps can be found where  the
  previous photograph was positioned and also at the  bottom  of  the  same
  page.  Therefore this document cannot be relied upon as evidence  of  the
  holder's nationality and/or identity."

The respondent did not  ask  the  appellant  for  any  explanation  and  the
application was refused

The appellant obtained an expert report from  one  Pouneh  Saatnia  who  has
both Iranian and British nationality and who practises law  in  Iran.  I  do
not wish to be disrespectful in any way  to  Mrs  Saatnia  whose  underlying
competence has not been challenged and who extended the courtesy of  writing
in the English language but I cannot avoid observing that her syntax is  not
always conventional and her meaning not always clear.

The appellant had explained that the photograph  had  been  changed  and  Ms
Saatnia said (page 25 in the appellant's bundle) that:

  "there is possibility to change  the  photograph  of  an  existing  birth
  certificate ... and the issues raised in relation to the staple holes and
  new rubber stamp, this would be expected if  the  above  explanation  and
  does not necessarily  indicate  that  the  document  is  not  genuine  or
  authentic."

The judge noted that  it  was  the  appellant's  case  that  it  was  wholly
unsurprising that there were signs of an earlier  photograph  being  affixed
to the identification document because he knew  an  earlier  photograph  had
been affixed to an  identification  document  and  would  have  said  so  if
anybody had troubled to ask him.

The judge outlined the appellant's oral evidence including  his  answers  in
cross-examination.  The appellant said that he could not remember  when  the
birth certificate had been sent to him but he thought  it  was  "one  and  a
half to two years ago".  He had not seen the document when  he  applied  for
leave in 2018 but that  claim  clearly  was  not  right  because  there  was
reference to it, or appeared to be. It was put  to  the  appellant  that  an
identity document and a birth certificate are  different  documents  but  he
claimed not to know.

However the appellant had said on an earlier occasion that  his  father  had
told him that a photograph was needed on his  "birth  certificate"  when  he
achieved the age of 15.  It was now his case that the document  relied  upon
had had a new photograph added because, for reasons he  could  not  explain,
the earlier photograph had been damaged.

The  judge's  conclusions  begin  at  paragraph  23.   The  judge  found  no
satisfactory explanation for the identity document not being produced  until
2018 when its absence was noted in the refusal letter of 2011 and  this  was
not helped by there being no independent evidence, such as an envelope  with
postage stamps, showing when the document was sent from Iran.

The judge also said at paragraph 26 "the fraud unit had seen  the  original,
the expert has not", and  then  that  the  explanation  for  there  being  a
replacement photograph was contradictory being both that it was damaged  and
that it was affixed when the appellant was aged 15 years.

Importantly the judge said at paragraph 28:

  "If it was a replacement document to an existing birth  certificate  that
  should be recorded and it hasn't been and the expert does not say  it  is
  valid but only that the document meets all the requirements to be a valid
  birth certificate - it contains the information that one would expect and
  perhaps she goes no further because she has not seen the original".

The judge then noted there was evidence from friends  and  college  lecturer
but that could not be good  evidence  that  the  appellant  was  in  fact  a
citizen of Iran.  The witnesses were passing on what  they  had  heard  from
the appellant and with the additional comment that  he  was  thought  to  be
trustworthy.  Likewise his association  with  political  activities  in  the
United Kingdom do not prove his nationality but his  expressed  interest  in
Kurdish separatism.

The judge found that the appellant had not established his nationality.

It is a very frustrating feature of the case that the respondent  seemed  to
have missed the point completely.  I can understand, as a matter  of  common
sense, that when an identity document is shown to have  had  the  photograph
changed its value is considerably diminished.  However there is  nothing  in
the report from the Secretary of State to show that  the  examiner  had  any
expertise  in  the  law  of  Iran  or  anything  else  to  substantiate  the
commonsense observation that a changed photograph was unsatisfactory.

The appellant's expert does have expertise in the law of Iran and  is  quite
plain that photographs can be changed because both parties  accept  that  it
has been changed.  It is therefore deeply regrettable that the Secretary  of
State, having seen the expert report, did not look into the matter  further.
 A possibility is that the expert  is  just  plain  wrong  to  say  the  law
provides for a photograph to be changed  but  that  is  inherently  unlikely
given her professional expertise and  there  is  certainly  no  evidence  to
substantiate such a finding.  Another possibility is that  there  are  means
of changing the photograph lawfully and properly (something which is not  in
any way inherently surprising) but they had not been carried out here.

The difficulty with the appellant's case is when the expert comments on  the
possibility of change she says: "Any such replacement to an  existing  birth
certificate should be recorded" but  does  not  say  expressly  where  there
records should be made and if there is such a record here.

The expert does say under the heading "conclusion":

  "I confirm that I  have  done  the  actual  checks  to  verify  that  the
  documents have genuinely been issued by  the  Islamic  Republic  of  Iran
  Ministry of interior state registrar of civil status under the Chapter  3
  - Birth Registration of the Law on Registration in point of my view  this
  is genuine and correct."

However Ms Saatnia does not explain what  she  means  when  she  makes  this
observation.  According to the grounds of appeal  the  meaning  is  that  Ms
Saatnia had made independent checks with records in Iran  but  that  meaning
is not obvious and, in my judgment, the First-tier Tribunal  should  not  be
criticised for not assuming or even considering  that  possibility.   It  is
not for the respondent to prove that the document  is  forged  but  for  the
appellant has to prove that the document is reliable.  The  short  point  is
that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  find  the   additional   evidence
particularly helpful to the appellant because  the  expert  report  did  not
satisfy the judge that the document relied upon was in  fact  good  evidence
of the appellant's nationality.

I have  read  the  grounds  and  I  consider  specifically  the  appellant's
skeleton argument.

The written submissions begin, after appropriate and helpful  introductions,
with the assertion that the flaw in the Secretary of  State's  decision  was
"the decision that the strength of Pouneh Saatnia's expert opinion that  the
birth certificate was genuine did not matter if the NDFU had  already  found
it to be unreliable."

This, I find, is substantially made out.  I have already indicated that  the
Secretary of State is to be  criticised  for  just  not  engaging  with  the
expert evidence.  However corrected such errors is one of  the  purposes  of
an appeal and it was for the appellant  to  make  his  case  at  the  appeal
hearing and he failed to do that.

The next point made is that the judge did not  have  proper  regard  for  Ms
Saatnia's assertion that  she  had  made  all  the  necessary  checks.   The
problem is, as I have indicated, that these checks are  not  explained.   It
is not an error of law for the  judge  to  resolve  a  possible  unexplained
ambiguity and I am not at all satisfied that Miss  Saatnia  meant  that  she
had made external checks in appropriate registries that  had  referred  back
to the document.  I make it plain that if that  was  her  meaning  then  the
appellant's  representatives  might  want  to  give   thought   to   further
representations based on a clearer report.   However  that  meaning  is  not
plain and I do not agree there  was  an  error  of  law  in  the  judge  not
interpreting it that way. The judge was under no obligation to  resolve  any
ambiguity in favour of either party.

Many of  the  other  criticisms  have  merit.  It  is  immaterial  that  the
appellant did not see the expert.  The expert was not asked  to  comment  on
the appellant but on the document.  Similarly the late production  does  not
of itself impact on its  authenticity  although  proper  reasons  have  been
given for finding that it does impact on  the  appellant's  credibility.   I
just do not agree that the expert report authenticated  the  document.   The
expert report recognised that it had all the  necessary  ingredients  which,
as the First-tier Tribunal Judge pointed out, is not the same at all.

The fundamental problem with this case is the appellant could not prove  his
nationality.  It may well be the case that he is of  limited  education  and
may not be very well informed about the geography of Iran.  It may  well  be
that his loyalties even within the parameters set by his education make  him
think more of his Kurdish rather than his  Iranian  identity.   Nevertheless
he was very ignorant about the country and  no  amount  of  explanation  for
that ignorance elevates the poor evidence he gave into good evidence of  his
nationality.   He  really  has  nothing  except  his  certificate  which  is
supported by a report that is found to be ambiguous.

Whilst I do  accept  that  the  judge  might  have  erred,  for  example  in
apparently giving weight to the fact  that  the  fraud  unit  had  seen  the
original and the expert had not,  I  do  not  accept  that  the  errors  are
material. They do not undermine the findings about the expert report.

Additionally, I am not satisfied  that  the  judge  erred  in  referring  to
contradictory explanations for the  need  to  replace  the  photograph.   An
explanation that in substance is "I fixed a photograph because I was 15"  is
not inconsistent with  an  explanation  that  boils  down  to  a  "I  had  a
replacement photograph fixed because the earlier one  was  damaged".   These
could be answers to different questions or  at  least  questions  that  were
understood in a different way and it may not be safe to  put  much  reliance
on this point.

I also am concerned that the judge's finding that he preferred the  evidence
and conclusions of the fraud unit to those of the  expert.   They  were  not
really  in  conflict.   The  problem  was  the  fraud  unit  had  shown   no
inclination whatsoever to consider the possibility of the  alteration  being
consistent with it being a legitimate document.

It follows that there are elements of that decision that concern me  but  as
a whole the core point is not undermined.  The  only  point  going  for  the
appellant was an identity document.  He had produced it late without a  good
explanation.  He had not been clear about the need or reasons for  replacing
a photograph, especially bearing in mind that if he is telling the truth  it
should have been a fairly recent event because  he  would  almost  certainly
have been aged over 15 before any photograph was placed on it.

At the risk of being unhelpfully repetitive it may be that if  the  expert's
report is reworded the case will have to be looked at again.  The  Secretary
of State has committed herself to accepting the  expertise  of  the  expert.
That of course can change but only for a  proper  reason.   However  on  the
expert's report as given the decision was open to the judge and  it  follows
that I find that there has been no material error and I dismiss the appeal.

Notice of Decision

No material error law has been established and I dismiss this appeal.



                              Jonathan Perkins
|signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 17 June 2020                   |

