
  [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11552/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Determination Promulgated             |
|On 28th June 2017                     |On 12th July 2017                     |
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL
                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS

                                   Between

                                    [R S]
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Butterworth (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy (Senior HOPO)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge N Amin, promulgated on 5th January 2017, following a  hearing  at
    Hatton Cross on 22nd November 2016.  In the determination,  the  judge
    dismissed  the  appeal  of  the  Appellant,  whereupon  the   Appellant
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before us.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Pakistan, who was born  on  [  ]]
    1991.  He appealed against the decision of the  Respondent  dated  11th
    October 2016, refusing his  claim  for  asylum,  and  for  humanitarian
    protection, under paragraph 339C of HC 395.

The Appellant's Claim

 3.  The  Appellant's  claim  is  that  he  would  face  mistreatment   and
    persecution on account of his having married a woman of Hindu  religion
    who is an Indian national, whilst he was in the UK,  on  23rd  February
    2015, which was something that his family  discovered  in  March  2015,
    leading to his uncle  subsequently  threatening  him  by  telephone  by
    making a death threat, although the uncle did  not  subsequently  issue
    further threats after March 2015.

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge found that both the  Appellant  and  the  Appellant's  wife's
    families "have shown disapproval with their marriage and these resulted
    in some strong telephone calls and messages" but that she did not  find
    that these threats were so serious "as to amount to persecution that is
    persistent and serious" (paragraph 36).  With respect  to  the  threats
    already issued against the Appellant, the judge went on  to  say  that,
    "this evidence shows that there is no desire to  pursue  the  Appellant
    even if returned to Pakistan" given that no further  threats  had  been
    made after April 2015 (see paragraph 39).  Whatever fear the  Appellant
    had was a subjective one and could not be objectively  sustained.   The
    judge also held that the Appellant had failed to show that there was  a
    lack of effective police protection in Pakistan were he to return  back
    there with his Hindu wife (paragraph 44).  Consideration was  given  by
    the judge to interfaith marriages, and how they are  considered  to  be
    illegal, and it was recognised that  women  face  severe  pressure  and
    retribution from family members, which was something that the judge did
    accept, but the decision was made by the judge that the Appellant would
    have "recourse to the police" and that alternatively "he can choose  to
    live in India with his wife" (paragraph 48).

 5. The appeal was dismissed.

Grounds of Application

 6. The grounds of application state that the judge  was  not  entitled  to
    find that the threats made to the Appellant had been forgotten  because
    time had passed, and the judge was also wrong to  say  that  there  was
    effective state  protection  in  Pakistan,  with  or  without  internal
    relocation.

 7. On 9th March 2017, permission  to  appeal  was  granted  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal on the basis that, "this is a case about the problems faced by
    a male, a Muslim, citizen of Pakistan who, against the  wishes  of  his
    family, has chosen to marry a citizen of India who  follows  the  Hindu
    religion.  I am satisfied that the decision is arguably wrong".

 8. On 23rd March 2017, a Rule 24 response was entered to the  effect  that
    the judge below had directed himself appropriately because it was clear
    that the Appellant and his wife could relocate to  different  parts  of
    Pakistan such as Karachi if  need  be.   Alternatively,  the  Appellant
    could live with his Indian wife in India.

 9. At a hearing on 24 April 2017, UTJ Rintoul found that the  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error  of  law.  That
    decision is set out in the annex to this decision. UTJ Rintoul observed
    that the judge had accepted the Appellant's credibility, but  had  then
    gone on to say that the threats were not so serious  as  to  amount  to
    persecution that was persistent and serious.  Once it had been accepted
    that the Appellant was credible, then "it is difficult  to  see  how  a
    threat to kill even if the applicant were to return to Pakistan is  not
    a serious threat"  (paragraph  9).   The  judge  appears  not  to  have
    properly thought through what followed from her  findings  or  to  have
    given reasons as to why she considered that a death threat  was  not  a
    serious threat (paragraph 10).

Submissions

10. At the hearing before us on 28th June 2017, Mr  Butterworth,  appearing
    as Counsel on behalf of the Appellant, submitted that there  were  four
    issues before this Tribunal.  First, whether there had been persecution
    in the past.  Second, whether there was a risk of persecution in future
    from the Appellant's family.  Third, if such  a  risk  is  established,
    whether  there  would  be  on  the  particular  facts,  sufficiency  of
    protection for the Appellant in this case.  Fourth, whether  there  was
    sufficiency of protection in the home area, and if not whether it would
    be reasonable to expect the  Appellant  to  relocate  elsewhere  within
    Pakistan.  He then made the following submissions.

11. First, once it had been accepted by Judge Amin that family  members  in
    Pakistan had threatened to  harm  and  kill  the  Appellant,  this  was
    sufficient to meet the  asylum  tests  of  persecution,  on  the  lower
    standard.  Second, the objective evidence, such as the  CIG  (Pakistan:
    Women Fearing Gender Based Harm/Violence), makes it clear (at paragraph
    9.3) that there is a risk of harm with regard  to  love  marriages,  in
    precisely  such  circumstances,  and  in  particular  given  that  such
    relationships involve honour  amongst  families  (see  paragraph  7.3).
    Third, it was not enough to say that the last time that the uncle  made
    the threat was in March 2015, and that this was an  insufficient  basis
    for  rejecting  risk,  because  past  persecution  is   an   "excellent
    indicator" of future persecution, and unless there has  been  "a  major
    change of circumstances within  that  country  that  makes  prospective
    persecution unlikely,"  it  is  "generally  sufficient,  though  not  a
    mandatory, means of establishing prospective risk." Fourth, it was well
    established that there is corruption in the police service in Pakistan,
    and quite frequently the police failed to adequately protect parties to
    a love marriage, but they actively assist in  tracing  the  lovers  and
    returning them back to their families, and this is expressly recognised
    in the CIG (Pakistan): Women  Fearing  Gender  Based  Harm/Violence  at
    paragraph 7.3.1, which makes it clear that,

         "some families were reportedly moved to use  violence  in  opposing
         love marriages, including kidnapping their daughters, attacking the
         relatives of the males in a relationship, and obtaining  help  from
         the police to  track  down  partners  who  married  without  family
         approval".

    Furthermore, the same report makes it clear that,  "instead  of  filing
    charges, police typically  responded  by  encouraging  the  parties  to
    reconcile" and that "there were reports that police and security forces
    raped women"  (see  paragraph  10.1.1).   Fifth,  as  far  as  internal
    relocation was  concerned,  this  was  not  a  viable  option  for  the
    Appellant, because the police would not protect the Appellant  and  the
    Appellant's family would be able to trace him wherever  he  went,  thus
    resulting in risk to the Appellant (see the  CIG  Report  at  paragraph
    7.3.1 and 10.1.1).  Finally, the Appellant could not go to  India  with
    his wife, because the Appellant is a Pakistani national, who would then
    be at risk from his wife's relatives there.

12. For his part, Mr Duffy submitted that once Judge Amin had accepted,  as
    credible, that the Appellant had met with threats  from  his  uncle  in
    March 2015, then there would be a risk on return of persecution on  the
    lower standard.  This is because the threats are probative evidence  of
    what awaits the Appellant were he to return to Pakistan.  The  question
    then is whether the Appellant would be able  to  find  "sufficiency  of
    protection in Pakistan".   Although  minorities  of  Hindu  communities
    lived in  places  like  Lahore,  he  could  point  to  no  evidence  of
    interfaith marriages of couples living in such areas, in the midst of a
    largely Muslim country.  Mr Duffy submitted that, "it would be hard for
    me to argue there is sufficiency of protection".  He  also  noted  that
    the CIG (Pakistan) Report confirmed (at  paragraphs  3.1.4  and  3.1.5)
    that the police would often  be  complicit  in  the  ill-treatment  and
    persecution of people who had  married  against  the  wishes  of  their
    family.

13. In a reply, Mr Butterworth relied upon the expert report of Dr  Antonio
    Giustozzi (15th June 2017) which had been submitted in a "supplementary
    index" to this Tribunal, and this recognises (at page 15) that,  "there
    were many examples of police aiding and abetting  families  seeking  to
    punish or harm love marriage partners".  It also  recognises  that  the
    Appellant "will have to seek relatively well-paid employment  in  order
    to earn a livelihood, as nobody would be available to support him  even
    temporarily," were he to return.  He also  notes  that  the  Appellant,
    "and his wife would be at risk from his family  and  also  likely  from
    militant groups" (paragraph 15).

Remaking the Decision

14. We have remade the decision, on  the  basis  of  the  findings  of  the
    original judge, the evidence before her, and the  submissions  that  we
    have heard today.  We are allowing this appeal for the reasons given by
    Mr Butterworth, and largely conceded to by Mr Duffy.

15. First, this is a case where the Appellant has been  found  credible  in
    relation to the death threats that he has received for having  married,
    as a Muslim man of Pakistani origin, a Hindu woman  of  Indian  origin.
    Since he has been found credible we find the threats  to  be  real  and
    likely to be carried out.

16. Second, past persecution is  strong  evidence  of  future  persecution,
    unless there is a material change of circumstance.  Since we have found
    the threats to have been real, and likely to  be  carried  out  in  the
    future, we find that there is no material change of circumstance as  to
    take the appellant out of his risk category. Third, the  evidence  both
    from "the CIG (Pakistan): Women Fearing Gender Based Harm or  Violence"
    and from the Country Advice Pakistan,  Australian  Government,  Refugee
    Tribunal, "Pakistan - PAK37665 -  Punjab  -  Love  Marriages  -  Family
    Violence - Protection Orders - State Protection - Political  Violence"
    (17th November 2010) makes it clear that adequate protection  for  love
    marriages  is  not  provided  in  Pakistan  (see  paragraph  5  of   Mr
    Butterworth's skeleton argument).   Third,  sufficiency  of  protection
    does not exist for the reasons set out  in  the  expert  report  of  Dr
    Antonio Giustozzi (at paragraphs 10 to 13), though we are bound to  say
    that the expert has absent-mindedly stated that, "interfaith  marriages
    are rare in Afghanistan" (paragraph 14).  Finally, internal  relocation
    is not available, on the lower standard. This is because there are well
    known difficulties  arising  from  this  not  being  seen  as  a  valid
    marriage.  There is also  a  risk,  in  those  circumstances,  of  this
    couple's living together being seen as  zina.  This  would  make  their
    protection difficult.  This is particularly so if they had  to  explain
    why the appellant's family was threatening them.  The police are  often
    complicit in aligning themselves with family members in order to  trace
    a couple who have married against their wishes,  and  this  is  to  say
    nothing of the fact, as pointed out in the expert report, that internal
    relocation here for the Appellant would be  "unduly  harsh"  given  the
    lack of employment, and the fact that he would be seeking to internally
    relocate with his Hindu wife of Indian origin, such as to come  to  the
    attention of the neighbourhood, and militant  groups.   For  all  these
    reasons, this appeal is allowed.

Notice of Decision

17. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law such that it fell to be set aside.  We have remade the  decision
    as follows.  This appeal is allowed.

18. No anonymity direction made.


Signed                              Dated


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 6th July 2017




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As we have allowed the appeal  and  because  a  fee  has  been  paid  or  is
payable, we make a fee award of any fee  which  has  been  paid  or  may  be
payable.



Signed                              Dated


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 6th July 2017
                        ANNEX - ERROR OF LAW DECISION

                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-VP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11552/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 24 April 2017                              |                              |
|Extempore                                     |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

Between

                                    [r s]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant


                                     and



               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Butterworth, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Amin promulgated on 5 January 2017  dismissing  his
    appeal against the decision of the respondent to refuse his  claim  for
    asylum.

 2. In brief the appellant's case is that he married  a  Hindu  woman  from
    India and that when their respective families found out about that, his
    being  in  Pakistan  and  her  family  in  India,  both  families  were
    displeased to a considerable extent,  the  family  in  Pakistan  making
    clear threats to kill as disclosed in  the  Home  Office  interview  at
    question 76. Those threats came from an uncle.

 3. The judge accepted the appellant's credibility but  at  paragraph  [36]
    considered that the threats  were  not  so  serious  as  to  amount  to
    persecution that is persistent and serious, concluding that the parents
    were  expressing  their  disagreements  to  the  sudden  news  of  this
    marriage.

 4. The judge noted at [37] there had been no further threats, holding:

         On this basis I do not  consider  that  the  past  threats  or  any
         apprehended  threats  or  harm  the  Appellant   fears   attain   a
         substantial level of  seriousness.   What  has  been  expressed  is
         family or social  disapproval  by  the  appellant  and  his  wife's
         family.   As  such  these  threats  are  outside  the  concept   of
         persecution.

 5. The judge then went on to consider  that  there  had  been  no  further
    contact and at [39] found that the evidence shows there is no desire to
    pursue the appellant even if he returned to Pakistan.

 6. The judge then went on to conclude on the evidence on  light  of  these
    findings of fact that there would be a sufficiency  of  protection  for
    the appellant; and, given that his fear of persecution was  related  to
    the Sialkot area of Pakistan that it would be reasonable to expect  him
    to relocate where there would be low risk to him.

 7. The appellant challenged this decision on four grounds.

      i) First the judge had erred in finding that the  death  threats  were
         insufficient to establish persecution.

     ii) In her assessment of  whether  there  would  be  a  sufficiency  of
         protection.

    iii) In her assessment of  whether  there  would  be  a  possibility  of
         internal relocation; and,

     iv) Whether country evidence concerning entry  to  India  was  properly
         taken into account by the assessment of the risk in India.

 8. For reasons which I will  develop  it  is  only  necessary  for  me  to
    consider the first three grounds.

 9. The difficulty I considered appears to arise from the judge's  approach
    to the evidence is that having that the applicant is  credible  and  to
    have accepted the facts she fails not to have considered properly  what
    those threats were.  It is difficult to see how a threat to  kill  even
    if the applicant were to return to Pakistan is not  a  serious  threat.
    What the judge appears  to  have  done  is  to  have  directed  herself
    properly in line with MI Pakistan and MF Venezuela v SSHD  [2014]  EWCA
    Civ 826 that a three-stage test to  be  adopted:   what  do  the  facts
    establish; what is the relevant threshold; and, whether that  threshold
    is met.  That is naturally relevant to past  persecution  which  is  an
    indicator of but not determinative of a future risk of persecution.

10. The judge appears to have not properly thought  through  what  followed
    from her findings or to have given reasons to why she considered that a
    death threat was not a serious threat.  The fact that it comes  from  a
    member of the family is not in of itself a reason to dismiss it and  in
    this case, she appears not properly to have applied the decision in  MI
    Pakistan.

11. There is an additional error in that the judge appears to conclude that
    simply because on the evidence of the appellant that  the  phone  calls
    had been terminated that this showed that there was no desire to pursue
    the appellant even if he returned to Pakistan.  This is not  a  natural
    or a sustainable inference. Further on that basis I am  satisfied  that
    the first ground is made out.  It appeared  also  that  the  judge  has
    misconstrued the evidence in her decision at 41.

12. I turn next to  the  second  and  third  grounds  which  can  be  taken
    together.  These are as Mr Butterworth submitted clear dependent on the
    specific fact-finding exercise paragraphs in this case.  The judge  had
    made a finding that there was a threat from the family and I considered
    that properly construed that the judge's decision on the issues both of
    sufficiency of protection and as to internal relocation  are  based  on
    those.  There is some evidence  as  Mr  Butterworth  submits  that  the
    police  will  assist  families  in  pursuing  other  members  of  those
    families, albeit the evidence tending to show those of women but  there
    would necessarily have to be given indications that evidence  that  the
    police do not assist people who have for  example  gone  against  their
    family or on particular facts of this case entered into  an  interfaith
    marriage which would need to be factored into account in assessing  the
    issue of sufficiency protection facts of this case.

13. Further these considerations go also to the issue of  whether  internal
    relocation would or would not be reasonable given the difficulties that
    may occur as a result of  the  actions  of  the  family,  the  possible
    actions of the police  and  the  difficulties  that  the  wife  of  the
    applicant may face as being part of an interfaith marriage.

14. For these reasons I am satisfied that the decision involved the  making
    of an error of law which is capable of affecting the outcome and I  set
    aside the decision.  The decision is to be  remade.   The  findings  of
    fact and in particular the findings of credibility are preserved.   The
    remaking of the decision will take into account the following matters:

      1) Whether there has been persecution in the past.

      2) Whether  there  is  a  risk  of  persecution  in  future  from  the
         appellant's family

      3) If such a risk is established whether there would on the particular
         facts of this case be sufficiency of protection for the appellant.

      4) Whether if there were no sufficiency of protection in the home area
         whether it would be reasonable to expect the appellant to  relocate
         elsewhere within Pakistan.

      5) Any new evidence on which the parties seek to rely must  be  served
         on or before 18 June 2017.



Signed                                  Date 5 May 2017


[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul
