
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11436/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 2 April 2019                               |On 10 April 2019              |
|                                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HUTCHINSON


                                   Between

                                     AHS
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Claire, Counsel instructed by A2 Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Iraq born on 23 June 1980 who appealed to
    the First-tier Tribunal against the decision of the  respondent,  dated
    24 October 2017, to refuse his protection claim.

 2. The history of this case is that the appellant claims to  have  entered
    the UK initially on 16 May  2005  when  he  claimed  asylum  which  was
    refused.  His appeal against that refusal was dismissed by  Immigration
    Judge Martin, in a decision promulgated on 22 August 2005, following  a
    hearing on 17 August 2005.  The  appellant  made  further  submissions,
    which were all refused, on 11 June 2009, 15 April  2010  and  14  April
    2013.  Further submissions were then made on the appellant's behalf  on
    14 November 2014 and it is the decision on those submissions,  made  in
    October 2017, which was considered by  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   The
    appellant's appeal to the First-tier Tribunal was originally heard on 5
    December 2017 and dismissed.  That decision was set aside by the  Upper
    Tribunal in a decision promulgated on 19 April 2018, whilst  preserving
    the recording of the appellant's evidence.  The appeal was remitted  to
    the First-tier Tribunal and came before  Judge  Pooler  on  22  January
    2019.  In a decision promulgated  on  31  January  2019,  Judge  Pooler
    dismissed the appellant's appeal on all grounds.

 3. Although the appellant appealed on four  grounds  for  permission,  the
    appeal before me was with limited permission.  The first three  grounds
    related to credibility and the judge's approach  to  Devaseelan  [2002]
    UKIAT 00702.  Designated First-tier Tribunal  Judge  McCarthy  rejected
    those grounds for reasons given in the  permission  decision  dated  27
    February 2019.  A notice of decision of permission  to  appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal on limited grounds was issued on 6 March 2019.  Although
    it was noted that the appellant had the right to  apply  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal for permission to appeal on issues on grounds not  granted  by
    the First-tier Tribunal,  no  such  application  was  made;  Mr  Claire
    confirmed that this was the case and that the only ground  pursued  was
    the fourth ground of permission.

 4. The fourth ground in  the  grant  of  permission  to  appeal  reads  as
    follows:

         "Ground (4) - Failure to make findings on a material issue

         14.  It is submitted that  it  is  arguable  that  FTJ  Pooler  has
             repeated the same error as FTJ Aujla which led to the previous
             grant of permission.

         15.  When permission was previously granted by FTJ Doyle, the grant
             of permission read:

             '3.  The appellant comes from Samarr,  the  capital  of  Salah
                  Aldin.  On 22  June  2017,  the  Court  of  Appeal  issued
                  updated country guidance on Iraq.  In the annexed  to  the
                  decision of AA (Iraq) CG [2017] EWCA Civ 944 the Court  of
                  Appeal said

                      The intensity of this armed conflict in the so-called
                      "contested areas", comprising of  the  governates  of
                      Anbar, Diyala, Kirkuk (aka Ta-min), Ninewah and Salah
                      Al-din, is such that as a general matter,  there  are
                      substantial grounds for believing that  any  civilian
                      returned there, solely  on  account  of  his  or  her
                      presence there, faces a real risk of being  subjected
                      to indiscriminate violence amounting to serious  harm
                      within  the   scope   of   Article   15(c)   of   the
                      Qualification Directive.

             4.    It  is  arguable  that  the  Judge  has  not  adequately
                  considered the appellant's Humanitarian Protection  appeal
                  and that his Article 3 ECHR assessment is flawed.  [...].'

         16.  The appellant submits  that  the  same  has  occurred  in  the
             present determination of the First-tier Tribunal."

 5. It was agreed by Mr Claire, following a preliminary point raised by  Mr
    Bramble, that  an  error  appears  to  have  crept  into  the  previous
    proceedings in relation to where the  appellant  is  from.   First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Doyle, in the permission  granted  in  relation  to  the
    previous decision of Judge Aujla stated erroneously that the  appellant
    comes from "Samarra, the capital of Salah Aldin".  It was not  disputed
    that Samarra is one of the  contested  areas.   However,  as  correctly
    found by Judge Pooler and conceded  quite  properly  by  Mr  Claire  as
    recorded in the refusal letter dated 24 October 2017 and  not  disputed
    by the appellant, the appellant comes from Samawa in southern Iraq  and
    not "Samarr(a) in Salah Aldin".  There is no error therefore  in  Judge
    Pooler's finding, at [39], that "the appellant is  from  the  south  of
    Iraq and the difficulties identified in the country  guidance  at  [11]
    would not apply to him".

 6. The judge was referring to paragraph 11 of the summary of the Court  of
    Appeal's country guidance in AA  (Iraq)  which  provides  including  as
    follows:

         "C.  The CSID

         9.   Regardless of the  feasibility  of  P's  return,  it  will  be
             necessary to decide whether P has a CSID, or will be  able  to
             obtain one, reasonably soon after arrival in Iraq.  A CSID  is
             generally required in order for an Iraqi to  access  financial
             assistance  from  the  authorities;   employment;   education;
             housing; and medical treatment.   If  P  shows  there  are  no
             family or other members likely to be able to provide means  of
             support, P is in  general  likely  to  face  a  real  risk  of
             destitution, amounting to serious harm, if, by  the  time  any
             funds provided to P by the Secretary of State or her agents to
             assist P's return have been exhausted, it is reasonably likely
             that P will still have no CSID.

         10.  Where return is feasible but P does not have a CSID, P  should
             as a general matter be able  to  obtain  one  from  the  Civil
             Status Affairs Office for P's home Governorate, using an Iraqi
             passport (whether current or expired), if P  has  one.   If  P
             does not have such a passport, P's ability to  obtain  a  CSID
             may depend on whether P knows the page and  volume  number  of
             the book holding P's information (and  that  of  P's  family).
             P's ability to persuade the officials that  P  is  the  person
             named on the relevant page is likely to depend  on  whether  P
             has family members or other individuals who  are  prepared  to
             vouch for P.

         11.  P's ability to obtain a CSID is likely to be severely hampered
             if P is unable to go to the Civil Status Affairs Office of P's
             Governorate because it is  in  an  area  where  Article  15(c)
             serious harm is occurring.   As  a  result  of  the  violence,
             alternative CSA Offices for Mosul, Anbar and  Saluhaddin  have
             been established in Baghdad and Kerbala.   The  evidence  does
             not demonstrate that the 'Central Archive',  which  exists  in
             Baghdad, is in practice about to provide  CSIDs  to  those  in
             need of them.  There is, however, a National Status  Court  in
             Baghdad, to which P could  apply  for  formal  recognition  of
             identity.  The precise operation of this  court  is,  however,
             unclear."

 7. It was Mr Bramble's primary submission  that  there  was  therefore  no
    arguable ground of appeal before the Upper  Tribunal.   There  is  some
    force in that argument given that the ground (4)  on  which  permission
    was granted was entirely based on a  false  premise  as  to  where  the
    appellant was from.

 8. I have  taken  into  consideration  that  Designated  Judge  McCarthy's
    permission grant appears to be on  a  different  basis  to  the  ground
    argued at ground (4) in that Designated Judge McCarthy asserted that it
    was arguable that Judge Pooler had failed to apply the country guidance
    case to the issue of whether the appellant is  likely  to  be  able  to
    obtain a CSID in a reasonable time if he is returned  to  Iraq.   Judge
    McCarthy was of the view that  this  ground  was  arguable  as  it  was
    arguable that the consideration of this  issue  at  [40]  to  [42]  was
    insufficient and based on speculation rather  than  assessment  of  the
    facts.  However, ground (4) as argued in the grounds for permission  to
    appeal did not specifically cite any arguable errors with the  CSID  in
    itself but instead argued that the judge had  failed  to  consider  the
    appellant's humanitarian protection appeal under Article  3  appeal  on
    the basis that he was from a contested area (which he is not).

 9. In considering the new ground of appeal introduced by Designated  Judge
    McCarthy it is unclear whether Judge McCarthy took  into  consideration
    what was said in AZ (Error of law:  jurisdiction;  PTA  practice)  Iran
    [2018] UKUT 00245 which confirmed including as follows:

         "Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal should be granted on  a
         ground that was not advanced by an applicant for  permission,  only
         if:

         (a)  the  judge  is  satisfied  that  the  ground  he  or  she  has
             identified is one which has a strong prospect of success:

             (i)  for the original appellant; or

             (ii) for the Secretary of State, where the ground relates to a
                  decision which, if undisturbed, would  breach  the  United
                  Kingdom's international Treaty obligations; or

         (b)   (possibly)  the  ground  relates  to  an  issue  of   general
             importance, which the Upper Tribunal needs to address."

10. I am not satisfied that such criteria is made out (and  Mr  Claire  did
    not identify how this might be the case).  Even if it  were  I  am  not
    satisfied that Designated Judge McCarthy's new ground  establishes  any
    error of law.

11. In reaching this conclusion I have considered the submissions  of  both
    parties and the relevant country guidance including AAH (Iraqi Kurds  -
    internal relocation) Iraq CG [2018] UKUT 00212 which provides including
    as follows:

          "Section C of Country Guidance annexed to the  Court  of  Appeal's
         decision in AA (Iraq) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department
         [2017] Imm AR 1440; [2017] EWCA Civ 944 is  supplemented  with  the
         following guidance:

         (1)  Whilst it remains possible for an Iraqi national returnee  (P)
             to obtain a new CSID whether P is able to  do  so,  or  do  so
             within a reasonable time frame, will depend on the  individual
             circumstances.  Factors to be considered include:

             (i)  Whether  P  has  any  other  form  of  documentation,  or
                  information about the location of his entry in  the  civil
                  register.  An INC, passport,  birth/marriage  certificates
                  or an expired CSID would all be of substantial assistance.
                   For someone  in  possession  of  one  or  more  of  these
                  documents  the  process  should  be  straightforward.    A
                  laissez-passer should not be counted for  these  purposes:
                  these can be issued without any other  form  of  ID  being
                  available, are not of any assistance in 'tracing back'  to
                  the family record and  are  confiscated  upon  arrival  at
                  Baghdad;

             (ii) The location of the relevant civil registry  office.   If
                  it is in an area held, or formerly held, by  ISIL,  is  it
                  operational?

             (iii)    Are there male family members who would be  able  and
                  willing to attend the civil registry with P?  Because  the
                  registration system is patrilineal it will be relevant  to
                  consider whether  the  relative  is  from  the  mother  or
                  father's side.  A maternal uncle in possession of his CSID
                  would be able to assist in locating the original place  of
                  registration of the individual's mother,  and  from  there
                  the trail would need to be followed to the place that  her
                  records were transferred upon marriage.  It must  also  be
                  borne in mind that a significant number of  IDPs  in  Iraq
                  are themselves undocumented; if that is  the  case  it  is
                  unlikely that  they  could  be  of  assistance.   A  woman
                  without a male relative to assist with the process of  the
                  redocumentation, would face very significant obstacles  in
                  that officials may refuse to deal with her case at all."

12. It was Judge Pooler's findings that the appellant in this  case  failed
    to prove his case to the lower standard and that there was no basis for
    a finding that the appellant would be at real  risk  of  serious  harm,
    either in his home area or on return to Baghdad (paragraph [31]).   The
    judge took into consideration the  country  guidance  including  in  AA
    (Iraq) and BA (Returns to  Baghdad)  Iraq  CG  [2017]  UKUT  00018  and
    considered at [40] the appellant's ability to obtain a CSID.

13. The judge reminded himself that the  onus  was  on  the  appellant  and
    concluded at [42] that the appellant had failed to prove  there  was  a
    reasonable likelihood that he would be unable to obtain a CSID  by  the
    time funds provided to him have been exhausted.  In the  circumstances,
    where the  appellant  was  found  to  be  not  credible  by  successive
    Tribunals, and where no further evidence has been produced  that  might
    adequately address this issue (and Mr Claire confirmed that  there  had
    been no Rule 15 application made  for  the  admission  of  any  further
    evidence) it is difficult to see how there can be any  error,  material
    or otherwise, in Judge Pooler's reasoned conclusions that the appellant
    had failed to demonstrate that there was a reasonable  likelihood  that
    he would be unable to obtain a CSID.

14. I take into consideration, which Judge Pooler will have  had  in  mind,
    that the Reasons for Refusal Letter indicated that the appellant in the
    screening interview stated that he had a national identity  card  which
    he left in Iraq with the respondent noting that there was no record  of
    him ever attempting to secure the necessary documentation  despite  the
    fact that the appellant was then in contact with  his  family  who  had
    forwarded evidence.

15. Although, as noted by Mr  Claire,  the  judge  had  accepted  that  the
    appellant's evidence was unchallenged that his mother had died in  2017
    and that his uncles and cousins had left for the United States and that
    he had no continuing contact with his sister and in fact that  she  had
    left Iraq and he did not know her whereabouts, it is not disputed  that
    the appellant's home area is not a contested  area  and  therefore  the
    difficulties that might arise for individuals from contested areas  did
    not apply for the appellant.  In circumstances where the appellant  has
    been found to be lacking in  credibility,  and  where  his  failure  to
    previously produce documentation was noted, there is no material  error
    in the judge's conclusion that he failed to prove to the lower standard
    that he would be unable at this time to obtain a CSID by the time funds
    provided to him have been exhausted (and indeed there was no suggestion
    that he could not be provided funds, for example from his relatives  in
    the United States).

16. For the avoidance of doubt, I rely on my primary conclusion that  there
    is  no  permission  ground  before  the  Upper  Tribunal  and  in   the
    alternative that such ground is not established.  The decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal does not contain an error of law and  shall  stand.
    The appellant's appeal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date:  8 April 2019
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee was paid or payable so no fee award is made.


Signed                                  Date:  8 April 2019
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson
