
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11154/2019 (p)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided Without a Hearing under Rule |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|34                                   |                                     |
|On 30 October 2020                   |On 9 November 2020                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                                     R K
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Imamovic, instructed by Tann Law Solicitors
                    (written submissions only)
For the Respondent:    No representation and no submissions


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/2698) I  make  an  anonymity  order.   Unless  the  Upper
    Tribunal or court directs otherwise, no  report  of  these  proceedings
    shall directly or indirectly identify the  appellant.   This  direction
    applies to both the appellant and to the respondent and  a  failure  to
    comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Introduction

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Zimbabwe who was born on  6  March  1970.
    She came to the United Kingdom as a visitor on 24 December  2000.   The
    appellant's leave as a visitor expired on 24 June 2001 and, thereafter,
    she overstayed.

 3. On 17 February 2003, the appellant made an  application  for  leave  to
    remain outside the Rules on  medical  grounds.   That  application  was
    refused on 20 November 2003.

 4. On 16 February 2006, the appellant claimed asylum.

 5. The basis of that claim was that she had been a member of  the  MDC  in
    Zimbabwe where she had been an  official  and  had  attended  meetings,
    rallies and demonstrations.  She claimed that on 30 June 2000, she  was
    assaulted and raped by war veterans and ZANU-PF youths and then  handed
    over to the police where she was detained for  two  days  during  which
    time she was raped by a police officer.  She  was  released  after  her
    husband paid a bribe of US $1,000.    Her claim was that she was  again
    arrested on 1  December  2000  after  attending  an  MDC  meeting,  was
    released whilst enquiries were carried out by the  CIO.   She  reported
    her ill-treatment to the police but was told that MDC members were  not
    entitled to  state  protection.   She  was  refused  treatment  by  the
    hospital in Harare because she was not authorised by  letter  from  the
    ZANU-PF.  She left Zimbabwe on 24 December 2000 and  travelled  to  the
    UK.  The appellant was diagnosed subsequently  in  March  2002  as  HIV
    positive.

 6. On 3 August 2007, the Secretary of State refused the appellant's claims
    for asylum, humanitarian protection and under the ECHR.

 7. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  On 9 October  2008,
    the First-tier Tribunal dismissed her appeal.  The judge accepted  that
    the appellant had been raped by ZANU-PF supporters in June 2000 and  as
    a consequence had become HIV positive.  The judge accepted that she had
    been detained at a police station for two days and a further day  on  1
    December 2000.  However, the judge did  not  accept  the  core  of  her
    account as being credible.   The  judge  found  that  a  police  report
    produced by the appellant was not genuine and had regard  to  the  fact
    that she had delayed claiming asylum for almost six years  despite,  on
    her claim, being in close proximity to MDC supporters in the  UK.   The
    judge was not satisfied that she had been the victim of persecution and
    that she would be  at  risk  on  return  to  Zimbabwe  because  of  her
    political opinion.

 8. The appellant made further submissions on 13  January  2010  but  these
    were withdrawn after she was granted indefinite leave to remain  on  22
    September 2010.

 9. On 21 February 2014, the appellant was convicted at  the  Harrow  Crown
    Court on two counts of theft and  was  sentenced  to  eighteen  months'
    imprisonment on each count to run concurrently.

10. On 13 March 2014, the respondent issued a notice to  the  appellant  of
    her liability to be deported on the basis of  these  offences.   On  17
    November 2014, a deportation order was signed  against  the  appellant.
    On that date also, the respondent refused the appellant's international
    protection and human rights claims and certified them  under  s.94  and
    94B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  respectively.
    The notification decision was subsequently withdrawn in  the  light  of
    the Supreme Court's decision in R (Kiarie &  Byndloss)  v  SSHD  [2017]
    UKSC 42.

11. On 19 January 2015, further submissions were made.   These  submissions
    were rejected under para 353 of the Immigration Rules (HC  395)  on  23
    January 2015.  That decision has subsequently been withdrawn.

12. Further submissions were made on 21 May 2014, 22 July 2014, 19  January
    2015 and 25 April 2016.  On 30 October 2019, the  Secretary  of  State
    rejected the appellant's claims for asylum, humanitarian protection and
    under the ECHR contained within those further submissions.

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

13. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In addition to what
    had been raised in her earlier appeal, the appellant relied upon  what,
    she said, had happened to her in 2011 when she had returned to Zimbabwe
    in order to correct her Zimbabwe passport which had been issued to  her
    with her name misspelt.  She claimed that while she was in Zimbabwe she
    had been detained by the CIO on arrival at Harare Airport and had  been
    beaten and mistreated.  She had been questioned but was released  after
    she paid a bribe of $500.  She claims that  she  left  Zimbabwe  and  a
    warrant or summons has been issued against her.

14. The appellant claims that she would be persecuted, as she has  been  in
    the past, if she returned to Zimbabwe and she also relies upon  claimed
    political activity in the UK for  the  MDC,  including  involvement  in
    meetings and demonstrations outside the Zimbabwe High Commission.

15. Judge Broe dismissed the appellant's appeal on all grounds.  The  judge
    accepted the findings made in the earlier appeal which,  he  concluded,
    he saw no reason to depart from (see para  59  of  his  determination).
    Further, the judge made an adverse credibility  finding.   He  rejected
    her account of her return to Zimbabwe in 2011 and any risk  that  could
    arise from that.  He did not accept that she had been detained  at  the
    airport or ill-treated or that there are any criminal proceedings or  a
    warrant outstanding.  In addition, as regards  her  reliance  upon  sur
    place activities, whilst the judge accepted her claimed activities,  he
    concluded that  she  had  not  demonstrated  that  the  authorities  in
    Zimbabwe would be aware of her activities such that she  would  have  a
    political profile to put her at risk on return to Zimbabwe.

16.  Finally,  having  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal  on  asylum  and
    humanitarian  protection  grounds,  the  judge   also   dismissed   the
    appellant's appeal based upon her claim under Art 3 on  health  grounds
    and under Art 8 of the ECHR.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

17. The appellant sought permission to appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  on
    seven detailed grounds: challenging the  judge's  adverse  findings  in
    relation  to  the  appellant's  asylum  claim  (grounds  (a)-(e));  his
    decision in respect of Art 3 and the appellant's  health  (ground  (f))
    and his decision in relation to Art 8 (ground (g)).

18. Permission was initially refused  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
    Fisher) on 1 June 2020.  However, on renewed application to  the  Upper
    Tribunal, UTJ Reeds granted permission on 1  July  2020.   She  did  so
    primarily on the ground set out in ground (f), namely  that  the  judge
    had wrongly  failed  to  apply  the  Supreme  Court's  decision  in  AM
    (Zimbabwe) v SSHD [2020] UKSC 17 when dismissing the appellant's Art  3
    claim on the basis of her HIV positive status and the implications  for
    her health on return  to  Zimbabwe.   As  regards  the  other  grounds,
    challenging the judge's assessment of the evidence and the evidence and
    decision in relation to the appellant's sur place claim and  Art  8  of
    the ECHR, the judge noted that those grounds might not be as strong  as
    the ground in relation to Art 3 but she nevertheless granted permission
    on all grounds as arguable.

19. In her decision granting permission, UTJ Reeds also  issued  directions
    in the light of the COVID-19 crisis provisionally  proposing  that  the
    issues of whether the First-tier Tribunal had erred in law and, if  so,
    whether the decision should be set aside, should be determined  without
    a hearing.  UTJ Reeds invited the parties to make submissions  both  on
    the substantive issues in the appeal and also on whether the  error  of
    law decision could be made without a hearing.

20. In response, the appellant's representatives  refiled  the  appellant's
    grounds of appeal.  They did not raise any objection to  the  error  of
    law issue being determined without a hearing.

21. The respondent did not file a rule 24 response or  any  submissions  in
    reply to UTJ Reeds directions.

22. In the light of  the  parties'  submissions  and  the  absence  of  any
    objection, and having regard  to  the  interests  of  justice  and  the
    overriding objective of determining the appeal justly  and  fairly  and
    the nature of the legal issues raised, I am satisfied that it is in the
    interests of justice to determine the error of law issue in this appeal
    without a hearing under  rule  34  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008 (SI 2008/2698  as  amended)  and  para  4  of  the
    Amended General Pilot Practice Directions: Contingency Arrangements  in
    the First-tier Tribunal and the  Upper  Tribunal  (14  September  2020)
    issued by (then) Vice Senior President and (now)  Senior  President  of
    Tribunals, the Rt. Hon. Sir Keith Lindblom.

The Grounds of Appeal

23. The grounds of appeal are numbered (a) to (g).  They are  detailed  and
    can be summarised as follows.

24. Ground (a): at paras 49 and 52, the judge found that  in  2011  it  was
    "highly unlikely" or "very unlikely" that the appellant would have been
    released, rather than been taken to court and that she would have  been
    tried in her absence as she claimed.   The  ground  contends  that  the
    judge reached a view on this matter of criminal procedure  in  Zimbabwe
    without any supporting evidence to substantiate his conclusion that the
    appellant's claim was implausible on these issues.

25. Ground (b): at paras 48-49 the judge took into account, in finding  the
    appellant not to be  credible  in  relation  to  the  events  she  said
    occurred on return to Zimbabwe in 2011, that she had not raised certain
    matters  in  letters  and  other  documents   she   prepared   (without
    professional assistance) and had submitted to  the  Home  Office.   The
    grounds contend that the judge failed to have regard to the  fact  that
    these documents were not professionally prepared and the  omissions  or
    inconsistencies simply reflected her "unprofessional  understanding  of
    what it is necessary to include".

26. Ground (c): the judge erred  in  doubting  the  appellant's  sur  place
    activities, concluding that photographs  were,  in  effect,  posed  and
    failed to give adequate reasons why that was so.  Further, in rejecting
    her claimed activity in the UK with the Luton Branch of the MDC on  the
    basis that there was no supporting evidence, the judge failed  to  have
    regard   to   the   evidence   given   by   an    official    of    the
    Wolverhampton/Walsall Branch - and whose evidence the judge accepted  -
    that she had also been involved with the MDC Branch in Luton.

27. Ground (d): the judge wrongly discounted the expert evidence simply  on
    the basis that the expert referred to the burial ground where President
    Robert Mugabe was buried as  "Heroes'  Place"  when  it  was  known  as
    "Heroes' Acre".  It is also contended  that  the  judge  was  wrong  to
    discount the expert's evidence because in one  section  of  the  report
    (para 14) the expert refers to the appellant  using  the  male  pronoun
    (him).   It  is  contended  that  the  expert  clearly  identified  the
    appellant as female and his expertise  was  not  called  into  question
    otherwise.

28. Ground (e): the judge was factually wrong at para 66 and mixed  up  the
    addresses of the appellant with that of her friend (Mary) whose address
    had appeared upon the warrant when it was left with her.

29. Further, the judge failed properly  to  consider  the  appellant's  sur
    place risk in finding that there was no evidence that  the  authorities
    would be aware of her activities.  That, it  is  said,  fails  to  have
    regard to the country guidance decisions which recognise the ability of
    the Zimbabwe intelligence service, the CIO  to  collate  evidence  from
    those demonstrating abroad (see HS (returning asylum seekers)  Zimbabwe
    CG [2007] UKAIT 0094 at [95]-[102], [104], [132]-[134].   Further,  the
    finding fails to take into account  the  appellant's  evidence  of  the
    interest the CIO showed in her on her return in 2011.

30. Ground (f): the judge wrongly applied the high threshold in  N  v  SSHD
    [2005] UKHL 31, rather than the less onerous  test  identified  by  the
    Supreme Court in AM (Zimbabwe), in determining whether a breach of  Art
    3 was established on health grounds.  The judge failed to give adequate
    reasons why the appellant, on the basis of the expert  evidence,  would
    not fall within the new test, given that one drug she required was  not
    available and was not affordable and the expert evidence was  that  she
    would die in a period of twelve to eighteen months without treatment.

31. Ground (g): contends that given the appellant's  circumstances,  having
    spent nineteen years in the UK, that she is a member of the MDC and  is
    receiving life saving treatment which is not available in Zimbabwe, the
    judge was wrong to find that there were "no significant  obstacles"  to
    her integration on return to Zimbabwe under para 276ADE.

Discussion

32. I propose to consider each of the grounds separately.  As  will  become
    clear, I am satisfied that a number of the grounds are established  and
    amount to material errors of law.

33. A number of  the  grounds  challenge  the  judge's  assessment  of  the
    evidence that led him to disbelieve the appellant in  relation  to  the
    events she relied upon arising since the earlier appeal  decision.   In
    particular, whether she  had  established  that  she  had  returned  to
    Zimbabwe in 2011 in order to correct a misspelling of her name  in  her
    passport issued by the Zimbabwe authorities and, whilst there, had been
    detained by the CIO, mistreated and questioned about MDC activities and
    had been subject to court proceedings which are outstanding.

34. Ground (a): At paras 49 and  52,  the  judge  found,  in  effect,  that
    aspects of the appellant's account concerning the  appellant's  release
    on bail (para 49) and she was convicted in her absence (para  52)  were
    respectively "highly unlikely" and "very unlikely".  In  reaching  that
    conclusion or those conclusions, the judge  recognised  in  both  paras
    that there was "no evidence of  the  Rules  of  criminal  procedure  in
    Zimbabwe" (para 49) or "no evidence  of  the  procedure  for  trial  in
    absence" (at para 52).  The judge said this at paras 49 and 52 which  I
    set out in full:

         "49. I note that she made no mention in 2014 or 2015 of being given
             the document, which I shall call a summons, requiring  her  to
             attend court to answer a very serious charge.   She  now  says
             that after bribing the CIO they took her to Harare where  they
             gave her a document and told her that she had to attend  court
             at 3.30 that afternoon.  There is no evidence of the Rules  of
             criminal procedure in Zimbabwe but I find it  highly  unlikely
             that the CIO would release the Appellant on bail  rather  than
             take her on to court to seek a remand in custody.  There is no
             evidence of the process for commencing proceedings on  such  a
             charge and in particular of  the  involvement  of  the  public
             prosecutors or attorney general.  ....

         52.  The third section [of a letter from a  firm  of  attorneys  in
             Harare] states that the appellant 'was  convicted/remanded  by
             the Magistrate on 14 December 2011 of/on a charge of C/S 25(1)
             of  the  Code  and  sentenced  to/and  released  on  bail  but
             defaulted court'.  On the appellant's account she had not been
             placed on remand (which would have required an  attendance  at
             court).  The warrant therefore appears  to  have  been  issued
             postconviction.  There is no evidence  of  the  procedure  for
             trial in absence in such a serious matter and I find  it  very
             unlikely that she would have been convicted in her absence  in
             such circumstances.  I note that it is  not  signed.   I  have
             considered  this  document  in  the  round  and  against   the
             background of a use of a false document in  her  last  appeal.
             This document purports to have  been  in  existence  for  over
             eight years, it is inconsistent both internally and  with  the
             appellant's account and I find  it's  not  genuine.   Its  use
             further undermines the appellant's credibility."

35. What the judge has done in both of these paragraphs is reach a view  on
    the plausibility of the appellant's experience in criminal  process  in
    Zimbabwe in the absence of any evidence as to the criminal procedure or
    process in Zimbabwe.  He has, in effect, shifted the burden of proof to
    the appellant to show that what he considers not to be plausible was in
    fact in accordance with Zimbabwe criminal procedure or  process.   That
    is an impermissible shift in  the  burden  of  proof  and,  given  that
    criminal procedure and process can vary between jurisdiction, the judge
    was not entitled to assess  the  plausibility  of  what  the  appellant
    claimed happened to her, judged by his UK focused view as  to  how  the
    criminal process would operate.  The point is similar to that  made  by
    the Court of Appeal in HK v SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ 1037 in assessing  the
    plausibility of an individual's account and the dangers of  imposing  a
    view external to that other country's cultures, social behaviours, etc.
     At [29] Neuberger LJ (as he then was) said this:

         "Inherent probability, which may be helpful in many domestic cases,
         can be a dangerous, even a wholly inappropriate, factor to rely  on
         in some asylum cases.  Much of the evidence will  be  referable  to
         societies with customs and circumstances which are  very  different
         from those of which the members of the fact-finding  Tribunal  have
         any (even second-hand) experience.  Indeed, it is likely  that  the
         country which an asylum-seeker has left will be suffering from  the
         sort of problems  and  dislocations  with  which  the  overwhelming
         majority of residents of this country will be  wholly  unfamiliar."



36.  Applied  mutatis  mutandis,  that  reasoning  operates  equally   when
    assessing the criminal  justice  system  in  another  country.   In  my
    judgment, the judge fell into that error in paras  49  and  52  of  his
    determination.  For these reasons, I accept to this extent, ground  (a)
    relied upon by the appellant.

37. Ground (b) criticises the  judge  for  taking  into  account  that  the
    appellant  failed  to  mention  in  earlier  statements  and  documents
    produced by her, for example that she had been raped and that  she  had
    been given the summons or warrant.  The judge dealt with this at  paras
    44-49 of his determination.   The  grounds  contend  that  the  earlier
    documents were not professionally prepared.  The judge was,  no  doubt,
    aware of that when he set out the documents at paras 45-47.  Indeed, at
    para 48, he acknowledged the sensitivity of disclosing previous  sexual
    violence but that the appellant had been able  to  discuss  an  earlier
    incident without any problems.  The judge was, in my view, alive to the
    nature of  the  appellant's  earlier  statements.   But  those  earlier
    statements or documents, whether or not professionally prepared, failed
    to disclose important and significant parts of  the  appellant's  claim
    before the judge, including the sexual violence and also that  she  had
    been given a court document which she now relied upon  to  support  her
    claim.  In my judgment, the judge was entitled to take into account her
    failure to mention these matters earlier in 2014  and  2015.   I  would
    reject ground (b).

38. As regards grounds (c) and (e), these relate to her sur place claim and
    activities with the MDC in the UK.   The  appellant  gave  evidence  of
    those activities, including taking part in demonstrations and relied on
    photographs of her at demonstrations, including near the Zimbabwe  High
    Commission.  The Chairman of the Wolverhampton/Walsall  Branch  of  the
    MDC gave oral evidence before the judge, whose evidence the judge found
    "no reason to doubt" (see para 58).  At para 57, despite  the  Chairman
    of the MDC Branch in Wolverhampton/Walsall attesting, not only  to  the
    appellant's activities with  his  branch  but  also  referring  to  her
    earlier involvement with the Luton Branch, the judge  nevertheless  did
    not accept she was an MDC member at  that  time.   He  did  accept  her
    membership and activities with the MDC  from  February  2019  with  the
    Wolverhampton and Walsall Branch.  I am not persuaded  that  the  judge
    was unable to reach his adverse finding on this, perhaps minor issue in
    the totality of her  claim,  for  the  reasons  he  gave  at  para  57,
    including that  there  was  no  documentary  evidence  to  support  her
    involvement with the Luton Branch and there had been no mention  of  it
    in a letter from the Chairman of the MDC in the UK and Ireland.

39. Where, however, I have concluded that  ground  (c)  and  (e)  establish
    errors by the judge is in his consideration first, of the  photographic
    evidence and secondly, in forming his view that  her  activities  would
    not come to  the  attention  of  the  Zimbabwe  authorities  so  as  to
    establish she had a political profile which could put her  at  risk  on
    return.  As regards both issues the judge dealt with this in para 58 as
    follows:

         "Whilst I have reservations about the appellant's motivation I  see
         no  reason  to  doubt  the  evidence  of  [the  Chairman   of   the
         Wolverhampton and Walsall Branch of the MDC].  I  accept  that  the
         appellant joined his branch in February of last year and that since
         then she has attended most  of  their  meetings.   There  are  also
         photographs of her at various demonstrations  which  I  accept  she
         attended.  They are not photographs of demonstrations at which  she
         can be seen but photographs designed to show her at  demonstrations
         which brings into question their purpose.  There is no evidence  to
         show that the  authorities  in  Zimbabwe  would  be  aware  of  her
         attendance or that  they  would  cause  her  to  have  a  political
         profile.  I accept that there may have been some  consideration  of
         her taking office in the branch but this is yet to take place."

40. As regards the  former  point,  the  judge  did  not  explain  why  the
    photographs,  which  include  pictures  showing  the  appellant,   were
    photographs that had, so to speak, been posed rather than  showing  her
    being genuinely involved in demonstrations.

41. Further, the judge did not engage with the relevant material concerning
    the potential for surveillance by the Zimbabwe  authorities,  including
    of those taking part in  demonstrations.   In  context  of  politically
    repressive regimes, it may not take much to  conclude  they  have  'the
    means and inclination' to monitor and identify those they  perceive  as
    political  opponents,  including  in   demonstrations   outside   their
    Embassies (see YB(Eritrea) v SSHD [2008]  EWCA  Civ  360  at  [18]  per
    Sedley LJ).   In HS, the AIT noted evidence concerning infiltration  by
    CIO into organisations in the UK and the collation of information about
    activists.  At [104] the AIT said this:

         "We  consider  it  significant  that  the   regime   has   invested
         considerable resources in  seeking  to  infiltrate  groups  in  the
         United Kingdom to identify those who support the opposition or  who
         are 'activists  in  the  country'.   This  does  indicate  that  it
         distinguishes those people from Zimbabweans present in  the  United
         Kingdom generally.  It is noteworthy it has not been suggested that
         those  carrying  out  that  function  in  the  United  Kingdom  are
         collating information about those who have made  an  asylum  claim,
         but that they are concerned to  identify  those  considered  to  be
         activists."

42. The appellant relies upon HS and, in particular  passages  such  as  at
    [104] that indicate the  risk  of  being  identified  by  the  Zimbabwe
    authorities monitoring activists in the UK.  I  do  not  say  that  the
    judge was bound to find that, given the appellant's activities  in  the
    UK, she would have come to the attention of the  Zimbabwe  authorities.
    The judge was, however, required to grapple with  the  evidence  before
    reaching a conclusion that the authorities would not be  aware  of  her
    activities.  It was not the case that  there  was  "no  evidence"  that
    could support such a contention.

43. For that reason, I am satisfied that grounds (c) and (e) are made  out
    to that extent.

44. Ground (d) relates to the judge's finding at paras 61-63 that he should
    give "little weight" to the expert evidence.  At  para  61,  the  judge
    said this:

         "I have given careful consideration to the report  prepared  by  Mr
         John Birchal who says he has a  arrange  of  contacts  in  Zimbabwe
         allowing  him  to  examine  issues  with  a  range   of   different
         individuals.  It contains a great deal of  background  evidence  on
         Zimbabwe and I note that in  his  introduction  to  the  political
         situation in Zimbabwe he refers to the funeral  of  Robert  Mugabe.
         He said that 'his funeral etc. was  quite  well  attended  but  his
         family would not allow his remains to be buried in "Heroes' Place",
         somewhere the State wants those who fought  for  freedom  to  lie'.
         The burial ground to which he refers  is  called  National  Heroes'
         Acre and generally known as Heroes' Acre.  It has never been  known
         as Heroes' Place and this casts doubt on Mr Birchal's expertise  on
         Zimbabwe."

45. I accept the appellant's submission that in this  paragraph  the  judge
    has placed undue, and unsustainable, weight  upon  a  minor  linguistic
    difference in  the  description  of  the  burial  ground  where  Robert
    Mugabe's funeral took place.  In itself,  it  cannot  bear  the  weight
    which leads to  a  discounting  which  gives  "little  weight"  to  the
    expert's opinion.

46. Then at para 62, the judge went on to quote a section from the expert's
    report at para 14 headed "Author's Comments" in which he refers to  the
    appellant using the male pronoun of "him".  However, as is  also  clear
    from the quotation set out  at  para  62,  the  expert  refers  to  the
    appellant using her surname and the prefix "Ms".  Clearly,  the  expert
    wrongly used the male pronoun (him) but equally it cannot be said  that
    the expert misunderstood whom he was writing a report about.  He  named
    the appellant and stated her gender correctly.  Plainly  something  has
    gone wrong in the transcription of the passage in the  report  but  the
    judge was not, in my judgment,  justified  in  reaching  the  following
    conclusion in para 63 when he said:

         "this appears to refer to someone other  than  this  Appellant  and
         casts doubt on the report as a whole."

47. That, in my judgment, is a criticism too far and an improper basis upon
    which to doubt that the expert was referring to anyone other  than  the
    appellant in his report.

48. For these reasons, ground (d) is made out.

49. In my judgment, the grounds that  I  have  found  made  out  result  in
    material errors of law in the judge reaching  his  adverse  credibility
    finding and also in his rejection of the appellant's claim  based  upon
    her sur place activities in the UK.

50. Turning now to ground (f), the judge dealt with the appellant's  health
    claim based upon her HIV positive status at  paras  67-68  as  follows:



         "67.     I have given  careful  consideration  to  the  appellant's
             health.  She is HIV  positive  and  has  had  the  benefit  of
             treatment in  this  country.   She  provided  a  letter  dated
             31 January  2020  from  her  consultant  who  described  her
             condition,  co  morbidities  and  medication.   In  his  view,
             although his expertise on the issue is not made clear, one  of
             her medications would not be available  in  Zimbabwe  and  she
             would not be able to afford  to  buy  it  privately.   If  the
             treatment is withdrawn it's extremely likely  that  she  would
             die in twelve to eighteen months.

         68.  With the exception of that one drug it is not  suggested  that
             medication is unavailable in Zimbabwe.  If her  consultant  is
             right, and I note again there is no evidence of his  expertise
             on  medical  services  in  Zimbabwe,  the  issue  is  one   of
             affordability.   I  have  had  regard  to  the   findings   in
             Paposhvili v Belgium (No. 41738/10).  I  find  at  the  outset
             taking her case at its highest that I am  not  satisfied  that
             her health is such that the threshold set in N v  SSHD  (2003)
             EWCA Civ 1396 is met so as to engage Article 3."

51. Leaving aside that the judge referred to the Court of Appeal's decision
    in the N case, rather than the decision of the House of  Lords,  it  is
    plain that the judge failed to recognise that the Supreme Court  in  AM
    (Zimbabwe) had modified the test to be applied under Art 3 in a  health
    case, in accordance with Paposhvili as a result of which the  threshold
    in N is no longer the law.  The applicable test is now a different one.
     Article 3 is no longer limited  to  so-called  "deathbed  cases",  but
    includes cases where an individual's circumstances are such that  there
    is a real risk of "serious,  rapid  and  irreversible  decline  in  the
    person's state of  health  resulting  in  intense  suffering  or  to  a
    substantial reduction in life expectancy" (see [31] of AM  (Zimbabwe)).
    As regards a "significant" reduction in life expectancy, at  [31]  Lord
    Wilson  noted  that  what  was  "significant"  had  to   consider   the
    significance for the individual concerned, hence he said:

         "Take a person aged 74, with an expectancy of life normal for  that
         age.  Were that person's expectation to be  reduced  to,  say,  two
         years, the reduction  might  well  -  in  this  context  -  not  be
         significant.  But compare that person with  one  aged  24  with  an
         expectancy of life normal for that age.  Were his or her expectancy
         to  be  reduced  to  two  years,  the  reduction  might   well   be
         significant."

52. In this appeal, it was that test  and  the  approach  set  out  by  the
    Supreme Court in AM (Zimbabwe) that the judge had to apply.  There  was
    evidence that without treatment the appellant's life  expectancy  would
    be 12-18 months.  It was for the  judge  to  decide  whether  that  was
    "significant" so as to fall within the revised approach set out by  the
    Supreme Court in applying Art 3.  The judge did not do  this  and  fell
    into error as a result.  In addition, as the Supreme Court  made  plain
    in AM (Zimbabwe), the circumstances of  the  individual  in  their  own
    country, and whether treatment would be available to  them,  is  to  be
    assessed as a practical matter having regard to both availability  and,
    if relevant, affordability of that treatment (see [23(d)]).

53. For these reasons, ground (f) is made out.  I  am  satisfied  that  the
    judge materially erred in law  in  dismissing  the  appellant's  appeal
    under Art 3 based upon health reasons.

54. That then leaves ground (g) and the challenge to Art 8.  In itself, the
    judge's assessment of Art 8 does not disclose any demonstrable material
    error of law.  However, the assessment is based upon  factual  findings
    which, as a result of my  conclusions  above,  are  unsustainable.   In
    order to determine whether there are very significant obstacles to  the
    appellant's integration in Zimbabwe under para 276ADE(vi) of the  Rules
    and  whether  there  would  be   "unjustifiably   harsh   consequences"
    sufficient to outweigh the public interest, findings must be made based
    upon the appellant's circumstances both in  the  UK  and  in  Zimbabwe.
    Given that the judge's adverse credibility findings  are  unsustainable
    and his conclusion in relation  to  the  appellant's  health  claim  is
    unsustainable, his assessment of Art 8 also cannot be  sustained.   The
    Art 8 assessment needs to be made on sustainable  findings  as  to  the
    appellant's circumstances.

55. Consequently, I  am  satisfied  that  the  Art  8  claim  needs  to  be
    reconsidered by a judge in the light of findings  yet  to  be  made  in
    relation to the  appellant's  circumstances  both  in  the  UK  and  in
    Zimbabwe.

56. For the reasons I have given,  the  judge's  decision  to  dismiss  the
    appellant's appeal involved material errors of law.

Decision

57. The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  to  dismiss  the  appellant's
    appeal involved the making of an error of  law.   The  decision  cannot
    stand and is set aside.

58. In the light of the material errors of law I have identified,  none  of
    the judge's findings can be preserved.  The appeal needs to be  reheard
    de novo.  For these reasons, having regard to the nature and extent  of
    fact-finding required and having regard  to  para  7.2  of  the  Senior
    President's Practice Statement, the proper disposal of this  appeal  is
    to remit it to the First-tier Tribunal for a de novo rehearing before a
    judge other than Judge Broe.


                                                                      Signed

                                                                Andrew Grubb

                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                                             3 November 2020
