
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
PA/11480/2016
                                                        Ex-tempore judgement

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                |           Decision & Reasons           |
|                                    |Promulgated                             |
|On 21 June 2017                     |           On 05 July 2017              |
|                                    |                                        |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM

                                   Between

                              Mrs Nazia Khurram
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Shah, 786 Law Associates
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan and her  date  of  birth  is  28
    November 1983.  She made a claim for asylum which was  refused  by  the
    Secretary of State in a decision of  5  October  2016.   The  Appellant
    appealed against that decision and her appeal was dismissed by Judge of
    the First-tier Tribunal  McIntosh,  in  a  decision  promulgated  on  9
    January 2017, following a hearing at Taylor House on 21 November  2016.
    Permission was granted to the Appellant by Upper Tribunal Judge  Martin
    in a decision of 15 May 2017.

2.   The Appellant's evidence,  in  a  nutshell,  is  that  she  married  Mr
    Khurram Ajaz Bhutta in November  2006,  against  the  wishes  of  their
    respective families, who sought revenge soon after the  marriage.   The
    Appellant gave evidence of having been physically assaulted by her  in-
    laws and her husband having been seriously assaulted  by  her  brother.
    The Appellant also claimed to be at risk  from  the  authorities  as  a
    result of her husband's involvement with  MQM.   The  judge  stated  as
    follows;

         "21. The appellant fears that if she and her husband were to return
             to Pakistan they  would  be  persecuted  by  their  respective
             families  and  her  husband   would   face   persecution   and
             prosecution from the Pakistani army who now have a  regime  of
             attack against members of MQM.  Members of  MQM  are  detained
             and some are killed.  The appellant  fears  that  her  husband
             would be located by the army and treated in the way described.


         22.  The appellant fears that upon return to Pakistan both she  and
             her husband would be easily located because  her  brother  has
             access, as a journalist to resources that would allow  him  to
             easily find them."

3.       The judge rejected the Appellant's claim to be at risk from  family
    members (see paragraphs 36 and 37). Mr Shah abandoned any challenge  to
    this.  In regards to the Appellant's husband's membership of  MQM,  the
    judge concluded that the  Appellant's  husband  would  not  be  of  any
    interest to the authorities. He made the following finding;

         "38. With regard to the appellant's husband's involvement with MQM,
             this was for a very limited period  in  2007  when  he  worked
             voluntarily to obtain charitable funds for  the  organisation.
             The appellant suggests that her husband would  have  attracted
             adverse interest from  the  Pakistani  Government  upon  their
             return.  I find, taking into account  the  objective  evidence
             that it is unlikely that her husband would be of  interest  to
             the authorities."


4.   The grounds, as I indicated to Mr Shah at the hearing  before  me,  are
    insufficiently particularised. Mr Shah helpfully focused on one  ground
    stating that the others were not pursued. The sole ground relied on was
    that the judge had failed to take into account evidence at page  30  of
    the AB (which post-dated the Country of Origin  Information  Report  on
    which the judge relied) which established, according to Mr Shah, during
    a raid on the MQM headquarters in  2016  the  Pakistan  Rangers  seized
    identity documents, including the Appellant's husband's.   As a  result
    he and Appellant are now at risk.

5.   The document at page 30 is a printout  from  a  website  entitled  "PTA
    bans MQM's official website in Pakistan" dated 23 August  2016  stating
    that the Pakistani government  has  banned  access  to  MQM's  official
    website and this is after the government's  action  taken  against  the
    political party the evening before. The documents cites a  quote  which
    reads as follows: "Sindh  Rangers  on  Monday  night  initiated  action
    against Muttahida Qaumi Movement (MQM), for allegedly inciting violence
    in the metropolis". It is this evidence which  Mr  Shah  relies  on  to
    argue that the Appellant would be at risk because the authorities  have
    seized her husband's membership card in a raid and thus  will  identify
    him.  It is, in my view, at best a tenuous argument.

6.   The judge did take the document into account.    The judge  set  out  a
    very comprehensive account of the Appellant's  evidence  including  the
    document that Mr Shah referred me to at page 30 of the  AB.   Reference
    is made to this at paragraph 24 of the decision:

         "24. Mr Khurram Ajaz Bhutta stated that Mr  Ayub  is  currently  in
             Pakistan and is fully aware of the risks that the couple face.
              He sent copies of newspaper  articles  confirming  the  close
             relationship  that  Mr  Bhutta's  father  has  with  the  vice
             president as well as a copy of a Public Notice  of  Disownment
             of a Child that was ringed and I note comes from  a  newspaper
             article dated  in  2016.   I  understood  that  the  Pakistani
             Government had banned the MQM's official website  in  Pakistan
             and had asked all Pakistani ISP's to  block  access  to  their
             website.  As a consequence the belief is that the  appellant's
             father would disclose  the  whereabouts  of  Mr  Khurram  Ajaz
             Bhutta to the Pakistani Government if he  were  to  return  to
             Pakistan and he would therefore be in danger."


7.       The evidence must be viewed  in  the  context  of  the  finding  at
    paragraph 38, to which there is no challenge.  The significance of  the
    finding is that the Appellant's husband's role  was  insignificant  and
    historic so  that  even  if  the  evidence,  at  page  30  of  the  AB,
    establishes that MQM is now an illegal organisation  and  that  a  raid
    took place during  which  membership  cards  were  seized,  it  is  not
    arguable  that  this  would  result  in  the  identification   of   the
    Appellant's husband thereby putting him at risk.

8.   The judge, having taken into account the  evidence  including  that  at
    page 30 of the AB, had regard to the background  material  before  him.
    Paragraph 32 and of the decision reads as follows;

         "32. The Country of Origin Information (COI)  Report  for  Pakistan
             dated 9 August 2015 states: In relation to the MQM,  this  was
             led by Altaf Hussain and was founded in 1984.  The  party  was
             formed to represent the interests of  Urdu  speaking  migrants
             (from India, following partition).   The  MQM  is  the  fourth
             largest party in the National Assembly with 25  seats  and  is
             part of a coalition Government in Sindh.


9.   The grounds inadequately explain how the above background  evidence  or
    indeed the findings in respect of the Appellant's husband's limited and
    historic role are materially undermined by the document at page  30  of
    the AB.  The judge  was  entitled  to  conclude  that  the  Appellant's
    husband was of no interest to the authorities.

10.    The judge had regard to Section 8 of the 2004  Act  noting  that  the
    Appellant made a claim for asylum in 2016, six years after having  left
    Pakistan, ten years after the marriage and nine years after her husband
    worked for MQM on a voluntary basis.  He stated as follows;


          34. I am aware of the provisions of Section 8 of  the  Asylum  and
             Immigration (Treatment of Claimants, etc.) Act 2004 (the  2004
             Act) and in  view  thereof  make  the  following  findings  in
             relation  to  the  claimant's  credibility.   In  so  doing  I
             appreciate that Section 8 is not the  starting  point  for  my
             assessment of credibility but a factor I take into account  in
             my overall assessment of it (SM [2005] UKAIT 00116)."


11.   Mr Shah although having  initially  indicated  to  me  that  the  sole
    ground of appeal related  to  the  document  at  page  30  of  the  AB,
    addressed me in respect of Section 8 of the 2008 Act. He submitted that
    the judge was wrong to take into account the delay by the Appellant  in
    making a claim for asylum because it only became apparent in 2016  that
    her husband would be at risk as a result of the ban on the organisation
    and the raid  on  the  premises.  This  does  not  sit  well  with  the
    Appellant's claim that she was at risk on return as  a  result  of  her
    marriage which formed the basis of her claim to be at  risk  on  return
    from family members.  The judge was wholly entitled  to  conclude  that
    the Appellant had delayed without good reason making a claim.


12.  Although Mr Shah in oral submissions argued before me that the  account
    of the Appellant's evidence as set out by the judge was  not  accurate.
    This was not raised in the grounds of appeal or  inadequately  expanded
    on in oral submissions.

13.      For the above reasons there is no error of law and the decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal to dismiss the  appeal  on  asylum  grounds  is
    maintained.

No anonymity direction is made.




Signed        Joanna McWilliam                        Date 3 July 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam











