
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11527/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On Wednesday 15 May 2019             |On Thursday 13 June 2019             |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                                     n a
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr B Bedford, Counsel instructed by Central England
Law Centre
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
An anonymity order was made by  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  As  this  is  an
appeal on protection grounds, it is  appropriate  to  continue  that  order.
Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify  him  or  any  member  of  his  family.  This  direction
applies, amongst others, to  both  parties.  Failure  to  comply  with  this
direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

BACKGROUND

The Appellant appeals against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
Dhaliwal promulgated on 7 March 2019 ("the Decision") dismissing the
Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's decision dated 17 September
2018, refusing the Appellant's protection and human rights claims.

The Appellant is a national of Afghanistan.  His age is disputed.  That is
a point to which I return later as it lies at the heart of the Appellant's
challenge to the Decision.   He claimed asylum on the basis that he would
be at risk as the family member of an interpreter who had worked for the US
Forces in Afghanistan, his brother [HA]. He also claimed to be at risk
because he would be perceived as having been westernised.

The Judge accepted that [HA] had worked as an interpreter and had himself
been kidnapped by the Taliban and released by them on condition that he
acted as a spy for them against the international forces.  [HA], having
spent a short period at his home after his release, left Afghanistan.  The
remainder of the family including the Appellant left Afghanistan about six
months later.  The Appellant was separated from the rest of his family
during the journey.  The Judge found that the Appellant was not at risk in
his home area and could return there or to Kabul.

The Appellant raises two grounds of challenge under the heading of "Age"
and "Home Area Risk".  I elaborate on those grounds below.  Permission to
appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge EM Simpson dated 4 April
2019 in the following terms so far as relevant:

         "2.  Permission to appeal is granted because there was arguable
             that [sic]:


               i) On a material matter live at the hearing, the appellant's
                  age, the appellant claiming to be a minor born on
                  11/07/2002 whilst the respondent asserting his date of
                  birth to be 01/01/2000, that the Judge erred in his
                  treatment of the issue, both in respect of fair process at
                  the hearing, including permitting the respondent to raise
                  assertions concerning evidence relied upon on the matter,
                  without requiring the respondent, if relying on that
                  absent evidence to produce same, i.e. Council age
                  assessment report and the raising by the HO Presenting
                  Officer of there being another Taskera in respect of the
                  appellant on the respondent's file, and furthermore in the
                  overall assessment of the evidence on the matter,
                  including failing to give the appellant the benefit of
                  doubt, and provide a sufficient adequacy of reasoning for
                  rejecting expert opinion;


              ii) In the Judge's treatment of the appellant's older
                  brother's evidence, that there was misconceived the
                  contents of that evidence when assessing the credibility
                  of the appellant's claim of risks faced in the home area;


             iii) There was overall disclosed an inadequacy of reasoning on
                  material matters.


         3.   Arguable/No arguable material error(s) of law disclosed
             [sic]."


The matter comes before me to assess whether the Decision does disclose an
error of law and to re-make the Decision or remit to the First-tier
Tribunal for re-hearing.



DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS

Age

The way in which this ground is pleaded is three-fold.  First, it is said
that the Judge erred in her treatment of the evidence of Dr Giustozzi who
had provided a report about the authenticity of a taskira which the
Appellant produced in support of his claimed age. Second, it is said that
the Respondent should not have been permitted to rely on an original
taskira held on the Respondent's file but not produced.  Third, it is said
that the Respondent should not have been permitted to rely on the
conclusions of a local authority age assessment where that age assessment
was not before the Judge.

The way in which Mr Beckett developed his case went beyond those pleaded
grounds.  His submissions were that, stemming from the errors pleaded, the
Judge should have accepted that the Appellant is an unaccompanied asylum-
seeking child ("UASC") and therefore vulnerable.  He said that the Judge
had taken the wrong approach when dealing with that vulnerability.  Based
on the Practice Direction 'First-tier and Upper Tribunal Child, Vulnerable
Adult and Sensitive Witnesses' issued on 30 October 2008 and what is said
by the Court of Appeal in AM (Afghanistan) v Secretary of State for the
Home Department [2017] EWCA Civ 1123 about the treatment of asylum claims
by minors and other vulnerable applicants, Mr Bedford said that the Judge
ought to have accepted the Appellant as credible and taken his case at its
highest.  Moreover, he said that the effect of the Appellant being an UASC
is that the Respondent accepts that UASCs cannot be returned to Kabul and,
if he cannot be returned to Kabul which is safer than other areas of
Afghanistan, then he cannot be returned to Kunduz which is his home area as
that would be riskier.  In light of the way in which the case is put, it is
necessary first to determine whether there is any error of law in the way
in which the Judge approached the determination of the Appellant's age.

Mr Kotas submitted that the Judge was entitled to take the conclusion of
the age assessment as her starting point.  He was not sure why the document
on the Home Office file was not produced to the Judge as he had a copy.  A
copy was handed in and given to Mr Bedford.  Mr Bedford said in reply that,
if this were the totality of the age assessment, it is not "Merton
compliant".

In relation to the taskira, Mr Kotas pointed out that the issue was really
one of fairness.  He was unable to clarify the reference to there being
another original taskira on the Home Office file.  He had been unable to
find one. However, he submitted that the Judge was entitled to reach the
view she did based on her analysis of the evidence of Dr Giustozzi.

I deal first with the age assessment point.  The document handed in by Mr
Kotas is headed "Model Information Sharing Proforma".  It shows that the
age assessment was carried out by social workers from Warwickshire County
Council and that the assessment was completed on 16 September 2016.  It
gives the Appellant's claimed date of birth as "11.07.2002".  The document
is not a full copy of the age assessment.  It does however summarise the
qualifications of the two social workers, gives the date of interview,
summarises what occurred at the interview and provides the conclusion as
follows:

         "Taking all evidence into consideration, [NA]'s account is not
         accepted as credible and he is not believed to be 14.  Rather it is
         felt he is most likely to be an older teenager, probably between 16-
         19 years old, though potentially older.  However, in the lack of
         concrete evidence to be more precise, workers have decided to
         exercise some benefit of the doubt and make [NA] 16".

    That document therefore confirms the Respondent's position that the
    Appellant's date of birth was in 2000 and that therefore, by February
    2019, he would have been aged over eighteen years.

The age assessment document shows that the age assessment was shared with
[NA] on 16 September 2016.  That is consistent with what is said in the
Appellant's witness statement as follows:

         "4.  ... My lawyer, Megan Ward, who was looking at my case to see
         if I could challenge my age assessment, told me that there was a
         merit to challenge the local authority's decision about my age.
         But I understood that it may take a long time to go through the
         process.  At the time I was already waiting for a long time to hear
         from the Home Office and I was getting very frustrated.  I did not
         want to further delay.  Therefore, despite my lawyer saying there
         was good reason for me to challenge the decision about my age, I
         did not go ahead with the challenge.  But just because I did not
         challenge the age assessment, does not mean I accepted the age
         assessment done by the local authority. I confirm I am 16 years old
         according to the Taskira which is a genuine document verified by
         the expert."

The Judge dealt with this issue in the Decision as follows:

         "16. There still remains a dispute about the age of the Appellant.


         17.  On the Welfare Form: Unaccompanied children on A1 of the
         Respondent's bundle, in the presence of his social worker and a
         Dari interpreter, the Appellant was asked questions.  In response
         to question 7 on page 4 of that form, the Appellant's response to
         his date of birth was 20/04/1381 as he stated that was the date
         that was given to the Appellant by his mother, it further states
         conversion states 11/07/2002.  This would make him 16 years of age
         and this is what the Appellant asserts is his correct age.


         18.  As is the norm, an age assessment was carried out by the local
         council.  I do not have the benefit of having sight of that age
         assessment but that age assessment gave the Appellant a date of
         birth of 1 January 2000, which presently makes him 19 years of age.


         19.  In terms of assessing age, I note the historical case law
         seems to favour that an age assessment is carried out at the end of
         judicial fact-finding.  The materiality in this case was to do with
         the conduct of the hearing and whether the case law of LQ (Age:
         immutable characteristic) Afghanistan [2008] UKAIT 00005 applied.
         I also note more recent authority (Rawofi (age assessment -
         standard of proof) [2012] UKUT 00197 (IAC)). The situation before
         me is set out in a similar way in as much as the matter has not
         been put before me as a discreet preliminary issue.  In that case,
         the Upper Tribunal approved of the age issue being addressed at the
         beginning of the judicial evaluation.  The Rawofi case also
         confirms that in the context of age disputes in an asylum appeal
         the burden is on the appellant and the standard of proof is to the
         lower standard applicable in asylum appeals.


         20.  I note R (on the application of GE - Eritrea) [2015] EWHC 1406
         that age is an issue of fact for the court and not other decision
         makers which "...involves the application of judgment on a variety
         of factors ...".  I also note the case of VS [2015] EWCA Civ 1142.
         In terms of the court's general approach to evidence in age
         assessment I note in particular paragraph 19 citing R (AM) v
         Solihull Metropolitan Borough Council (AAJR) [2012] UKUT 00118
         (IAC) paragraphs 15,19,20 and 23.  I note paragraph 20 goes on to
         consider FZ v Croydon LBC [2011] EWCA Civ 59 which recites the
         Merton principles."


There is no error in the Judge's analysis of the case law.  As she
observed, the burden and standard of proof which applies to age assessments
in the appeal context is to the lower standard on an appellant even though
there is a higher standard and no burden in the context of judicial review
challenges to age assessments.  The Judge then directs herself that an
assessment of age is to be carried out on all the evidence and that it is
an issue of fact.  She then goes on to consider that evidence in the
paragraphs which follow as I come to below.

The Appellant's case is that, not having seen the age assessment, the Judge
should have paid no regard to it at all.  I cannot accept that proposition.
As I pointed out to Mr Bedford, if anything, the law more generally would
tend to pull in the opposite direction.  In R (A) v Croydon LBC [2009] UKSC
8 ("A and M"), the Supreme Court held that whether a person is a child is a
matter of jurisdictional fact, albeit I accept that this was in the context
of a judicial review of a local authority's decision in relation to the
need to provide support.  The Supreme Court went on to say that "the public
authority, whether the children's services authority or the UK Border
Agency, has to make its own determination in the first instance and it is
only if this remains disputed that the court may have to intervene".

In a somewhat closer context, the Administrative Court in R (on the
application of PM) v Hertfordshire County Council [2010] EWHC 2056 (Admin)
had to grapple with the question of the extent to which a local authority
was bound to or entitled to rely on a finding of the First-tier Tribunal as
to age.  Although Hickinbottom J (as he then was) rejected the local
authority's submission that the Tribunal's finding was a judgment in rem
(based on the reasoning in A and M) or one which gave rise to any form of
estoppel between the parties, he nonetheless accepted that the finding of
the Tribunal was a materially relevant factor to which the local authority
was entitled to have regard.

The Judge in PM put forward a series of objections to the local authority
simply adopting the finding of the Tribunal, some of which are based on the
duty on that authority to determine age for itself when making a decision
whether or not to support.  Those objections do not apply in the opposite
direction.  The age assessment, determined over two years previously, had
not been challenged.  The Appellant accepted that he had seen the age
assessment and had taken a decision not to challenge its conclusion even
though he continued to dispute it. Given the potential implications for his
support whilst in the UK, if he disputed the conclusion, he might be
expected to challenge it.  He could at the very least have produced the
document he was given in order to dispute it before the Tribunal Judge.  In
response to Mr Bedford's point that the age assessment as now produced is
shown to be not "Merton compliant", as I have already pointed out, the
document on which the Respondent relies is not the full age assessment but
merely a "sharing proforma" which provides a summary of the process, those
conducting it and the conclusions.   The Appellant has a copy of the age
assessment given to him by the local authority. As I have already said, if
he wished to challenge the compliance of that assessment with the "Merton"
procedures (including before the First-tier Tribunal), he could have done
so but did not. He was well aware that the Respondent had adopted the
conclusion of the age assessment.

In summary therefore, the Judge was entitled to take the local authority's
assessment of the Appellant's age into account.  If the Appellant wished to
dispute the validity or process of that assessment and to say that no
weight should be attached or if he said that the conclusion was not as the
Respondent asserted, he could have produced the document to make that
argument.  He did not do so.   Similarly, if the document now produced had
shown that the conclusion was not as the Respondent asserted it to be, I
would have found an error of law.  However, for the foregoing reasons and
since the Judge treated the age assessment conclusion only as part of the
evidence as to age, there is no error of law established in this regard.

I therefore now turn to the remainder of the evidence before the Judge and
her treatment of it.  That leads me on to the taskira as that is the
evidence pointing in the opposite direction in support of the Appellant's
claimed age.

The evidence about the provenance and production of the taskira was given
by [HA] and the genuineness of it was supported by the report of Dr
Giustozzi.  It is necessary to look at what the Judge had to say about both
aspects at [21] to [33] of the Decision as follows:

         "21. In making a determination of the Appellant's age, I bear in
         mind what the Appellant said in evidence to the tribunal, he stated
         that his brother held his original tashkira and he produced this in
         court.


         22.  Of concern was the Presenting Officer also appeared to have an
         'original' tashkira on their file.  I intend to return to this
         point later.


         23.  I also heard evidence from the Appellant's brother.  He
         confirmed that when he left Afghanistan, he took the Appellant's
         tashkira with him as he thought he would make applications for both
         himself and his brother in due course.  If this is correct, then it
         seems that the Appellant's brother had some future intention of
         meeting up with the Appellant in Europe. In cross examination, the
         Appellant's brother accepted that the tashkira appeared to be
         issued in 2012, it was made at that time, as the Appellant was
         required to have one as an Afghani citizen and that when he left in
         2014, he took it with him.


         24.  This assertion by the Appellant's brother seems to make little
         sense to me, for the very fact, that if his evidence is to be
         accepted, he was leaving Afghanistan for good as he feared
         persecution from the Taliban.  He was therefore leaving all of his
         family behind with no immediate or foreseeable prospect of return.
         There appears to be no reason for him to take the Appellant's
         tashkira, particularly as he knew this was a document that would be
         required by the Appellant in his home country as an Afghani
         citizen, as he said so, in his own evidence.  The explanation from
         the Appellant's brother was not, in my view, plausible.


         25.  In any event, the Appellant relies upon the opinion of Dr
         Guistozzi, who confirms that the tashkira in the possession of the
         Appellant's brother is an authentic document.  The Respondent
         states that no weight should be placed on this evidence as reliance
         was placed by Dr Guistozzi and others on what is essentially a
         scanned document.


         26.  As I go on to consider the authenticity of the document, I
         return to the point that both the Respondent and the Appellant's
         brother seemed to have what was said to be the 'original' tashkira
         in their possession during the hearing.  They may well have been
         duplicates, but I was not told that.  Suffice to say, that it did
         not become clear which was the original copy, if at all.


         27.  For the sake of my determination, I intend to move forward on
         the basis of the tashkira, that was in the Appellant's brother's
         possession.  A scanned copy of this was sent to Dr Guistozzi, on
         which he was requested to give an expert opinion.  Dr Guistozzi
         states that confirmation of authenticity of the tashkira was sought
         from the Central Civil Registration Authority department of Kunduz
         province where his colleague met up on his instructions with an
         employee of the office, that employee found a complete match of the
         tashkira with their records and confirmed that the tashkira is
         genuine.  Furthermore, that the confirmation statement at the back
         of the tashkira is sought by government offices otherwise the
         tashkira is not accepted as being valid.


         28.  I carefully read the report from Dr Guistozzi.  It was lacking
         in a number of different respects.


         29.  Dr Guistozzi's instructions appear to be that he was asked to
         seek confirmation as to whether the tashkira can be verified as
         genuine or not.  It follows that the expert would then reasonably
         be expected to give an opinion on whether the tashkira could be
         verified or not.


         30.  In this instance, Dr Guistozzi appears to ask his associate
         researcher, Mr Rahimi to obtain confirmation of whether the
         tashkira was genuine.  Mr Rahimi reported back to Dr Guistozzi that
         he met up with another employee in Afghanistan who made the
         necessary checks and confirmed that there was a complete match.  Dr
         Guistozzi then reported what he was told by Mr Rahimi.  It is
         therefore difficult to ascertain on what aspect Dr Guistozzi
         himself gives an expert opinion, other than reporting back what he
         was told by his researcher.


         31.  It may well be that Mr Rahimi could have provided a report, if
         he falls within the definition of an 'expert'.  On Dr Guistozzi's
         report, it states that Mr Rahimi's CV is attached but this did not
         seem to eb attached.  In any event, I question the weight that I
         could attach to it, as the evidence of the authentication appears
         to come from an unidentified employee of the Central Civil
         Registration Authority department of Kunduz province and again, Mr
         Rahimi, is likewise not providing any 'expert' opinion.


         32.  If I reach the view that I do not have before me an expert
         opinion, which is where I now seem to be at, it still does not
         prohibit me in any way from considering the evidence of Mr Rahimi
         and the unidentified employee from the Registration Authority.  In
         that regard, there is a lack of continuity and depth of information
         from one stage to the next, for instance, there is no explanation
         as to what is meant by a 'complete match', no explanation as to
         what 'their records' consisted of and no explanation on what basis
         the employee was able to confirm that it was a 'genuine' document,
         particularly, in light of the fact that the information given by
         the employee also seemed to suggest that confirmation statements
         were sought by authorities, otherwise tashkira's were not accepted
         as valid.  Finally, there is no explanation of the circumstances in
         which the confirmation statement at the back would be dated
         differently from the date of issue of the tashkira.  It seemed to
         require much speculation on my part.


         33.  I am not persuaded in the circumstances of this case, that for
         the cumulative reasons mentioned from paragraphs 21 to 32, that the
         tashkira in the possession of the brother is a document on which
         reliance can be placed."


I can deal very briefly with the point made about the unfairness of relying
on what was said to be an original taskira on the Respondent's file.  As I
have already noted, Mr Kotas was unable to find such a document and could
not assist.  However, although the Judge mentions this point and, I accept,
may place some limited weight on that issue, it is clear from what is said
at [27] of the Decision that the Judge proceeded thereafter on the basis
that the taskira on which the Appellant relied was that apparently
authenticated by Dr Guistozzi's report and which [HA] had produced. Even if
there is an error in that regard, therefore, it is not material.

Turning then to the taskira on which the Appellant relied, the evidence is
a combination of the evidence of [HA] and the report of Dr Guistozzi.
There is no challenge to the Judge's finding that [HA]'s evidence of how he
came to have the taskira in order to give it to Dr Guistozzi or to him via
the Appellant's representatives is implausible.  That is therefore the
starting point to consideration of the genuineness of that document.

The Appellant's grounds are, in essence, that Dr Guistozzi is providing a
report as an expert about the process of authentication which he says can
be relied upon to determine the authenticity or otherwise of the taskira.
That may be so.  However, the authenticity still depends on the carrying
out of that authentication process (as opposed to a verification on the
face of the document based on the expert's familiarity with that type of
document).  The Judge's findings are a combination of giving little weight
to Dr Guistozzi's evidence because he was not himself involved in the
process and discounting the weight he could give to the evidence as
reported by Dr Guistozzi because it was unsupported by evidence from those
who conducted the process; in effect, that there was no audit trail.

The Judge has provided detailed reasons for not accepting Dr Guistozzi's
evidence which, when combined with her finding about the implausibility of
how the "original" taskira came to be in the UK in the first place, are
sufficient to explain why she reached the conclusion she did.  It cannot be
said that the conclusion reached is perverse based on those reasons.

The Judge was therefore left in the position at this point of giving some
weight to the age assessment conclusion and no weight to the taskira.  That
though was not the end of her consideration as to the Appellant's age.
She went on to consider the other evidence and make her own assessment as
follows:

         "34. I also read the Verification Report translation at page G1 of
         the Respondent's bundle, which confirms that the Appellant is not
         known in his village by the elders.  However, I find that to be so
         vague, that I do not attach any weight to it.


         35.  I am then back to my starting position where I am left with
         the Appellant asserting he is 16 years and an age assessment
         carried out by the Council, which confirms that he is 19 years of
         age.


         36.  It was of course open to the Appellant to dispute the age
         assessment, if he did not agree with it, and the letter from
         Central England Law Centre dated 29 January 2019 on p99 of the
         Appellant's bundle states that advice was sought by him but
         ultimately the Appellant decided against appealing this decision on
         the grounds of expediency.  This letter does not specify when such
         advice was sought, but as there is a mention of a tashkira, this
         presumably would have been after July 2017.  It is unusual for the
         Appellant not to have disputed the age assessment when it has such
         a bearing on his case, but I bear in mind, that an explanation of
         expediency has been provided by those whom he instructed.


         37.  I am then left with an assertion by the Appellant as to his
         age and an age assessment carried out by the local council.  Whilst
         I have not had sight of that assessment and can make no detailed
         findings.  Whilst the Appellant disagreed with the age assessment,
         it was not asserted that report was anything other than Merton
         compliant.  I also remind myself that it is not open to me to
         speculate on what is not before me.  However, what I am able to
         infer it that the age assessment by the council would have required
         a more rigorous process to have arrived at their decision.


         38.  Furthermore, as I am entitled to take a rounded view of all
         the evidence, in determining age, the detail given by the Appellant
         in his statement dated July 2017 appears to me, to be more
         consistent, with a child of 17 years of age, rather than one of 14
         to 15 years of age.  I also noted that in his evidence, he was able
         to give forthright answers, for instance, when asked why his
         brother had taken his tashkira, he was able to give an immediate
         and forthright reply that his brother should be asked that question
         rather than him.  He did not give the impression of being someone
         who is vulnerable or a youth.


         39.  Taking a rounded view of all the evidence before me, I arrive
         at the conclusion tht the Appellant is 19 years of age and an adult
         and not 16 years of age, as he suggests.  I find that the evidence
         given by the Appellant at each stage of the proceedings was more
         akin to that of an older individual than the Appellant suggests.
         Whilst I do not have the age assessment before me, I have the
         conclusion from that assessment, which, in the absence of
         assertions to the contrary, is likely to have been Merton
         compliant, and thus would have involved a more rigorous process
         than the assertion made by the Appellant. I also bear in mind, the
         burden of proving age and that the Appellant ultimately chose not
         to dispute the age assessment.  I therefore proceed on the basis
         that the Appellant is now an adult of 19 years of age".


 As can be seen from that extract, the Judge made very similar points to
those which I made earlier concerning the age assessment and the reliance
which could be placed on that.  The Judge did not consider herself bound by
that assessment but reached a view on the totality of the evidence based on
her earlier findings on the evidence and taking into account the burden of
proof which was on the Appellant albeit to the lower asylum standard.

For the foregoing reasons, there is no error of law in the Judge's approach
to the determination of the Appellant's age nor in her conclusion.  It
follows that she was entitled to treat him as an adult for the purposes of
the hearing.  Mr Bedford drew my attention to the Judge's remarks about
vulnerability at [10] of the Decision.  He said that the Judge had adopted
the wrong approach by asking Counsel for the Appellant whether there were
any vulnerabilities other than the Appellant's claimed age and for Counsel
to draw any matters to her attention during the hearing if necessary.
There is no suggestion in the evidence that the Appellant suffers from any
mental health problems or is otherwise vulnerable.  Given the Judge's
conclusion that the Appellant is not a minor which I have found to contain
no error of law, whether or not the approach she adopted was correct can
make no difference.

Risk in Home Area

The Appellant's ground in this regard is that the Judge's treatment of an
expert report of Mr Tim Foxley and her discounting of that evidence is
based on a factually incorrect premise.  The ground runs like this.  The
risk to the Appellant in his home area from the Taliban is said to arise
because of [HA]'s failure to carry out his promise to spy for the Taliban.
The Judge placed weight on the fact that the family carried on living in
their home area for six months following [HA]'s release by the Taliban.
However, that failed to recognise that [HA] did not work for the
international forces in his home area and it would therefore be some time
before the Taliban in the local area would realise that [HA] had broken his
promise and come looking for the Appellant and his family.  It is said that
the Judge's findings in this regard ignore [HA]'s own evidence. The
Appellant also says that there is an apparent contradiction between the
Judge's findings about this aspect of the case at [55] of the Decision and
what is said at [58] of the Decision.

I deal with that latter point first.  At [55] of the Decision, the Judge
said this (having first referred to the background evidence that those
working for the international forces were at risk - although lower in Kabul
- and that family members may also be targeted):

         "This supports the fact that the Appellant's brother is likely to
         be at risk and likewise, family members may be targeted, however,
         when I consider the position of the Appellant, I note that


         iv) The Appellant's brother was at home for at least 20 to 25
             days, during which, the family had no visits or problems from
             the Taliban,


          v) Even after the brother left, the Appellant and his family
             remained at home for approximately 4 months, before the mother
             of the Appellant expressed concern that they would be targeted
             but they were still able to remain for another 2 months,
             before they left.  Nothing before me suggests that the family
             were targeted generally or specifically due to the fact that
             they were the family of an interpreter and more so, the family
             of an interpreter who promised to spy for them but then
             disappeared after approximately 20 to 25 days.  The Taliban
             are not known for their patience and I do not find that they
             would wait 20 to 25 days and take no action.  More so, as I
             find as a fact that the Appellant's brother was approached and
             detained by the Taliban in their home village, it is
             reasonable to expect that the Taliban would know where their
             home address and thus the location of his family, yet there
             were no visits from the Taliban for up to 6 months.


         I infer from this the Taliban had no interest in pursuing the
         family of the interpreter who worked for the American Forces,
         namely, the Appellant, his mother or his youngest brother and to
         all intents and purposes, regardless of their familial relationship
         with an interpreter for the American Forces, they are deemed to be
         of 'low profile'.  If there was no interest in pursuing the
         Appellant or his family then, there is not likely to be any
         interest in pursuing the Appellant now."


Having then set out an extract from Mr Foxley's report to which I will
return, the Judge said this at [58] of the Decision:

         "On the basis that the Appellant's brother spent 20 to 25 days in
         his home before he left and the Appellant and his remaining family
         spent 6 months in their home village without adverse attention, I
         am of the view, as mentioned earlier than there there is [sic]
         indicative that the Taliban have no interest in the Appellant or
         his family.  I cannot therefore accept Mr Foxley's conclusion which
         is based on the situation in an area where his family appear to
         have been identified and targeted by the Taliban. I do not accept
         that the family have been identified, the Appellant's brother was
         identified, detained and released.  On the back of that, there was
         still no further adverse attention directed to either his brother
         or to the remaining family.  I therefore reject Mr Foxley's
         conclusions as they are based on an incorrect premise."


The Appellant's ground regarding a conflict between those paragraphs does
not withstand scrutiny.  The Judge at [58] was clearly referring back to
what she said at [55] and making the same point, namely that the Taliban
would have no interest in the family because, in spite of knowing where the
family lived, they had not targeted them following [HA]'s release.  The
Appellant's complaint appears to turn on the use of the word "identified".
That word as used at [58] is used synonymously with the word "targeted". It
is not used in the perhaps more natural meaning of recognising someone but
rather as singling out a person.  I anticipate that this is probably due to
the way in which Mr Foxley had himself explained the risk in his report as
set out in the extracts included at [57] as follows:

         "I read the report prepared by Mr Tim Foxley MBE dated 21 November
         2018 on behalf of the Appellant in which he states that as far as
         the risk to the Appellant from his home area village of Kunduz is
         concerned:-


         There are demonstrably clear risks to interpreters and their
         families...The Taliban still have a very active presence in Kunduz,
         so there will be a high likelihood that the Taliban will still be
         operating in your client's home area.  He could be at risk of being
         targeted... (paragraph 29)


         I think the greatest risk to your client from the Taliban would eb
         on return to his home area.  He will be at risk from a volatile
         security situation in an area where his family appear to have been
         identified and targeted by the Taliban, potentially bringing
         himself to the adverse attention of the insurgents (paragraph 32)


         Those loyal to the Taliban may identify him on his return and mark
         him for adverse attention


         ..."


     There is therefore no conflict between the findings in the two
    paragraphs when read in context and as a whole.

I can deal quite shortly with the other part of this ground.  The Appellant
says that the Judge has misunderstood that [HA] did not work with the
international forces in his home area and therefore the Taliban local to
his home area would not have become aware as quickly that [HA] was not
carrying out his promise to spy for them.  It is said that the Judge failed
to have regard to [HA]'s evidence on this point.  I do not need to refer to
[HA]'s evidence about this.  It is evident from what the Judge said at [55]
that she was considering the period during which [HA] was at his family
home immediately following release when the Taliban locally would no doubt
be keen for him to start his spying activities on their behalf and in the
four month period after [HA] left when he was away but they would become
aware that he was not carrying out his promise.  Moreover, the Judge was
there considering not simply the risk based on [HA]'s failure to comply
with his promise to spy for the Taliban but also the risk based on familial
connection with an interpreter working for the international forces.

The Judge was entitled to reach the conclusion which she did based on the
facts and evidence.  She did not misunderstand the Appellant's case in this
regard.  Her conclusion is not irrational.  There is no error of law in
this regard.

Even if I am wrong about that, though, the Judge went on to consider
whether the Appellant would be at risk from the Taliban elsewhere in
Afghanistan.  This is dealt with at [60] to [61] of the Decision as
follows:

         "[60]    As to the risk from the rest of the country, Mr Foxley
         states


         Your client has a low profile and from his account does not appear
         to have come to the specific attention of the Taliban...


         If the return was to Kabul,


         It becomes less likely that he would present a profile for specific
         tracking and targeting...I don't feel that the Taliban as a
         movement would have any particular interest in or awareness of him,
         were he to move to a different region.


         If the Taliban came across him anywhere in the country, and his
         specific background became known, he would be at greater risk.


         [61] Based on my findings thus far, for similar reasons, as the
         Taliban did not appear to have any interest in the Appellant or his
         family, after the brother was released by them, I find that, it is
         highly unlikely that he will come to the attention of the Taliban
         and his specific background is likewise unlikely to become known.
         The risk of this happening is negligible based on past conduct."


Having considered the country guidance cases relating to the situation in
Kabul, the Judge concluded that return to Kabul would not be unduly harsh
([64] of the Decision).  There is no pleaded challenge to that finding.  As
I have already noted, Mr Bedford's submission was that the Appellant could
not be returned to Kabul because he is a minor.  Having upheld the Judge's
finding in relation to the Appellant's age, there is no error of law in the
Judge's conclusions regarding risk on return.  Even if she was wrong about
return to the Appellant's home area (which for the reasons given above, I
do not accept), she has also concluded that he could return without risk to
Kabul and that it would not be unduly harsh to expect him to relocate
there.

Mr Bedford also made the submission that, because the Appellant should have
been accepted to be a minor and vulnerable on this account, the Judge fell
into error by not taking the Appellant's claim at its highest or at least
determining it on the basis of the background evidence rather than the
Appellant's testimony.  That submission is of course undermined by my
conclusion about the determination of the Appellant's age.  In any event,
in seeking to make good his submission that the Appellant would in fact be
at risk on return, Mr Bedford took me to a number of background documents
which were not before the Judge (as he accepted) and could only therefore
be relevant if I found there to be an error of law on the two pleaded
grounds which I have concluded is not the case.  I intend no disrespect to
Mr Bedford's able submissions by not dealing with them; they are not
relevant as a result of my above conclusions.  I should add though that, as
Mr Kotas submitted, the Judge in fact largely accepted the credibility of
the Appellant's claim ([52] of the Decision).  Her conclusions are that,
based on the accepted facts, there is a lack of current risk to the
Appellant.

CONCLUSION

For the above reasons, there is no error of law in the Judge's findings
concerning the Appellant's age or the risk to him on return to Afghanistan.
 I therefore uphold the Decision.

Notice of Decision

I am satisfied that there is no material error of law in the decision of
First-tier Tribunal Judge Dhaliwal promulgated on 7 March 2019.  I
therefore uphold that decision with the consequence that the appellant's
appeal remains dismissed.


Signed   [pic]             Date: 4 June 2019

 Upper Tribunal Judge Smith
