
                                    [pic]

Upper Tier Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11589/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice Centre          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13 March 2020                                  |On 23 March 2020              |
|                                                  |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PICKUP

                                   Between

                                     MZ
                         [ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the appellant:     Mr M Schwenk, instructed by WTB Solicitors LLP
For the respondent:    Mr A Tan , Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269), I make an anonymity direction. Unless the Upper  Tribunal  or
a Court directs otherwise, no report of these proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the appellant(s).

 1. This is the appellant's  appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Garratt promulgated 19.11.18, dismissing on all  grounds
    her appeal against the  decision  of  the  Secretary  of  State,  dated
    14.9.18, to refuse her application for international protection made on
    13.4.18.

 2. First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Chohan  refused  permission  to  appeal  on
    13.12.18. However, when  the  application  was  renewed  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal, Upper Tribunal Judge Plimmer granted permission  on  22.1.20,
    finding it arguable that:

      a) The First-tier  Tribunal  failed  to  take  into  account  relevant
         country background evidence, in particular evidence concerning  the
         role of the Catholic Church in demonstrations, as asserted  by  the
         appellant;

      b) The First-tier Tribunal gave inadequate reasons  for  finding  that
         the appellant's sur place activities would not lead to  prospective
         risk, in the light of the heightened political tensions in the DRC.

 3. Mr  Tan  confirmed  that  there  was  no  Rule  24  response  from  the
    respondent.

Error of Law

 4. For the reasons set out below, I find there was no  material  error  of
    law in the making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal such as to
    require it to be set aside.

 5. The according of weight to evidence is a matter for the  judge.  It  is
    not an arguable error of law for a judge to give too little or too much
    weight to a relevant factor, unless the exercise is irrational. Nor  is
    it an error of law for a judge to fail to deal with every factual issue
    of argument. Disagreement  with  a  judge's  factual  conclusions,  the
    appraisal  of  the  evidence  or  assessment  of  credibility,  or  the
    evaluation of risk does not give rise to an error of  law.  Nor  is  it
    necessary to consider every possible alternative  inference  consistent
    with  truthfulness  because  a  judge  has  concluded  that  the  story
    proffered is untrue. However, if a point of  evidence  of  significance
    has been ignored or misunderstood, that may be a failure to  take  into
    account a material consideration.

 6. Mr Schwenk divided his submissions into issues relating to the  adverse
    credibility findings and the application of the Country Guidance to the
    facts as found by the Judge.

 7. The first argument raised is that in grounds from  [4]  onwards,  which
    criticise the judge's adverse credibility findings at [46] and [48]  of
    the decision, relating to the claimed arrest on 25.2.18, and  which  is
    argued to be consistent with country information confirming  the  harsh
    prison conditions and treatment in  the  DRC.  Whilst  the  appellant's
    account was that she was detained for about  a  month  and  mistreated,
    until she escaped.

 8. In relation to the circumstances of  the  appellant's  claimed  arrest,
    detention and ill-treatment on 25.2.18, the judge stated at  [48]  that
    there was "no objective material or media report to  confirm  that  the
    Catholic  Church  held  the  demonstration  and  several  people   were
    arrested." The grounds and Mr Schwenk referred to page 11 and paragraph
    4.1.5 of the CPIN which reports  the  statement  of  the  UN  Secretary
    General on 1.6.18. This was to the  effect  that  the  Comite  Laic  de
    Coordination, said to be associated with the Catholic Church, organised
    demonstrations on various dates, including 24.2.18. Strictly  speaking,
    the extract does not demonstrate that it was the Catholic Church  which
    held the demonstration on 25.2.18 and, more significantly, it does  not
    refer to there being any arrests at all at any of  the  demonstrations,
    whereas the appellant claimed that at least 15 people were arrested. Mr
    Schwenk argued that the lay committee must be taken to be  part  of  or
    associated with the Catholic Church, but there is  no  evidence  before
    the Tribunal to that effect. The general country information relied  on
    does not bear sufficiently directly on the appellant's claim.

 9. At [46]  the  judge  pointed  out  that  the  appellant's  account  was
    inconsistent with the UDPS letter of 13.9.18 in  that  the  UDPS  claim
    that they organised the  peaceful  demonstrations.  Whilst  the  letter
    states that she went missing it does not specifically  state  that  she
    was arrested at the demonstration, as she claims.

10. The grounds go on to refer to reports "widely published in the national
    and international media and internet" that  the  Catholic  Church  held
    demonstrations in DRC and many people were arrested during the rallies.
    However, Mr Schwenk conceded that this information is  not  within  the
    material put before the First-tier Tribunal, although he  attempted  to
    argue that as a matter of fact, post-decision  evidence  on  the  point
    ought to be admissible. The fact remains that that evidence was not put
    before the judge and he cannot be criticised for not looking  at  media
    reports not drawn to his attention or put before the Tribunal.

11. Curiously, there was no challenge to the remainder of the  findings  at
    [48] of the decision that the appellant was not detained and mistreated
    in February 2018, findings supported by the cogent  reasoning  set  out
    therein.

12. It follows that on a straight-forward  reading  of  the  decision,  the
    judge was entitled to state that there was  no  objective  material  or
    media report to confirm that the Catholic Church held the demonstration
    and that several people were arrested. The information relied on is too
    vague and insufficient  to  demonstrate  that  the  judge  was  in  any
    material error in the finding made. The ground attempts  to  make  more
    out of the objective material than it in fact permits.

13. The second issue addressed was the alleged arrest in 2016, rejected  by
    the findings at [45] of the decision,  and  addressed  at  [8]  of  the
    grounds, which submit that  the  Judge  failed  to  take  into  account
    country  background  information  to  assess  the  credibility  of  the
    appellant's account of her arrest in 2016 and release, referring to the
    CPIN at 2.4.2.

14. For his part, Mr Schwenk submitted that the CPIN at 2.4.2 supported the
    appellant's account. However, once again, the information relied on  is
    not quite how it is painted in the grounds.  2.4.2  does  in  fact  not
    state that anyone was  arrested  during  the  December  2016  protests.
    Neither does it state that any such  persons  were  released.  Properly
    read, it appears that a promise was made, inter alia, to hold elections
    and release political prisoners. The election was never  held  and  the
    extract states that other elements of the agreement  made  in  December
    2016 remained outstanding, including the continued detention of  around
    118 political  prisoners.  This  material  is  scant  support  for  the
    appellant's claim and there is no error in the judge's finding at  [45]
    of the decision, which is cogently reasoned.

15. The third issue raised by Mr Schwenk is the judge's  treatment  of  the
    UDPS membership card.  The grounds  from  [10]  onwards  criticise  the
    judge's findings  at  [42]  and  [43]  that  the  appellant  failed  to
    demonstrate that  she  was  the  holder  of  a  properly  obtained  and
    authorised UDPS membership card. However, cogent reasons were given for
    that conclusion,  open  to  the  judge  on  the  evidence.  Mr  Schwenk
    suggested that the  judge  found  that  the  membership  card  was  not
    authentic and should have applied a higher standard of proof applicable
    to fraud or forgery, an argument not  pleaded  in  the  grounds.  On  a
    proper reading of the decision it is clear from the  last  sentence  of
    [42] that what the judge found was that "the evidence does  not  enable
    me to conclude that the appellant is the holder of a properly  obtained
    and authorised membership card for the UDPS."  Effectively,  the  judge
    was applying Tanveer Ahmed [2002] UKAIT 00439,  where  it  is  for  the
    appellant to demonstrate  that  a  document  is  reliable.  Mr  Schwenk
    pointed to the opening sentence of  the  next  paragraph  at  [43],  to
    suggest that the judge found the card fabricated or fraudulent. Even if
    no more than 'not authentic' that is not the point being  made  by  the
    judge at [43] of the decision. It is clear that the judge was conceding
    that whether even without a valid or authentic membership card did  not
    mean that the appellant was not a  UDPS  supporter.  That  is  entirely
    different to a finding of forgery or fraud. In any  event,  as  pointed
    out this was not pleaded in the renewed grounds  on  which  Mr  Schwenk
    relied.

16. Criticism is also made at [10] of the grounds that the judge failed  to
    examine the original documentation but relied on the colour photocopies
    in the bundle. When pressed on this Mr  Schwenk  did  not  pursue  this
    point. There was no obligation on the judge  to  examine  the  original
    document; the judge is not an expert. It follows that no error  of  law
    is disclosed by this aspect of the grounds.

17. In relation to the above points, it should also be  remembered,  as  Mr
    Tan pointed out, that there are several negative  credibility  findings
    in the decision which have not been challenged, including  the  finding
    at [41] of the decision that the judge did "not find it  credible  that
    the appellant would take to active membership  of  the  UDPS  when  she
    still had young children to care for. Similarly, there was no challenge
    to the application of section  8  at  [50]  of  the  decision,  or  the
    findings in relation to  the  sur  place  activities  at  [51]  of  the
    decision.  It  follows  that  there  were  a  number  of  key   adverse
    credibility findings in the context of which  the  relevance  of  other
    challenged findings must be considered.

18. In relation to the application of the Country  Guidance  to  the  facts
    found by the Tribunal, Mr Schwenk and the grounds criticise the judge's
    findings and conclusion at [52] of the decision, where the judge relied
    on MM (UDPS members, risk on return) DRC CG [2017] UKAIT  0023.  It  is
    argued that the judge failed to allow the appeal on the accepted  facts
    and [2] of the grounds asserts that the judge failed to properly assess
    whether the  appellant  is  at  risk  of  persecution  considering  the
    prevailing political climate, the nature and profile of her  activities
    and the organisation she represents, and whether she had  come  to  the
    attention of the authorities. Reference was made to [202]  of  MM,  set
    out at [3]  of  the  skeleton  argument,  as  to  risk  fluctuating  in
    accordance with the political situation. However, on a  proper  reading
    of that paragraph it is clear that the Upper Tribunal  held  (continued
    to believe) that low level members/sympathisers of the UDPS will not be
    at real risk on return to the DRC in the current climate "but  conclude
    that it is too early in  the  process  of  transition  of  the  DRC  to
    democratic rule, to find that there is no continuing threat on the part
    of the current Kabila regime to persecute UDPS activists."  It  was  in
    relation to activists and not low-level members  or  sympathisers  that
    the Upper  Tribunal's  comment  about  fluctuating  risk  applied.  The
    grounds are something of a deliberate misreading of the passage.

19. Mr Schwenk also drew my attention to 2.4.10-11  of  the  CPIN  in  this
    regard, referring in 2018 to heightened tension around the build up  to
    the December 2018 elections. However, the passage relates to those with
    a known political profile or position in an opposition party being more
    at risk than ordinary members. Even with the heightened tension,  "Rank
    and file party members and low-level activists are  generally  unlikely
    to  be  at  risk  of  such  treatment."  Once  again,  the   background
    information relied on does not bear out the argument of the grounds. It
    is clear that at [52] the judge was considering the  risk  involved  of
    the appellant being returned to the DRC as "a failed asylum seeker  who
    will not be recognised as a  political  activist  or  someone  who  has
    previously been detained for  such  activity  in  that  country."  This
    followed the judge's rejection of  the  appellant's  factual  claim  of
    events in the DRC and the finding at [51] that her involvement with the
    UDPS in the UK "did not take the form  of  activism  amounting  to  sur
    place political activity that would put her at risk if returned to  the
    DRC. In that respect I bear in mind that membership fo the UDPS is not,
    in itself, an offence." Applying the Country Guidance, the judge  found
    at [52] that low level membership of or sympathy with the UDPS will not
    for that reason alone put individuals at real risk on return. The judge
    also took into account heightened tensions because of  the  prospective
    elections of 2018. "As I have concluded  that  the  appellant  has  not
    shown that she is an active member of the UDPS or that she has  engaged
    in open opposition activities such as demonstrations or been  arrested,
    I cannot conclude that she  will  be  at  real  risk  of  serious  harm
    amounting to persecution if returned. For these reasons  the  appellant
    is not a refugee." It follows that contrary to the  assertions  in  the
    grounds, the judge has taken account of the  CPIN  and  the  heightened
    political tension. All the matters raised at [2] and [3] of the grounds
    have been taken into account but in the light of the rejection  of  the
    factual claim, the dismissal of the appeal was inevitable.

20. The final point taken by Mr Schwenk was another matter not  pleaded  in
    the grounds, suggesting that when finding at [41] of the  decision  the
    appellant would not become involved with young children, the judge made
    a statement he would not have made about a man, implying sexism. When I
    pointed out that the point had not been pleaded and  no  challenge  had
    been made in the grounds to the findings in [41], Mr Schwenk  submitted
    that it was a  Robinson-obvious  point,  which  I  do  not  accept  and
    declined to hear further submissions on such a point.

21. The remaining grounds are a plain disagreement with  the  findings  and
    conclusions of the First-tier Tribunal, arguing at [11],  for  example,
    that even on the judge's findings the appellant has a political profile
    sufficient to create a very real risk on return to the DRC, relying  on
    her detention without charge on two separate occasions  on  grounds  of
    her political opinion. However,  the  judge  found  at  [40]  that  the
    appellant's evidence of active membership of the UDPS  or  accounts  of
    two arrested and harassment at demonstrations to be credible. The judge
    set out her reasons for that conclusion in the succeeding paragraphs of
    the decision. It follows that the premise of the remaining  grounds  is
    entirely inconsistent with the findings of the First-tier Tribunal  and
    disclose no error of law.

22. In VW (Sri Lanka) [2013] EWCA Civ  522  at  [12],  LJ  McCombe  stated,
    "Regrettably, there is an increasing  tendency  in  immigration  cases,
    when a First-tier Tribunal Judge has given a judgment explaining why he
    has  reached  a  particular  decision,  of  seeking   to   burrow   out
    industriously areas of evidence that have been less  fully  dealt  with
    than others and then to use this as a  basis  for  saying  the  judge's
    decision is legally flawed because it did not deal  with  a  particular
    matter more fully. In my judgment, with respect, that is  no  basis  on
    which to sustain a proper challenge to  a  judge's  finding  of  fact."
    Sadly, this is such a case.


Decision

23. For the reasons explained above, the making  of  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making of an error on  a  point
    of law such that the decision should be set aside.

     I do not set aside the decision.

                    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands  and  the
                    appeal remains dismissed on all grounds.

     Signed


         Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated 13 March 2020

