
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11373/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 18 November 2019                  |On 25 November 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                     SM
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Imamovic, instructed by UK & Co solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant was born in 1994 and is a female  citizen  of  Iraq.  She
    entered the United  Kingdom  on  25  January  2017  with  their  eldest
    daughter who is now aged five years. She has another child who will  be
    two years old in January 2020. The children and the appellant's husband
    (R) are British citizens. R was born in Iran was granted asylum in  the
    United Kingdom.

 2. By a decision of Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain, the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal was set aside.  The  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge directed that the resumed hearing should take  place  before  any
    Upper Tribunal Judge. Accordingly, I conducted the resumed  hearing  at
    Birmingham on 18 November 2019 following which I reserved my decision.

 3. The Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge  directed  that  the  only  outstanding
    issue to be determined concerns the appeal on Article 8 grounds. He did
    not  disturb  the  conclusion  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  that  the
    appellant's asylum appeal should be dismissed. The First-tier  Tribunal
    had found that the appellant and her  husband  were  not  witnesses  of
    truth.

 4. The standard of proof in  the  Article  8  appeal  is  the  balance  of
    probabilities. The parties accepted before the Upper Tribunal that  the
    appellant did not satisfy the provisions of Appendix FM of HC  395  (as
    amended). The appeal falls to be considered, therefore, under Article 8
    ECHR outside the rules.

 5. Both the appellant and husband gave evidence Kurdish  Sorani  with  the
    assistance of an interpreter. The appellant said that her eldest  child
    is now in a reception class at infants school. The child speaks English
    90% of the time; she now speaks  little  Kurdish.  Her  youngest  child
    speaks mainly English also. The appellant explained that the husband is
    working so she mainly cares for the children. The  appellant  possesses
    only basic education qualifications.

 6. Cross-examined by Mrs Aboni, who appeared for the Secretary  of  State,
    the appellant said that she had no family living in Iraq. She said that
    her life in the United Kingdom were safe and settled. She believed  her
    husband had obtained his British nationality  in  2008.  She  confirmed
    that he had travelled to Iraq in the period 2011 - 2016; the couple had
    married in Iraq in 2013.

 7. I heard evidence from the appellant's husband, R. He stated that he had
    entered the United Kingdom as minor or in December 2004. He had  become
    a British citizen in June 2011. He said that he had travelled  to  Iraq
    in 2012 in order to try  to  make  contact  with  his  mother  who  had
    remained living in Iran. He had supported himself in  Iraq  by  working
    for the appellant's uncle in a car body shop. The appellant  now  works
    in the United Kingdom as a manager of a Tesco hand car wash.

 8. This is an appeal which turns on the question as to whether it would be
    reasonable to expect the two children of the appellant and her  husband
    to travel abroad to live in Iraq. The parties accept  that,  if  it  is
    found to be not reasonable, then the operation of  section  117B(6)  of
    the Nationality Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  (as  amended)  renders
    the removal of the appellant without public interest. Consequently, the
    removal of the appellant would not be  proportionate  (Article  8  ECHR
    (2)).

 9. The litigation history of this appeal is unfortunate. It is clear that,
    if the First-tier Tribunal had applied the Home Office policy which was
    in force at the date of the hearing before it, it would have found that
    the respondent did not consider it to be in the public interest British
    citizen children to have  to  leave  the  jurisdiction  of  the  United
    Kingdom. That policy, which has subsequently been  superseded,  made  a
    distinction between children who are 'qualifying  children'  under  the
    2002 Act only because they have lived in this country for  seven  years
    or more and children who are British citizens. Children in  the  latter
    category are now treated in exactly the same way  as  other  qualifying
    children under the  policy  now  in  force.  That  policy  (Version  4)
    provides that 'starting point is that [the Secretary  of  State]  would
    not normally expect qualifying child to leave the United Kingdom.'  [my
    emphasis] The policy goes on to record that 'the  Supreme  Court  found
    that 'reasonableness' is to be considered in  a  real-world  context...
    the parents' immigration status is a relevant fact  to  establish  that
    context.' The policy also stresses the need for decision-makers to have
    regard to the best  interests  of  the  children  (section  55  of  the
    Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009).

10. I am required to determine this appeal by reference to  the  facts  and
    the  law  (including,  by  extension,  the  relevant  policies  of  the
    respondent) appertaining as at the date of the Upper  Tribunal  resumed
    hearing. Mrs Aboni submitted that the  First-tier  Tribunal  had  found
    that  the  appellant  and  husband   were   not   credible   witnesses.
    Accordingly, it had also rejected their claim that they had  no  family
    members living in Iraq who would be able to assist them. Whether or not
    that finding is of relevance in the Article 8 appeal, I note  that  the
    appellant's husband found work with  the  appellant's  uncle  when  the
    couple were living in Iraq for a considerable period of time ending  in
    2016. They claim that they are no longer in touch with that uncle  but,
    in the light of the previous credibility assessment of this couple  and
    their failure to give any  proper  reason  for  having  fallen  out  of
    contact with the uncle, I find that that claim is not accurate. If  the
    couple return now to Iraq, I find that they will have contact with  the
    appellant's uncle and, even if his body shop  has  now  closed  as  the
    husband of the appellant claimed, I find  that  he  would  be  able  to
    assist the husband in finding work in Iraq as he had in the past and by
    assisting the reintegration of the family generally.

11. As regards the children, I accept that the eldest child may now be more
    proficient in English than she is in Kurdish. However, the fact remains
    that she does speak some Kurdish, in particular to communicate with her
    mother whose own English is poor. The eldest child has  lived  in  Iraq
    and, whilst I accept that she has now started school, she is still very
    young and there is no evidence to show that  she  would  not  adapt  to
    living in Iraq. The younger child was born in the  United  Kingdom  but
    she is of such a young age  that  her  language  skills  are  only  now
    beginning to develop; there is no evidence to suggest  that  she  would
    not be able to adapt readily  to  living  in  Iraq  and  mastering  the
    Kurdish language. I am fully aware that both children would  be  unable
    to exercise their rights as British citizens in full  whilst  they  are
    living in Iraq. However,  both  children  would  be  returning  to  the
    country of their own and their parents' heritage. Above all, I am aware
    that,  whilst  the  appellant's  husband  is  a  British  citizen,  the
    appellant herself has no right to remain in this country.  Moreover,  I
    have  find  that  her  husband  would  have  no   difficulty   whatever
    integrating into a country where he has lived and found  employment  as
    recently as three years ago.  I find that, on the particular facts,  it
    would be reasonable to expect both children to live in Iraq with  their
    primary carer, the appellant. I find that the test contained in section
    117B(6) is not satisfied in this instance and that family life  may  be
    continued in Iraq. I find that the removal of the appellant to Iraq  is
    proportionate and that her appeal on Article  8  grounds  is  dismissed
    accordingly.



Notice of Decision

    I have  re-made  the  decision.  The  appellant's  appeal  against  the
    decision of the respondent dated 14  September  2018  is  dismissed  on
    human rights grounds (Article 8 ECHR)


Signed                              Date 19 November 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane




Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.










