
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    PA/11571/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard by "Microsoft Teams"           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 14 July 2021                      |On 2 August 2021                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                               DAROWAN ISMAIL
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr S Winter, Advocate, instructed by Maguire,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This  is  an  appeal  against  the  decision  of  FtT  Judge  Buchanan,
    promulgated on 25 February 2021.  The 5 grounds  are  set  out  in  the
    appellant's application dated 9 March 2021.  I deal with  each  ground,
    and the submissions thereon, in order.

 2. Ground 1, "differences arising from the country expert report", is that
    the judge erred by noting discrepancies in the evidence arising from  a
    "draft statement" by the appellant which had apparently been before the
    expert but was not produced or adopted as evidence in  the FtT.

 3. Mr Winter drew attention to the  relevant  passages  in  the  decision,
    identifying discrepancies.  He accepted that some were given  no  great
    weight, but others were,  at  119.1.   He  said  that  the  matter  was
    therefore material; even if a "draft statement" was before the  expert,
    it was no more than that;  the  judge  speculated  on  how  differences
    arose; there was nothing to show their source; and although the  expert
    gave oral evidence, no clarification arose from that.

 4. Mr Bate said that the appellant tendered and relied upon the  whole  of
    the expert report, not on selected parts; the inconsistencies were  put
    to the appellant in cross-examination, as well as being the subject  of
    oral evidence from the expert; the inconsistencies were an  open  issue
    at the hearing, covered also in  submissions;  and  there  was  nothing
    speculative in the judge founding, in part,  on  inconsistencies  which
    the appellant had the opportunity to explain, and left hanging.

 5. I accept the submission of Mr Winter that if ground 1 disclosed  error,
    it was material.  The judge had other reasons for rejecting the  claim,
    but  the  inconsistencies  which  emerged  in  this  way   were   given
    significant weight.

 6. Beyond that, I prefer the submissions for the respondent on  ground  1.
    The appellant chose which  evidence  to  present,  including  a  report
    bearing to derive from his "draft  statement".   He  did  not  distance
    himself, in advance of being examined, on anything in the  report.   He
    elected not to produce the "draft statement" to the tribunal.   He  was
    given the chance to explain,  both  in  evidence  and  in  submissions.
    There was no error of law (or unfairness) in the  judge's  analysis  of
    the case put before him.

 7. Although this is not quite how the ground was  presented,  it  is  also
    clear that  there  was  no  inadvertent  error  or  unfairness  through
    anything which was not before  the  judge.   The  appellant  had  ample
    opportunity to rectify matters at the hearing, but even since then,  he
    has tendered nothing to show that he might have instructed an expert on
    the basis of a statement containing imperfections for which he was  not
    to blame.  He cannot complain of "speculation" when he is the source of
    the inconsistencies and the only party who could offer any explanation.



 8. Ground 2, "manner in which evidence construed", is that the judge erred
    by (i) by too narrow  a  construction  of  whether  threats  were  made
    directly to the appellant or through text messages; (ii) too  narrow  a
    construction of the appellant being asked to send  "any  documents"  to
    the FtT; and (iii) failure  to  assess  whether  mental  health  issues
    explained weaknesses in the appellant's evidence.

 9. Ground 2 (i) focuses on the decision at 33 - 39 and at 119.2.  At 33  -
    39 the judge  observed  a  distinction  between  the  appellant's  oral
    evidence of threatening texts from  an  unknown  source,  and  evidence
    through a psychological report that he had been "directly threatened by
    the family of his  girlfriend".   The  judge  thought  it  was  unclear
    whether the report was referring to direct  or  indirect  threats.   At
    119.2, moving towards his conclusions, the judge finds the  appellant's
    evidence about threats "vague ... on a  central  aspect".   The  ground
    says that there was "a reasonable inference that the  threats  emanated
    from the girlfriend's family".

10. Mr Winter's criticism was  that  the  judge's  interpretation  was  too
    narrow, or overly literal, on whether threats were through texts or  in
    person, as a threat made by text was made directly to the appellant.

11. This sub-ground says that "the same FtT has  been  criticised  for  the
    manner it interpreted evidence - see AR [2021]  CSOH  10".   Mr  Winter
    submitted that it was relevant to note that the  same  judge  had  been
    found to take a legally deficient approach (or at  least  that  it  was
    strongly arguable that he had done so).

12. Mr Bates said that it was not overly narrow for the judge to note  that
    the appellant alleged threats from his girlfriend's family, but in oral
    evidence watered that down to texts from a party or parties unknown; it
    was obvious that the suggested ultimate source was the same,  on  which
    the judge had no misapprehension; any judge might err in one case;  and
    such a finding did not imply that error was to be read into  all  other
    decisions by that judge.

13. In AR, the Court reduced the  UT's  refusal  of  permission  to  appeal
    against a decision of the same judge.  It did no more.  The report does
    not purport to be an authority that all resolutions by  this  judge  of
    factual matters are likely to be marred by legal errors.  This part  of
    the grounds is not a sound proposition of error on a point of law.

14. The judge at 33 - 37 found difficulty in reconciling what the appellant
    appeared to have said about threats to the psychologist  with  what  he
    said in oral evidence.  That analysis is realistic,  not  over-refined.
    In any event, what the judge said when moving towards  his  conclusions
    at 119.2 was that the appellant's evidence was "vague  in  relation  to
    what was said, by whom and when", and that if threats had been made, he
    would have "been able to give detailed evidence".  That view is plainly
    not based on a narrow or over-literal distinction.

15. Ground 2 (ii) alleges similar error,  based  on  the  decision  at  91,
    finding  difficulty  in  reconciling   dates   concerning   documentary
    evidence, and at 119.7, finding evidence in that respect vague, and  to
    disclose embellishment.  This sub-ground was not  pressed,  and  I  see
    nothing in it.

16. As to ground 2 (iii), the judge at 11  -  12  noted  the  diagnosis  of
    "generalised anxiety disorder" and said that he  bore  it  in  mind  in
    reaching conclusions.  At  126  he  found  there  to  be  no  medically
    explained reason for the garbled and confused state  of  the  evidence.
    The appellant says there is a  gap,  but  fails  to  specify  error  in
    declining to give the report any greater  weight.   I  find  this  sub-
    ground to amount to no more than disagreement and a search for  reasons
    upon reasons.

17. Ground 2, as a whole, discloses no error.

18. Ground 3, "arrest warrant", is that the judge erred (i) at 69 -  73  by
    "making certain criticism" but failing  to  identify  anything  in  the
    arrest warrant which itself rendered the document unreliable, and  (ii)
    at 120.1 by finding the warrant not to be central  to  the  claim  when
    that  finding  was  not  supported  by  the   evidence;   an   approach
    inconsistent with AR [2017] CSIH 52, in which the respondent  undertook
    verification checks, which vitiated the finding in this case that there
    was no such obligation on the respondent.

19. Mr Winter referred to AR at [35]:

         We remind ourselves of the need to  examine  the  facts  with  care
         (sometimes referred to as  "anxious  scrutiny"),  and  of  the  low
         standard of proof applicable in  cases  of  this  nature.   We  are
         persuaded that these factors have been  given  insufficient  weight
         and attention in the more  recent  decisions.   We  recognise  that
         there may be cases where  the  concerns  over  the  veracity  of  a
         claimant's account may be so clear-cut that the  decision-maker  is
         driven to rejection of supporting documents, even though  on  their
         face they appear to be authentic;  but even then, given what is  at
         stake, we would expect some consideration to  be  given  to  easily
         available routes to check authenticity.  There is no question  that
         these documents are at the centre of a  request  for  international
         protection.  The decision-maker should stand back and view  all  of
         the evidence in the round before deciding which evidence to  accept
         and which to reject, and on the proper disposal of the appeal.

20. At 69 -73, the judge notes the appellant's oral evidence that he failed
    to appear at court, and that he heard an arrest warrant  was  given  to
    his family; the absence of  any  detail  about  failure  to  appear  in
    earlier witness statements; and the expert's evidence that he  had  not
    commented, and could not comment, on the document.  The grounds do  not
    suggest  error  in  any  of  that.    It   contains   no   "criticism",
    objectionable or otherwise.

21. The appellant has not shown error through absence of  consideration  of
    whether the document appeared reliable on its face.   Further,  he  has
    not referred to anywhere in the decision where the document is  thought
    to have any other appearance.

22. The FtT's decision does not turn on a finding that the  arrest  warrant
    is inauthentic.

23. Mr Bates referred to the terms of the document as translated at page 80
    of the appellant's FtT bundle.  At 4 of the document the "law  article"
    under which the appellant is charged is "393 Q. E.  E.".   There  is  a
    translator's note , "no definition for abbreviation  could  be  found".
    At 5, under the heading "description", there  are  no  details  of  the
    appellant or of  the  alleged  offence,  only  the  words,  "Bring  him
    promptly before us, as he  is  charged  in  a  report  filed  with  the
    police".

24. At highest, the document lends very little support to  the  appellant's
    case; and as  Mr  Bates  further  observed,  this  was  a  claim  based
    primarily on risk from non-state agents, not from the authorities.

25. Cases where the respondent has the obligation to verify  documents  are
    exceptional, not the rule.  The  appellant  does  not  show  that  this
    should have been found to be a case where failure to verify weighed  in
    favour of the appellant.  There was  no  clear-cut  decisive  issue  by
    which verification of the document might have turned the  case  in  his
    favour.

26. Ground 4, "newspaper report", is that the judge erred because (i) there
    was no evidence that the report identified the family involved  and  so
    it was unclear what relevance the judge's findings at 98 & 122-123  had
    and (ii) the findings had  "no  evidential  base...  in  light  of  the
    country expert [report]".

27. At 98, the judge thought it unlikely that the police would disclose  to
    the press a matter embarrassing to a powerful family.

28. The report does not name the family but, as Mr Bates observed, it  says
    that both families were approached for comment,  so  according  to  its
    terms, the police must have told the press who they are.

29. In his reply, Mr  Winter  said  that  if  names  were  given,  but  not
    published, that might reflect power and influence.

30. At 122, the judge thought that it was material that  the  police  would
    not give the press such detail.  At 123, in light of the exert  report,
    he gave "limited  weight  to  the  evidence  because  of  its  inherent
    limitations".

31. Neither (i) nor (ii) of this ground shows that the judge's view of  the
    newspaper evidence involved any error on a point of law.

32. Even if some slip occurred, and despite the use of the word  "material"
    at 122, it has not been suggested that anything  in  the  report  shows
    that it must relate to the appellant.

33. Taking 122 and 123 together,  and  in  context,  this  is  a  fruitless
    debate; and I cannot discern that analysis of the newspaper report  had
    any real effect on the outcome.

34. Ground 5, "the envelopes", is that the judge erred at 112 because there
    was no foundation for his "impressions as to what  the  various  copies
    meant"; he "did not demonstrate any expertise in relation  to  how  TNT
    operate nor is it a subject within judicial knowledge".

35. This ground, rightly, was not pressed in submissions.  The  judge  from
    107 to 113 mused upon the paperwork about transmission of documents, as
    the appellant invited him to do, without trespassing on  matters  which
    should have been confined to a  technical  specialist.   The  appellant
    does not show that those musings were of any great moment, or that they
    contain any legal error.

36. The decision of the FtT shall stand.

37. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.

        Hugh Macleman

     15 July 2021
     UT Judge Macleman




                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS


1.   A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision  must  make
a written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any such application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:


2.   Where the person who appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).


3.   Where the person making the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


4.   Where the person who appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  outside
the United Kingdom at the  time  that  the  application  for  permission  to
appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if  the
notice of decision is sent electronically).


5.   A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or a Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.


6.   The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on the  covering
letter or covering email.

