
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11897/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields (Kings Court) |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 26 April 2019                     |On 14 May 2019                       |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HOLMES


                                   Between

                                     AO
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Brakaj, Iris Law Firm
For the Respondent:    Ms Petterson senior PO

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. We make an order pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008 prohibiting the disclosure of any matter likely to
    lead to the identification of the appellant and his  wife.   Breach  of
    this order may result in contempt proceedings.


 2. This is an appeal by a national of Jordan, born in  1983.   He  entered
    the United Kingdom in September 2016 as a dependent of his wife who had
    leave to enter as a Tier 4 Student and their two children.  The  family
    had leave to remain until 20  February  2018.   The  appellant  claimed
    asylum on 21 February 2018.


 3. The appellant had married  his  present  wife  on  20  June  2010.  His
    protection claim was based on the consequences of a sexual relationship
    with AS, a female colleague at work in February 2016.  He is  a  Muslim
    and she is said to be a  Christian.   The  appellant  had  ended  their
    relationship on moving to the United Kingdom with his wife. In  October
    2017 the appellant received a call from a friend in  Jordan  explaining
    that his family were in a feud with another family over a woman who was
    pregnant; this it emerged was AS's family.  AS subsequently gave  birth
    to his child.   Upon  AS's  family  discovering  the  identity  of  the
    appellant, they had set fire  to  property  owned  by  members  of  his
    family. Separately it was said that the appellant's  wife  had  learned
    about these matters through her own brother  in  Jordan.   Difficulties
    developed in the relationship between the appellant  and  his  wife  in
    consequence. A restraining order had been obtained by her against  him.
    Subsequently they were said to have resolved their marital issues,  but
    to have concluded that it was unsafe for them to return to Jordan.


 4. After considering the reliability of  the  documents  provided  by  the
    appellant in support of his claim, the judge made a series  of  adverse
    findings at [35] to [37] noting  that  no  Article  8  claim  had  been
    pursued:


         "35. Even if I accepted that the  appellant  had  embarked  upon  a
             relationship with the appellant [sic] and given birth  to  his
             child, this does not mean that the appellant is precluded from
             returning to Jordan and internally relocating.  The  appellant
             is highly educated and has a skill set which will  enable  him
             to secure employment upon his return to  Jordan.   His  mother
             has successfully internally relocated to Aman  and  I  see  no
             reason why the appellant, his wife and children could  not  do
             likewise.  The Tribe have assisted the appellant's mother  and
             have on occasions assisted the appellant; I see no reason  why
             the Tribe would not be willing to assist  the  appellant  upon
             return.  There is no suggestion that [A]'s family are rich and
             powerful with influences  in  all  areas  of  Jordan.   It  is
             unlikely that they would have the resources and wherewithal to
             track down the appellant to exact revenge.


         36.  There is no evidence to suggest that the appellant  could  not
             rely upon the police to protect him and his family in  Jordan.
             I recognise that the alleged events only came to  light  after
             he and his family had moved to  the  UK  for  study  purposes.
             However even by his own limited  experiences  in  Jordan,  the
             police have been  of  some  assistance  to  the  appellant  by
             providing copies of documents when he has asked for them.  The
             appellant said at question 77 that it was his mother who  sent
             the document which purports to be from  his  Tribe.   He  also
             stated that he was able to acquire the complaint document from
             a friend who worked for the police.  When pressed  further  as
             to why this police friend would put his career on the line  by
             obtaining this document he  then  stated  that  any  policeman
             could get the document.


         37.  I find that it has not been established to the lower  standard
             of proof that there is a real risk that if the appellant  were
             to be returned  to  Jordan  he  would  suffer  treatment  that
             amounts to persecution or that it is inhuman or degrading.   I
             have  also  considered  Articles  2  and  3  of  the  European
             Convention on Human Rights.  Article 2 protects the  right  to
             life and Article 3 prohibits torture and inhuman or  degrading
             treatment or punishment.  The burden and standard of proof  in
             the human rights claim are the same as in the asylum claim and
             in this case I am satisfied that they are both founded on  the
             same facts.  I am also satisfied that the  appellant  has  not
             demonstrated that there is a real risk of treatment in  Jordan
             that would amount to a breach of Article  2  and  3.   I  have
             concluded on the basis of the evidence before me that there is
             no reasonable degree of likelihood that the appellant would be
             at risk of serious harm on return to Jordan.  I therefore find
             that  the  appellant  does  not   qualify   for   Humanitarian
             Protection."


 5. Permission to appeal has been granted in response to a challenge  based
    on a failure by the judge to make  any  findings  in  relation  to  the
    evidence of the appellant's wife.  In addition, it  is  asserted  there
    was a failure to fully and properly address  the  documentary  evidence
    with reference to there being a major problem  in  Jordan  obtaining  a
    certificate for an illegitimate child.  The approach of  the  judge  to
    the supporting documentation was flawed; evidence provided by the tribe
    was the best that could be obtained.  By way of  relocation  the  judge
    had failed to consider it credible the appellant was also wanted by the
    authorities.


 6. In her submissions, Ms Brakaj argued that this was not a case in  which
    the  evidence  given  by  the  appellant's  wife  was  limited  to  the
    repetition of information she had been given by  her  husband.  Instead
    the appellant's wife had first hand evidence to  give  concerning  what
    she had been told by members of her own family, and,  the  effect  upon
    her  relationship  with  the  appellant  when  she  had  shared   those
    disclosures with him. Having reviewed her witness statement  we  accept
    that this is an argument with some substance.


 7. Ms Brakaj also argued that the judge had erred in her analysis  of  the
    sufficiency of protection. As she put the appeal, the argument was that
    the appellant faced prosecution for criminal conduct as a result of his
    having enjoyed an extra-marital affair with AS. However when  asked  to
    do so, she was unable to identify any evidence placed before the  judge
    to indicate that this was the reality under Jordanian criminal law. The
    evidence that had been produced, which was said  to  be  a  copy  of  a
    complaint filed by AS with the Jordanian authorities did  not,  in  our
    judgement,  establish  that  it  could  be  argued  the  appellant  was
    perceived in Jordan as potentially having committed a criminal offence.
    Indeed  without  further  evidence  it  was  impossible  to   ascertain
    precisely the nature of the complaint  these  documents  were  said  to
    relate to. Even if they were genuine, they could for example relate  to
    a complaint that the appellant had failed to recognize his paternity of
    the child, thus  blighting  her  future  marriage  prospects,  and  her
    ability to acquire identity documentation. Alternatively it could  have
    been a complaint that the appellant  had  failed  to  provide  adequate
    financial support for his child. Whilst it is clear that the judge must
    have received little assistance with the true nature of  this  evidence
    we are in the circumstances satisfied that the  judge  failed  to  make
    appropriate findings in relation to this materialt, before reaching her
    conclusions in [37].


 8. In the course of argument on this aspect, we noted paragraph 46 of  the
    refusal letter which is in the following terms:


         "With state evidence further supporting this  approach  to  alleged
         female adultery:


         'Text for Article 340 of the Jordanian Penal Code No. 16  of  1960:
         'He who discovers his wife or a female relative committing adultery
         and kills, wounds or injures one or both of them is  exempted  from
         any penalty.''"


    This  could  be  read  as  suggesting  the  respondent   accepted   the
    possibility that the police would not intervene should a male member of
    AS' family pursue an "honour crime" against the appellant, so  that  in
    law and practice there may be impunity for such  crimes  by  non  state
    agents in Jordan. It is  common  ground  before  us  that  the  judge's
    decision did not engage with this evidence,  or  this  possibility.  No
    doubt that was because the appeal was then  argued  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant, as it was before us, not on the basis of a risk of harm from
    non state agents by way of an "honour crime" raising the issues of  the
    ability to  relocate  to  avoid  it,  and,  the  sufficiency  of  state
    protection against it - but rather on  the  basis  that  the  appellant
    faced a risk of harm from the state. With the benefit of hindsight,  we
    understood Ms Brakaj to accept that given the opportunity to do so  she
    would entirely re-evaluate the way  in  which  the  appellant's  appeal
    should be presented, and indeed seek to obtain expert evidence to  shed
    light upon the position faced by the  appellant  upon  return,  in  the
    event that he was indeed the father of an illegitimate child born to an
    extra-marital affair.


 9. With sensible focus and candour, Ms  Petterson  accepted  that  at  the
    heart of the appellant's challenge to  the  judge's  decision  was  the
    complaint that no express findings had been made upon  the  credibility
    of the evidence offered by the appellant's wife.  Indeed  she  accepted
    that it did not appear to have  received  any  separate  consideration.
    Whilst the appellant's own evidence had been  robustly  dismissed,  she
    accepted that these adverse findings of fact were in the  circumstances
    unsafe, and that the decision under appeal  should  be  set  aside.  We
    agree. Properly directed, a differently constituted First-tier Tribunal
    will have to decide whether the appeal is based  upon  a  fiction,  or,
    whether there is in any event a sufficiency of state protection against
    any risk of harm that may exist from non state  agents,  or,  that  the
    risk of harm may be avoided by relocation within Jordan. Conclusions on
    these matters cannot be reached without  a  proper  evaluation  of  the
    evidence relied upon by the parties. We are satisfied that this has not
    yet occurred, and indeed that is  now  common  ground.  Thus  the  only
    course available to us  is  to  remit  the  appeal  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal with no findings of fact preserved for a hearing de novo.


10. In the light of the matters which  arose  in  the  course  of  argument
    before us we concluded that it would be of benefit to both the  parties
    and to the First-tier Tribunal that the  parties  should  now  agree  a
    statement of issues requiring resolution  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    upon the hearing of the remitted  appeal.  That  exercise  should  help
    focus minds upon what, if any, further evidence is to be relied upon by
    both parties.  We make the following directions;


      i) The appeal is to be heard  at  the  North  Shields  hearing  centre
         before a differently constituted Tribunal


     ii) An Arabic interpreter is required


    iii) A statement of issues is to be filed  by  the  appellant  with  the
         First-tier Tribunal by 5pm 30 May 2019.


     iv) Any  directions  required  as  to  timetabling  or  listing  should
         therefore be requested of the First-tier Tribunal in writing by 5pm
         30 May 2019


      v) The appeal is not to be listed for hearing before 1 June 2019





Notice of decision


The decision did involve the  making  of  an  error  of  law  sufficient  to
require  the  decision  to  be  set  aside  on  all  grounds,  and  reheard.
Accordingly the appeal is remitted to the First Tier Tribunal for  rehearing
de novo, with the directions set out above.





Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008


Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any member of his family. This direction  applies
both to the Appellant and to the Respondent.  Failure to  comply  with  this
direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



10 May 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Holmes
