

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
PA/11937/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      | Decision and Reasons Promulgated|
|On 12 February 2018                       | On 15 February 2018             |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEKI?

                                   Between

                                     M S
                           (anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Jafar, Counsel instructed by Liyon Legal Aid
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

       1. The appellant is a Sri Lankan national born on 27 March 1990.  His
          asylum appeal was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Hussain
          by way of a determination promulgated on 21 June 2017.


       2. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge  Pitt  on
          21 December 2017 and the matter came  before  me  on  12  February
          2017.


       3. Mr Duffy stepped in straightaway to concede  that  the  judge  had
          made a material  error  in  failing  to  consider  the  report  on
          scarring and the appellant's injuries. It followed that there  was
          no need for  Mr  Jafar  to  make  anything  more  than  the  brief
          submissions he did.



       4. Amongst the many arguable errors of law identified which I do  not
          now need to address, Mr Duffy was quite right to concede the point
          that the medical evidence was not taken into account. Plainly that
          was evidence that could have led to a different  outcome  and  the
          error is therefore material.



       5. I set aside the determination in its entirety. The  evidence  will
          need to be re-heard so that fresh findings on all matters  may  be
          made. To that end,  the  matter  is  remitted  to  the  First-tier
          Tribunal for a de novo hearing. No findings are preserved.


       6. Decision


       7. The First-tier Tribunal made errors of law and the decision is set
          aside in its entirety. The appeal is remitted  for  re-hearing  to
          another judge of the First-tier Tribunal.



       8. Anonymity



       9. I continue the anonymity order made by the First-tier Tribunal.

    Signed



       Upper Tribunal Judge

       Date: 12 February 2018


