
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
PA/11036/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 30 September 2019                      |On 2 October 2019                 |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT

                                   Between

                                     S T
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms E Sanders, Counsel, instructed by Duncan Lewis &
                    Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


 1. This is an appeal against the decision dated 19 June 2019 of First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Hemborough which refused the  asylum  and  human  rights
    appeal of the appellant.

 2. The appellant is a national of Albania born on 5 July  1989.   She  has
    two sons, the first born on 7 November 2011 and the second born in  the
    UK in 2017.

 3. The appellant arrived in the UK on 16 April 2016  and  claimed  asylum.
    She was accompanied by her older son.

 4. The basis of the  appellant's  claim  for  asylum  is  that  she  fears
    mistreatment from her husband and cannot relocate to  another  part  of
    Albania as a single mother with a child born outside of  marriage.  She
    maintains that in 2010 she had married in Albania against the wishes of
    her parents.  As a result her  family  had  disowned  her.   After  the
    marriage she discovered that her husband was  gay.   As  a  result,  he
    mistreated her severely.  In 2012 he forced her to  have  an  abortion.
    In August 2013 he assaulted her whilst she was pregnant which led to  a
    miscarriage.  The appellant eventually left her husband  and  travelled
    to Tirana where she stayed with a friend for  approximately  ten  days.
    Her friend's partner assisted her  to  obtain  fake  Italian  documents
    which she used to leave the country.  She  and  her  son  travelled  to
    Germany where they spent three days with  one  of  her  sisters  before
    flying to the UK using the false Italian documents.   After  coming  to
    the UK the appellant lived with another sister who had obtained British
    nationality.  She lived independently for a while but  became  pregnant
    with her second son and thereafter moved back to live with her  sister.



 5. On 12 October 2017 the  National  Referral  Mechanism  found  that  the
    appellant was not a victim of trafficking.  The respondent refused  the
    appellant's asylum and human  rights  claim  in  a  decision  dated  13
    October 2017.  The appellant's  original  appeal  against  the  refusal
    decision was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Grant and refused in  a
    decision dated 14 December 2017.  In a decision dated 1 May 2018 Deputy
    Upper Tribunal Judge Symes found an error of law in that  decision  and
    remitted it to be remade before  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   Thus  the
    appeal came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Hemborough on 3 June 2019.



 6. The appellant was refused permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal by
    the First-tier Tribunal in a decision dated 24 July 2019.  However,  in
    a decision dated 22 August 2019, Upper Tribunal  Judge  Latter  granted
    permission to appeal.  Thus the matter came before the  Upper  Tribunal
    on 30 September 2019.

 7. First-tier Tribunal Judge Hemborough accepted the  appellant's  account
    of being abused by her husband and that she fled from  Albania  with  a
    subjective fear of  mistreatment  by  him;  see  paragraph  68  of  the
    decision.

 8. First-tier Tribunal Judge Hemborough did  not  accept  the  appellant's
    evidence that her husband would seek to trace her were she to return to
    Albania. Part of the appellant's evidence on this issue  was  that  her
    husband had also threatened her brother and as a result her brother had
    fled to the USA. In paragraphs 72 to 77 of the decision, the Judge  set
    out reasons for finding that this part of the evidence was not credible
    and had been fabricated in order to bolster the protection  claim.  The
    appellant's evidence was that her parents had banned all  contact  with
    her after her marriage so the husband would have known that  there  was
    no point in harassing her brother in order to find her or put  pressure
    on her. Status documents from the  USA  showed  that  the  brother  had
    obtained leave there on the basis of a lottery system not international
    protection.  There was a pattern of family migration. In  paragraph  77
    the judge stated:

         "77.     Whilst I have  found  the  Appellant  to  be  credible  as
             regards the domestic violence to which  she  was  subjected  I
             find her attempt  to  bolster  her  protection  claim  by  the
             assertion that her brother fled to the  US  in  fear  for  his
             safety to undermine her credibility in  relation  to  risk  on
             return.  Her use of false  documentation  shows  that  she  is
             accustomed to use deception if her need dictates."

 9. The  Judge  also  found  that  the  evidence  did  not  show  that  the
    appellant's husband would know of her return or look  for  her  if  she
    went back to another part of Albania. At paragraph 71 the judge stated:

         "71.     It is now  over  three  years  since  the  Appellant  left
             Albania.  Her evidence was that she has had  no  contact  with
             her husband since shortly after she left the  family  home  in
             April 2016.  Prior to leaving Albania she spent eight  to  ten
             days living with a friend in Tirana.  I note that her  husband
             was unable to trace her whereabouts during this  period.   Nor
             was there any reliable evidence to  the  effect  that  he  was
             looking for her."

10. The judge went on in paragraphs 78 and 79:

         "78.     Looking at the evidence before me in the round I find that
             I have not been satisfied that the Appellant's husband has any
             continuing interest in her  whereabouts.   As  far  as  he  is
             concerned  she  has  disappeared  and   his   alleged   sexual
             orientation has not  made  it  into  the  public  domain.   As
             matters stand there is no  incentive  for  him  to  trace  her
             whereabouts with a view to bringing her to  harm  or  dragging
             her back to Kukes with the attended risk of exposure.

         79.  Moreover I not (sic) been satisfied that  he  would  have  the
             ability to know of her return to Albania or to trace her  once
             there.  In this regard I again note that he was unable to find
             her in Tirana before she left Albania in 2016 when his ire was
             no doubt at its peak and the 'trail  was  hot'.   Although  it
             appears from photographic evidence submitted that he  has  had
             some low level political involvement in the distant past there
             was no reliable evidence to  show  that  he  has  any  ongoing
             political influence or  the  ability  to  influence  with  the
             police nationally."

11. The judge also set out in paragraph 79 that he had referred to guidance
    from the case of BF (Tirana gay men) Albania CG [2019]  UKUT  00093  to
    the effect that there was "only very  limited  evidence"  that  someone
    could be traced in Tirana "by  operation  of  either  the  registration
    system or criminal checks at the airport".

12. The judge found in paragraph 80 that it had not  been  shown  that  the
    appellant's husband had personal friendships or other connections  that
    could assist him in tracing or harming the appellant  beyond  her  home
    area of Kukes.

13. In paragraph 81 the judge accepted that the appellant would be at  risk
    if she returned to Kukes on the basis of a chance  encounter  with  her
    abusive husband or a member of his family.  He therefore  proceeded  to
    assess whether it would be unduly harsh for her and her two children to
    relocate to Tirana.

14. In paragraph 84 of the decision the First-tier Tribunal considered  the
    respondent's CPIN from December 2018 on domestic abuse violence against
    women.  The judge noted that protection that was available included:

         "... protection orders for the victim and any children,  access  to
         shelters,  medical  assistance  including  psychological   therapy,
         welfare support, priority access to social housing, free  education
         and nursery care for children and assistance  with  employment  and
         reintegration packages.  I find the description of  the  assistance
         on  offer  to  be  analogous  to  that  available  to  victims   of
         trafficking which has been held in  general  to  make  the  Horvath
         standard."

15. The First-tier Tribunal was also provided  with  two  reports  from  an
    expert country witness, Dr Tahiraj.  The  first  report  was  dated  31
    March 2018 and there was a supplementary report dated 29 May 2019.  The
    First-tier Tribunal said this in paragraph 86 of the  decision  on  the
    evidence of Dr Tahiraj:

         "86.     In relation to risk on  return  what  I  gleaned  from  Dr
             Tahiraj's evidence taken in the round is that  although  women
             in Albania have equality before the law the delivery does  not
             live up to the aspirations.   Recognising  that  the  Albanian
             government has made significant advances  in  the  protections
             available to trafficked individuals and  victims  of  domestic
             violence she is of the view that and (sic) there remains  much
             to be done.  The services on  offer  are  under  pressure  and
             demand may exceed supply.  However she does not  fundamentally
             disagree with the extant country guidance as set out in TD and
             AD and while she refers to sufficiency of protection  as  'not
             certain' that is not the test."

    The reference to "TD and AD" is to the Country Guidance case of TD  and
    AD (Trafficked women) CG [2016] UKUT 00092.

16. In paragraphs 89  and  90  the  judge  considered  the  impact  of  the
    appellant's mental health in her ability to relocate to Tirana:

         "89.     I find that  she  has  made  a  partial  if  not  complete
             recovery from the effects of the abuse that  she  suffered  at
             the hands of her husband and that any  residual  symptoms  are
             now being managed by medication.  There was no evidence before
             me from which I could be satisfied that she would be unable to
             access such medication or talking therapy as she  requires  in
             Albania.  I note that  free  medical  treatment  is  including
             (sic)  psychological  therapy  is  available  to  victims   of
             domestic violence.

         90.  In passing I observe that whilst the Appellant has re-referred
             herself for a further course of talking therapy  it  does  not
             seem to me to be entirely coincidental that this was only  two
             months before this hearing was scheduled to take place and  if
             nothing else it  demonstrates  that  she  is  able  to  access
             services independently in the UK and I find that she would  be
             able to do so on return to Albania."




17. In paragraph 92 the judge referred to  the  factors  identified  as  of
    potential relevance  in paragraph (f) of the head note of  TD  and  AD.
    This paragraph states:

         "f)  Once asked to leave the shelter a victim  of  trafficking  can
             live on her  own.  In  doing  so  she  will  face  significant
             challenges including, but not limited to,  stigma,  isolation,
             financial  hardship  and  uncertainty,  a  sense  of  physical
             insecurity and the subjective fear of being  found  either  by
             their families or former traffickers.  Some  women  will  have
             the capacity  to  negotiate  these  challenges  without  undue
             hardship. There will however be victims  of  trafficking  with
             characteristics,  such  as  mental  illness  or  psychological
             scarring, for whom living alone in these  circumstances  would
             not be reasonable.  Whether a particular appellant falls  into
             that category will call for a careful assessment  of  all  the
             circumstances."

18. The judge goes on in paragraph 92 to find that the appellant would not:

         "... be entirely without support upon return to  Albania.   Clearly
         she cannot look to her parents for support however the evidence was
         she had sought and  received  support  from  her  sisters  both  in
         Germany and in the UK and I anticipate that this  may  continue  at
         the very least in emotional if not  financial  terms  upon  return.
         There was also evidence that she has been intermittent contact with
         at least one of her sisters in Albania and looking  at  matters  in
         the round I find it reasonable  to  infer  that  emotional  support
         might be forthcoming from her other sisters who continue to  reside
         there.  The more so as their  father,  who  it  is  claimed  issued
         instructions against contact has now left the country and is not in
         a position to enforce the same."

19. The judge set out his conclusions on whether internal flight  would  be
    unduly harsh in in paragraphs 93 and 94:

         "93.     Whilst it is clear  to  me  that  the  Appellant  and  her
             children are likely to face a degree of hardship upon return I
             find that there are mechanisms in place to provide  them  with
             such protection and support as they  may  need.   I  find  the
             Appellant  to  be  an   intelligent,   highly   educated   and
             resourceful woman who with appropriate support should be  able
             to reintegrate and find gainful employment so as to be able to
             support herself and her children in Tirana which is  the  city
             with which she is familiar having studied  there  for  several
             years when undertaking her  Degree.   In  the  meantime  I  am
             satisfied  that  they  will  be  supported  to  an  acceptable
             standard by the state.

         94.  Dr Tahiraj speculates about the possibility that the Appellant
             may  be  vulnerable  to  trafficking  on  return.   However  I
             discount this as a realistic possibility given my  finding  in
             relation to the protection and support available on return.  I
             also note that she will be 30 years old in a few months and is
             now passed what has been described as the 'the target age'  in
             other country  evidence  I  have  considered  in  relation  to
             trafficking in Albania."

20. The appellant brings a number of challenges  to  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  Ground 1 argues that the  judge  made  a  "flawed
    factual finding" when concluding that the appellant's husband would not
    seek to trace her.  The grounds argue that Dr Tahiraj had described how
    the appellant leaving her husband would have brought shame on  him  and
    his family and that they he would wish to trace her  for  this  reason,
    not merely because she knew about  his  sexuality.   The  grounds  also
    maintained that it was perverse of the First-tier Tribunal to  rely  on
    the fact of the appellant having been able to  spend  ten  days  living
    with a friend in Tirana before leaving for the UK.

21. I did not find that this ground had merit where it, in essence, amounts
    to disagreement.  Dr Tahiraj's  comments  on  the  appellant's  husband
    wanting to find her and being able to do so were made on the  basis  of
    the evidence concerning threats  to  her  brother  being  credible.  As
    above, the First-tier Tribunal provided rational  reasons  for  finding
    that the evidence about the brother had been fabricated and  that  this
    undermined the claim that  the  husband  had  an  ongoing  interest  in
    finding the appellant. The comment in paragraph 71 that  there  was  no
    "reliable evidence" showing that the husband does  not  show  that  too
    high a standard of proof or corroborative evidence  was  required.  The
    judge was entitled to consider that none of  the  evidence  before  him
    maintained that the husband had sought actively to find the  appellant,
    having only made telephone threats when she went to Tirana in 2016.  It
    was not irrational to take into account  that  the  appellant  did  not
    claim that her husband took active steps to find her when she  went  to
    Tirana in 2016 even though this was for a  short  period.  The  judge's
    finding that the husband had no continuing interest  in  the  appellant
    was reasoned and open to him on the material before him.

22. The second ground of challenge maintains that the judge's assessment of
    the reports of Dr Tahiraj and the Country Guidance case of TD and AD on
    the issue of the availability of  internal  relocation  was  in  error.
    However, the grounds do not argue  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was
    incorrect in stating that the country evidence provided by  Dr  Tahiraj
    was essentially in line with the ratio of TD  and  AD.  The  Judge  was
    aware of the view of Dr Tahiraj that  the  ambition  of  the  state  to
    provide support for victims of trafficking and  domestic  violence  was
    not shown in practice on the ground; see paragraph  86.  As  the  Judge
    found, however, that position is consistent with the  decision  of  the
    Upper Tribunal in TD and AD and the  grounds  did  not  seek  to  argue
    otherwise.

23. Further, Judge Hemborough clearly applied the material aspects  of  the
    Country Guidance, doing  so  in  paragraph  92  of  the  decision.  The
    statement in paragraph 92 that "stigma and persecution do not equate to
    persecution" is otiose  rather  than  error  concerning  the  test  for
    internal relocation where the First-tier Tribunal clearly did go on  in
    substance to consider whether relocation would be unduly  harsh,  doing
    so in line with the guidance from TD and  AD.  The  judge  was  clearly
    aware that the provision for the appellant and her children  on  return
    would be limited, accepting in paragraph 93 that  they  would  "face  a
    degree of hardship". He was entitled to find, however, that  particular
    aspects of her profile meant that the degree hardship  that  she  would
    face  did  not  preclude  internal  relocation.  He  carried  out   the
    individual assessment of her profile, in line with TD and  AD,  finding
    that the appellant was educated to degree level, familiar  with  Tirana
    as she had lived  there  as  a  student,  that  her  mental  state  had
    stabilised and that there was emotional support and the possibility  of
    practical support from her sisters living in and outside  Albania;  see
    paragraphs 92 and 93. He  made  findings  on  the  material  facts  and
    assessed the appellant's profile as found against the Country  Guidance
    and expert reports, the latter attracting less weight where  they  were
    based on different factual basis. That assessment was lawful.

24. The grounds also argue that the First-tier Tribunal failed to take into
    account the special vulnerability of the  appellant  where  she  has  a
    child outside of marriage. The First-tier  Tribunal  refers  itself  at
    numerous points to the  Country  Guidance  case  of  TD  and  AD  which
    identifies having an illegitimate child as a factor to  be  taken  into
    account. The Judge was clearly aware that the appellant's second  child
    was born outside of marriage; see  paragraphs  6,  40  and  46  of  the
    decision. The Judge referred to the stigma that the appellant  and  her
    children would face on  return  to  Albania  in  paragraph  92  of  the
    decision.  It is not arguable that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was  not
    alive to this aspect of  the  appellant's  profile.  The  second  child
    having been born outside of marriage was not a trump card that  had  to
    lead to internal flight being found  to  be  unduly  harsh.  The  judge
    accepted that the appellant and her children  would  face  hardship  on
    return; see paragraph 93.  It remained open to the First-tier  Tribunal
    to find that the particular profile of this appellant, when  considered
    against the guidance provided in TD and AD, was such that she would not
    face unduly harsh circumstances if she were to relocate to Tirana  with
    her two children, notwithstanding the status of her second child.

25. Ground  3  of  the  written  grounds  maintains  that  the  judge  gave
    inadequate reasons for rejecting the expert report of Dr Tahiraj.    As
    above, the First-tier Tribunal was entitled to take  a  different  view
    from Dr Tahiraj where the facts found differed from those addressed  in
    the expert reports. The First-tier Tribunal was not required to address
    each and every point made by Dr Tahiraj, particularly where the reports
    covered similar ground to the Country Guidance case.

26. The fourth  ground  of  appeal  maintains  that  the  judge  failed  to
    distinguish between the aspirations of the Albanian state in  providing
    protection to victims of  domestic  violence  and  the  reality.   This
    ground really only repeats what had already been argued in the previous
    grounds and ignores the specific  reference  in  paragraph  86  of  the
    decision to the Judge's note that "delivery does not  live  up  to  the
    aspirations".

27. For all of these reasons, I do not find the decision of the  First-tier
    Tribunal discloses a material error on a point of law.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not  disclose  an  error  on  a
point of law and shall stand.


Signed:  [pic]                                          Date:  30  September
    2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt





