
                                    [pic]

|Upper Tribunal                       |                                     |
|(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)     |Appeal number: PA/11436/2017         |
|                                                                            |
|the immigration Acts                                                        |
|                                                                            |
|Heard at:|Field House                | |Decision and Reasons Promulgated    |
|On       |18 April 2018              |     On 19 April   |                   |
|         |                           |2018               |                   |
|                                                                            |
|                                                                            |
|Before                                                                      |
|Upper Tribunal Judge Gill                                                   |
|                                                                            |
|Between                                                                     |
|           |A S                                               |Appellant    |
|           |(ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)                            |             |
|And                                                                         |
|           |The Secretary of State for the Home Department    |Respondent   |


Anonymity
I make an order under r.14(1) of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008 prohibiting the disclosure or publication of  any  matter  likely
to lead members of the public to identify the original appellant. No  report
of these proceedings  shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  him.   This
direction applies to both the appellant and to the respondent and all  other
persons. Failure to comply with this direction could  lead  to  contempt  of
court proceedings.
The parties at liberty to apply to discharge this order, with reasons.


Representation:
For the appellant:          Mr  J  Gajjar,  of  Counsel,  instructed  by  A2
                 Solicitors.
For the respondent:    Mr P Nath, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                           Decision and Directions


 1. The appellant, a national of Iraq born on 23 June 1980, appeals against
    a decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal P  S  Aujla  who,  in  a
    decision promulgated on 19 December  2017  following  a  hearing  on  5
    December  2017,  dismissed  his  appeal,  against  a  decision  of  the
    respondent of 24 October 2017 refusing his asylum claim.

 2. The appellant had had a previous appeal.  He  had  appealed  against  a
    decision of the respondent of 28  June  2005  which  was  dismissed  by
    Immigration Judge Martin on asylum grounds and human rights grounds.

 3. Judge Martin did not  have  evidence  before  her  in  support  of  the
    appellant's claim that his uncle and cousins had worked or collaborated
    with the US troops in Iraq.

 4. In support of his appeal against the decision of 24 October  2017,  the
    appellant  submitted  further  evidence  (the  "new  evidence").   This
    evidence is at pages 29, 32 and 37-50 of the appellant's bundle  before
    Judge  Aujla.  This  comprises  of  evidence  which,  in  Mr   Gajjar's
    submission, corroborated his claim  that  his  uncle  and  cousins  had
    worked or collaborated with US troops on Iraq.

 5. The grounds contend that Judge Aujla had materially  erred  in  law  by
    failing to engage with the new evidence.  In  addition,  Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Doyle, who granted permission to appeal, considered
    it arguable that Judge Aujla had materially erred in  law  by  applying
    the country guidance in AA (Article 15(c))  Iraq  CG  [2015]  UKUT  544
    (IAC) without recognising that the country guidance had been amended by
    the Court of Appeal in AA [2017] EWCA Civ 944.

 6. At the commencement of the hearing, Mr Nath agreed that Judge Aujla had
    erred in law in failing to consider or engage with the new evidence  at
    pages 32 and 37-50. He accepted that this was a material error of law.

 7. I agree that the judge erred in law  by  failing  to  engage  with  the
    evidence at pages 32 and 37-50 of the appellant's bundle.  Although the
    judge's decision was fairly lengthy, being 11 pages long (excluding the
    signature page), only one paragraph set out the judge's  assessment  of
    the subjective evidence that was before him, i.e. para 32. At para  32,
    he considered the document at para 29 and referred by page number  only
    to the document at page 32 of the appellant's bundle. However,  he  did
    not engage with the evidence at page 32, nor did he engage with any  of
    the evidence at pages 37-50.

 8. I therefore have to decide whether to exercise  my  discretion  to  set
    aside the judge's decision. The new evidence included evidence that was
    relied upon to address one of the reasons given  why  Judge  Martin  in
    making her adverse credibility assessment.   I am satisfied that it was
    evidence that was capable of persuading a judge from departing from the
    findings of Judge Martin.

 9. In these circumstances, I have  decided  to  set  aside  Judge  Aujla's
    decision in its entirety, save that his record of the oral evidence  at
    paras 23-26 shall stand and can be relied upon by both parties. For the
    convenience of the parties and the judge hearing the appeal at the next
    hearing, I shall now set out paras 23-26:

         "23. The Appellant gave oral evidence at the hearing with the  help
             of an Arabic interpreter. He confirmed at the beginning of his
             evidence  that  he  fully  understood  the  interpreter.   His
             evidence may be summarised as follows. The Appellant confirmed
             his name and address and stated that his witness statement  of
             17 November 2017 was correct and he adopted the  same  as  his
             evidence. He stated that he had no family left in Iraq. He had
             uncles living in the United States. He had  two  sisters.  One
             was living in the United States and the other  was  living  in
             Iraq but had now left the country. His mother had passed away.

         24.  The Appellant stated in cross-examination that he was  not  in
             contact with anyone in Iraq. He  last  had  contact  with  his
             mother in 2014. His sister in the US told him their mother had
             passed away. His sister was in contact with  his  mother.  His
             aunt in Iraq, with whom he had stayed before he came to United
             Kingdom, had told his sister  that  their  mother  had  passed
             away. His aunt was still living in Iraq. It was the same  aunt
             that he stayed with before he came to the United Kingdom.  She
             was his mother's sister and was living  in  Al  Muthanna,  the
             suburb of Arrasalah. He was not in contact with his  aunt.  He
             did not have a strong relationship with  her.  He  had  stayed
             with her before he came to the United Kingdom. He  had  chosen
             not to keep in contact with her.

         25.  The Appellant was asked about what he had stated in  paragraph
             7 of his witness statement. He had stated that "Although I was
             not employed by the US  troops,  I  was  happy  to  help  them
             distribute leaflets which was to oppose and destroy the Ba'ath
             party." The Appellant's attention was drawn to  questions  41,
             50 and 51 of the asylum interview where he had made no mention
             of leafleting when he was asked what he had done. It  was  put
             to him  that  he  had  not  previously  made  any  mention  of
             leafleting. The Appellant had  no  credible  explanation.  The
             Appellant stated that his cousins  had  left  for  the  United
             States in 2003, at the end of the year. He left Iraq in  2005.
             He could not relocate to another part of Iraq as militia  were
             everywhere. Militia were in control. He  could  not  go  to  a
             Sunni controlled area.

         26.  The Appellant stated in re-examination that he could not  live
             with his aunt in Iraq. She had  her  own  family.  Her  family
             would not accept him."

10. It is clear that Judge Aujla also erred in law in applying the  country
    guidance of the Upper Tribunal in AA because that country guidance  had
    been amended by the Court of Appeal in its  judgment  in  AA.  However,
    this does not affect my decision to set aside  the  decision  of  Judge
    Aujla on  the  basis  that  he  erred  in  law  in  his  assessment  of
    credibility.

11. In the majority of cases, the Upper Tribunal  when  setting  aside  the
    decision will re-make the relevant decision itself.  However, para  7.2
    of the Practice Statements for the Immigration and Asylum  Chambers  of
    the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  the  Upper  Tribunal   (the   "Practice
    Statements") recognises that it may  not  be  possible  for  the  Upper
    Tribunal to proceed to re-make the decision when it is satisfied that:

         "(a) the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before the
             First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other opportunity for
             that party's case to be put to and considered  by  the  First-
             tier Tribunal; or

         (b)  the nature or extent of any judicial  fact  finding  which  is
             necessary in order for the decision in the appeal  to  be  re-
             made is such that, having regard to the  overriding  objective
             in rule 2, it is appropriate to remit the case to  the  First-
             tier Tribunal."

12. In my judgment this case falls within para 7.2 (b). I am  therefore  of
    the view that a remittal to the First-tier Tribunal is the right course
    of action.



Notice of Decision

The decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Aujla involved  the  making
of errors on points of law such that  the  decision  is  set  aside  in  its
entirety. This case is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a hearing  of
the Article 8 claim outside the Immigration Rules  by  a  judge  other  than
Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Aujla.



     Directions to the parties

(1)  The decision on the appeal awaits  determination  by  a  Judge  of  the
      First-tier Tribunal other than Judge  Aujla.  It  is  noted  that  the
      appellant requires an Arabic interpreter and that there will  only  be
      one witness at the hearing.

(2)  Within 21 days of the date on which this "Decision and  Directions"  is
      sent, the appellant must serve the following:

     (i) In a paginated and fully indexed bundle,  any  evidence  (including
         witness statements) that he  wishes  to  rely  upon  which  is  not
         already contained in the appellant's 136-bundle  submitted  on  the
         appellant's  behalf  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  or  in  the
         respondent's bundle.

         If any such evidence includes background  material,  any  essential
         passages must be identified in a schedule or highlighted.

     (ii)     A skeleton argument.





[pic]
Signed                                  Date: 18 April 2018
Upper Tribunal Judge Gill
