
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11879/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 29 November 2019                  |On 10 December 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                AMARJEET [G]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not madE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Hussain, instructed by Halliday Reeves
For the Respondent:    Mrs Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. By a decision promulgated on 19 June 2019, I found that the  First-tier
    Tribunal had   erred in law such that  its  decision  fell  to  be  set
    aside. My reasons for so finding were as follows:

         "1.  The appellant is a male citizen of Afghanistan and was born on
         23 August 1977. He appealed against a decision of the Secretary  of
         State dated 25 July 2018 refusing protection claim. The  First-tier
         Tribunal, in a decision promulgated on 28 November 2018,  dismissed
         his appeal. The appellant now  appeals,  with  permission,  to  the
         Upper Tribunal.

         2.   I have a Rule 24 letter from the Secretary of State  dated  14
         January 2019 which indicates that the respondent  does  not  oppose
         the appeal. The Secretary of State's position was confirmed by  Mrs
         Pettersen, who appeared for the respondent at the initial  hearing.
         Given that both parties agree that judge erred in law such that his
         decision falls to be set aside, I have set aside the  decision.  We
         shall therefore give brief reasons only.

         3.   The grounds of appeal complain that the judge  has  not  given
         any or any sufficient reasons for finding  that  it  would  not  be
         unduly harsh to expect the appellant  to  relocate  to  Kabul.  The
         appellant is a Sikh. Judge accepted that he had  given  a  truthful
         account of the real risk he would face on return to his  home  city
         of Jalalabad. At [27], the judge recorded the appellant's  evidence
         under cross-examination and his claim that he faced harassment  'by
         the government' should he relocate to Kabul.  At  [28],  the  judge
         identified 'several  problems'  with  the  appellant's  account  of
         having been ill-treated by the authorities in Kabul (and likely  to
         face a real risk of future harm), in particular  casting  doubt  on
         the appellant's claim that the authorities would seek to  ill-treat
         him at all, a claim not  consistent  with  the  background  country
         information. It is true that the judge  moves  on  from  these  two
         paragraphs to a finding that the appellant would be safe  in  Kabul
         without directly  addressing  the  issues  raised  in  the  country
         guidance case of TG and Others (Afghan Sikhs persecuted) [2015]  CG
         UKUT 595 (IAC). It would, however, be possible for a reader of  the
         decision to  be  aware  that  the  judge's  account  of  the  cross
         examination and his comments at [28] amounted  to  a  finding  that
         relocation to the capital city would not be unduly harsh.  However,
         given the position adopted by both parties I  am  prepared  to  set
         aside the decision. I have, however,  decided  not  to  remit  this
         appeal to the First-tier Tribunal but rather  to  keep  it  in  the
         Upper Tribunal where  I  shall  remake  the  decision  following  a
         resumed hearing. I am aware that I  indicated  in  court  that  the
         appeal would be remitted but, on reflection, I  see  no  reason  to
         interfere with the findings of fact made by the judge. The  resumed
         hearing, therefore, will proceed on the  basis  of  those  findings
         save for what the judge has said regarding the option  of  internal
         flight. The issue  of  internal  flight  will  be  the  only  issue
         remaining to be determined before the Upper Tribunal. Both  parties
         may rely on fresh  evidence  provided  copies  of  any  documentary
         evidence, including witness statements, are sent to the other party
         and to the Upper Tribunal no less than 10 days prior to the resumed
         hearing.

         Notice of Decision

         The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.  All  of  the
         findings of factual stand save for those concerning the  option  of
         internal flight within  Afghanistan.  The  evidence  given  by  the
         appellant that the First-tier Tribunal and  recorded  by  judge  at
         [27] shall stand as a  record  of  what  the  appellant  stated  in
         evidence before the First-tier Tribunal.  Both parties may rely  on
         fresh  evidence  provided  copies  of  any  documentary   evidence,
         including witness statements, are sent to the other  party  and  to
         the Upper Tribunal no later than  10  days  prior  to  the  resumed
         hearing."

 2. The burden of proof in the appeal rests on the appellant. The  standard
    of proof is whether there are substantial grounds for believing that be
    a real risk that  the  appellant  faces  persecution  or  ill-treatment
    contrary to Articles 2/3 ECHR if he is returned to Afghanistan.

 3. At the resumed hearing at Bradford on 29 November 2019,  the  appellant
    gave evidence in Punjabi with the  assistance  of  an  interpreter.  He
    adopted his written statement as his evidence in chief.  Cross-examined
    by Mrs  Pettersen,  who  appeared  for  the  Secretary  of  State,  the
    appellant said that he had last resided in Jalalabad at a  Sikh  temple
    there  and  that  his  brother  had  supported  him  financially.   The
    appellant's brother has now left Afghanistan and the appellant does not
    know where he is now living. The appellant contradicted the evidence of
    the expert witness, Dr Giustozzi, when he said that there is  only  one
    temple in Kabul; the expert claims in his report that  there  were  two
    temples. In any event, the  appellant  believed  that  living  for  any
    length of time within the confines of a Sikh  temple  would  be  simply
    unsustainable.

 4. I reserved my decision.

 5. The current country guidance is provided in TG and others (Afghan Sikhs
    persecuted) Afghanistan CG [2015] UKUT 595 (IAC). The headnote states:

         '(i) Some members of the Sikh and Hindu communities in  Afghanistan
         continue to suffer harassment at the hands of Muslim zealots.

         (ii) Members of the Sikh and Hindu communities  in  Afghanistan  do
         not face a real risk of persecution or  ill-treatment  such  as  to
         entitle them to a grant of international protection on the basis of
         their ethnic or religious identity, per se. Neither can it be  said
         that the cumulative impact of discrimination suffered by  the  Sikh
         and  Hindu  communities  in  general  reaches  the   threshold   of
         persecution.

         (iii)    A consideration of whether an  individual  member  of  the
         Sikh and Hindu communities is at  risk  real  of  persecution  upon
         return  to  Afghanistan  is  fact-sensitive.   All   the   relevant
         circumstances must be considered but careful  attention  should  be
         paid to the following:

             a.   women are  particularly  vulnerable  in  the  absence  of
             appropriate protection from a male member of the family;

             b.   likely financial  circumstances  and  ability  to  access
             basic accommodation bearing in mind

             -    Muslims are generally unlikely to employ a member of  the
                  Sikh and Hindu communities

             -     such  individuals  may  face   difficulties   (including
                  threats, extortion, seizure of land and acts of  violence)
                  in retaining property and / or  pursuing  their  remaining
                  traditional pursuit, that of a shopkeeper / trader

             -    the traditional source of support for  such  individuals,
                  the  Gurdwara  is  much  less  able  to  provide  adequate
                  support;

             c.    the  level  of  religious  devotion  and  the  practical
             accessibility to a suitable  place  of  religious  worship  in
             light of declining numbers and the  evidence  that  some  have
             been subjected to harm and threats to  harm  whilst  accessing
             the Gurdwara;

             d.   access to appropriate education for children in light  of
             discrimination  against  Sikh  and  Hindu  children  and   the
             shortage of adequate education facilities for them.

         (iv) Although it appears there is  a  willingness  at  governmental
         level to provide protection, it is not established on the  evidence
         that at a local level the police are  willing,  even  if  able,  to
         provide the necessary  level  of  protection  required  in  Refugee
         Convention/Qualification Directive terms, to those members  of  the
         Sikh  and  Hindu  communities  who  experience  serious   harm   or
         harassment amounting to persecution.

         (v)  Whether it is reasonable to expect a member  of  the  Sikh  or
         Hindu communities to relocate is a fact sensitive  assessment.  The
         relevant factors to be considered include those set  out  at  (iii)
         above. Given their particular circumstances and  declining  number,
         the practicability of settling elsewhere for members  of  the  Sikh
         and Hindu communities must be carefully considered.  Those  without
         access to  an  independent  income  are  unlikely  to  be  able  to
         reasonably relocate because of depleted support mechanisms.

         (vi) This replaces the county guidance provided in the cases  of K
         (Risk - Sikh - Women) Afghanistan CG [2003] UKIAT 00057 and SL and
         Others (Returning Sikhs and Hindus)  Afghanistan  CG [2005]  UKAIT
         00137.'

 6. Although the appellant appeared to contradict his own previous  written
    statement in oral evidence as to whether or  not  he  had  worked  when
    living in Jalalabad, I accept what he told me as generally accurate and
    true. I am reminded that I am  concerned  only  with  the  question  of
    internal flight and whether this  may  alternative  to  return  to  his
    (unsafe) home area would be unduly harsh  for  the  appellant  and  his
    family; the  First-tier  Tribunal  has  already  established  that  the
    appellant cannot safely return to his home area of Jalalabad. I  accept
    the appellant's description of living in the Sikh temple  in  Jalalabad
    as very difficult.  His  experience  of  living  in  such  a  place  in
    Jalalabad had been unpleasant; for example,  he  described  how  bodies
    arriving in the temple for cremation had been laid out in a part of the
    temple where his children would see them at close  quarters.  I  accept
    also  that  the  appellant  would  find  it  very  difficult,  if   not
    impossible, to leave the temple safely  and  seek  work  in  the  wider
    community within Kabul. Instead, the appellant  and  his  family  would
    face an indeterminate period of time living  in  the  confines  of  the
    temple, which Mr Hussain, who appeared for  the  appellant  before  the
    Upper Tribunal, submitted would amount to an  'excessively  constrained
    existence.' It is also clear that the Afghanistan  state  is  generally
    unable and, at  a  local  level,  unwilling  to  offer  sufficiency  of
    protection to Sikhs beyond the confines of a temple.

 7. As indicated above, the appellant has that produced an expert report in
    support of his appeal prepared by Dr Giustozzi. Mrs Pettersen submitted
    that this document should not  be  afforded  great  weight,  not  least
    because of the evident lack of care with which it had been prepared. At
    [24], [34] and again at [51], the report refers by name to  individuals
    who are not the appellant or any member of his  family  and  appear  to
    have nothing whatever to do with his appeal. Any reader of  the  report
    would be left with the firm impression that Dr Giustozzi has simply cut
    and pasted whole paragraphs from reports which he has prepared  in  the
    appeals of other appellants, errors which Dr Giustozzi  has  failed  to
    correct by proof reading the document. I accept that the report is  far
    from satisfactory and that it betrays a slipshod method of  working  on
    the part of the expert. However, Mrs Pettersen did  not  seek  to  cast
    doubt upon the substance  of  the  report  which,  notwithstanding  the
    references to third parties not  connected  with  the  appeal,  clearly
    seeks to address the position of Sikhs in Afghanistan, a field in which
    Dr Giustozzi is an acknowledged specialist.

 8. I am reminded by the decision in TG of the need to consider  each  case
    on its particular facts. The appellant suffers from mental difficulties
    which the reporting expert, Dr Maggie Allison, a chartered  counselling
    psychologist, attributes to PTSD suffered by the appellant. Dr  Allison
    refers in her report of 2 August 2019 to the likelihood of the symptoms
    of PTSD mitigating entirely with the passage of time but notes that the
    appellant has not reported  any  diminishing  of  his  symptoms.  As  a
    consequence, Dr Allison  considers  that  the  appellant  will  require
    further treatment. I accept that, if the appellant is compelled to live
    within the precincts of a Sikh temple, it  is  very  doubtful  that  he
    would be able to obtain such services in Kabul. Moreover, I accept that
    the appellant does not have  friends  or  contacts  or  family  members
    living in Kabul who would be able to assist him  in  leaving  the  Sikh
    temple safely in order to seek work. As TG makes clear,  those  without
    independent sources of income from work are  otherwise  are  likely  to
    find it unreasonably difficult  to  establish  themselves  and  support
    their families following relocation.

 9. I accept,  on  the  basis  of  all  the  evidence,  that  there  is  no
    alternative for the appellant and his family, on relocation  to  Kabul,
    than living in a Sikh temple  for  an  indeterminate  period  of  time.
    Without the  prospect  of  leaving  the  temple  because  the  lack  of
    independent sources of finance or the likelihood  of  safely  obtaining
    employment, I  find  that,  although  acceptable  in  the  short  term,
    residence in the medium and longer term in the Sikh temple  would  mean
    that the appellant, his mental health difficulties probably exacerbated
    by the stress of confined living, would be living in  unreasonable  and
    unduly harsh circumstances. I  find,  therefore,  that  the  option  of
    internal flight, on the particular facts in the appellant's appeal  and
    in the light of the expert evidence and background material, is not  an
    acceptable and reasonable alternative to  life  in  his  home  area  of
    Jalalabad where it has already been established that he  faces  a  real
    risk of harm. I reach that conclusion aware that the  country  guidance
    of TG records at the outset that Sikhs in Afghanistan are not generally
    at real risk 'per se.' The application of the country guidance  to  the
    facts in this appeal leads me to  conclude  that  the  internal  flight
    alternative would be unduly harsh. I therefore allow his appeal.

    Notice of Decision

    The appellant's appeal against the decision of the Secretary  of  State
    dated 25 July 2018 is allowed on asylum and  human  rights  (Article  3
    ECHR) grounds.




    Signed   Date 2 December 2019


    Upper Tribunal Judge Lane
