
                                    [pic]



The Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/11068/2018 (P)



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Decided under Rule 34              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 16th June 2020                  |On 25th June 2020                  |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA



                                   Between

                                     RB

                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



                          DECISION AND REASONS (P)


 1. An anonymity direction was not made by the First-tier Tribunal ("FtT"),
    but as this a protection claim, it is appropriate that a  direction  is
    made. Unless and until a Tribunal or Court  directs  otherwise,  RB  is
    granted anonymity. No report of these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
    indirectly identify her or any member of her  family.   This  direction
    applies amongst others to all parties.  Failure  to  comply  with  this
    direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

 2. This appeal was listed for hearing on 2nd April 2020.  The hearing  was
    vacated due to the Government advice on restricting movement  in  light
    of the COVID-19 pandemic. On 29th April 2020 directions  were  sent  to
    the parties setting out my provisional view that in this case it  would
    be appropriate to  determine  whether  the  making  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision involved the making of an error of law, and if  so,
    whether that decision should be set aside, without a  hearing.   I  set
    out directions giving the appellant an opportunity  to  submit  further
    submissions in writing to support the assertion that  the  decision  of
    the FtT is vitiated by an error of law.  The directions  also  provided
    an opportunity for the respondent to respond in writing, and,  for  the
    appellant to file and serve any further reply.

 3.  In  response  to  the  directions  issued  by  me,   the   appellant's
    representatives  sent  an  email  to  the  Tribunal  on  5th  May  2020
    confirming  that   they   "will   not   be   submitting   any   further
    representations" and the appellant seeks to rely on  the  grounds  that
    were submitted as part of the application  for  permission  to  appeal.
    The respondent provided a written response dated 15th May  2020.    The
    appellant has filed a written response to the submissions made  by  the
    respondent. I am grateful to the parties for their engagement with  the
    directions that I previously made.

 4. In the appellant's written response to  the  submissions  made  by  the
    respondent, the appellant's representatives confirm  the  appellant  is
    content for the matter to  be  dealt  with  without  an  oral  hearing.
    Neither party has identified any procedural unfairness that  arises  in
    the event that a decision is made without a hearing.   I  am  satisfied
    that it  is  in  accordance  with  the  overriding  objective  and  the
    interests of justice for there to be  a  timely  determination  of  the
    question whether there is an error of law in the decision of  the  FtT.
    Taking into account the view expressed by the appellant, it is entirely
    appropriate for the error of law  decision  to  be  determined  on  the
    papers, to secure  the  proper  administration  of  justice.   For  the
    avoidance of doubt, in reaching my decision I have taken  into  account
    the matters set out in  the  appellant's  grounds  of  appeal  and  the
    written  representations  made  by  the  parties  in  response  to  the
    directions.

 5. The appellant is a national  of  Pakistan.  She  applied  for  and  was
    granted a family visit visa to enter the UK in July 2007,  valid  until
    25th January 2008.   She  arrived  in  the  UK  in  2007  and  remained
    unlawfully, when her visit visa expired. The appellant made a claim for
    asylum on 17th October 2016.  A  referral  was  made  to  the  National
    Referral Mechanism  ("NRM")  on  1st  November  2016  in  order  for  a
    Competent Authority to make a decision as to whether  she  fell  within
    the definition of a  victim  of  trafficking.  A  positive  'reasonable
    grounds' decision was made on  7th  November  2016.  Following  further
    consideration, a negative 'conclusive grounds' decision dated 9th  July
    2018  was  served  upon  the  appellant  by  the  Competent  Authority.
    Thereafter, the  appellant's  claim  for  asylum  was  refused  by  the
    respondent for reasons set out in a decision dated  31st  August  2018.
    The appellant's appeal against that decision was  dismissed  by  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Rai for reasons set out in a  decision  promulgated
    on 27th November 2019. It is that decision that is the subject  of  the
    appeal before me.

 6. The matters relied upon by the appellant in support of  her  claim  for
    asylum are summarised at paragraphs [10] to [20] and [65]  to  [66]  of
    the decision of the FtT.  Simply put, the appellant is fearful that  if
    returned to Pakistan she will be killed by her husband,  children,  and
    her family for leaving her husband for another man, whom I shall  refer
    to as SB in this decision.

 7. The appellant advances two grounds of appeal.   First,  the  FtT  Judge
    failed to take into account and/or  resolve  conflicts  of  fact  on  a
    material matter. The appellant claims that at  paragraph  [62]  of  the
    decision, the FtT judge found that the appellant was not  a  victim  of
    trafficking for the purposes of domestic servitude.  It is said that at
    paragraph [84] of the decision, the judge referred to the  evidence  of
    the appellant that she had been told by SB that her children  may  take
    action against her and kill her because they  are  ashamed  of  her  as
    their mother.  The judge noted that if he accepted  that  evidence,  he
    could not place any weight on hearsay evidence purported to  come  from
    SB given that he would say  anything  to  control  the  appellant.  The
    appellant claims the judge failed to consider whether the appellant was
    a  victim  of  modern-day  slavery  given  the  level  of  control  the
    appellant's partner is accepted to have exerted over her.  Furthermore,
    the appellant claims the  judge  failed  to  consider  or  resolve  the
    conflict between his acceptance of the  conclusive  grounds'  decision,
    and the findings in paragraph [84] of the decision.  Second, the  judge
    accepted the appellant is a vulnerable witness, but other than a  brief
    mention in paragraph [88] of the  appellant's  cognitive  difficulties,
    the judge does not  appear  to  have  later  directed  himself  to  the
    findings in the report of Dr Lawrence with respect to the consideration
    of the appellant's evidence and particularly, whether the conflicts  in
    her evidence in interview arose from her psychological  state  and  low
    intelligence.

 8. Permission to appeal was granted by FtT Judge Shimmin on 11th  February
    2020 on both grounds.  In this decision I consider whether  the  making
    of the FtT's decision involved the making of a material error  of  law,
    and, if so whether that decision should be set aside.

Ground 1

 9. At paragraphs [22] to [23] of his decision, the  judge  refers  to  the
    referral made to the NRM and the  decision's  reached  under  the  NRM,
    noting in particular that a negative conclusive  grounds  decision  was
    made on 9th August 2018 concluding the appellant is  not  a  victim  of
    trafficking or modern slavery.  At paragraph [62] of his decision,  the
    judge referred to decision of the  Court  of  Appeal  in  SSHD  -v-  MS
    (Pakistan) [2018] EWCA Civ 594 in which the Court of Appeal  held  that
    in a statutory appeal against removal, an appellant could  only  invite
    the FtT or Upper Tribunal to go behind a decision that he/she  had  not
    been the victim of trafficking where the appellant could show that  the
    decision of the Competent Authority was perverse,  irrational,  or  one
    which was not open to the decision-maker.  Taking his  lead  from  that
    decision, the judge found the appellant is not a victim of trafficking.



10. It is in my judgment clear that at paragraph [62] of his  decision  the
    judge found the appellant is not a victim of trafficking, but did so on
    the basis that he should not go behind the decision  of  the  competent
    authority unless the  FtT  found  that  the  decision  is  perverse  or
    irrational or one that was not reasonably open to the  decision  maker.
    I am satisfied the judge fell into error in finding at  paragraph  [62]
    that the appellant is not a  victim  of  trafficking  for  the  reasons
    given.  The FtT Judge refers to the decision of the Court of Appeal  in
    SSHD v- MS (Pakistan).  However, in DC  (trafficking:  protection/human
    rights appeals) Albania [2019] UKUT 00351 (IAC), the Upper Tribunal set
    out the approach to be taken by the  FtT  and  the  Upper  Tribunal  in
    determining appeals brought  on  protection  grounds  in  which  it  is
    alleged that the appellant has been trafficked,  but  where  there  has
    been  a  negative  "conclusive  grounds"  decision  of  the   Competent
    Authority which has not been challenged in judicial review proceedings.
     At paragraph [53], the Upper Tribunal summarised its analysis  of  the
    relationship between the decision of the Competent  Authority  pursuant
    to the Trafficking  Convention  and  decisions  of  Tribunals  deciding
    protection and human rights appeals.  At paragraph [53] it said:

         "(a)   In  a  protection  appeal,  the  "reasonable   grounds"   or
         "conclusive grounds" decision  of  the  CA  will  be  part  of  the
         evidence that the tribunal will have  to  assess  in  reaching  its
         decision on that appeal, giving the CA's decision such weight as is
         due, bearing in mind that the standard of proof applied by  the  CA
         in  a  "conclusive   grounds"   decision   was   the   balance   of
         probabilities..."


11. Recently in MS (Pakistan) -v- SSHD [2020] UKSC 9, Lady Hale (with  whom
    Lord Kerr, Lady Black, Lord Lloyd-Jones and Lord Briggs  agreed),  held
    that when determining an appeal in which it  was  argued  that  removal
    would breach rights protected by the ECHR, the FtT was not bound  by  a
    decision reached under the National Referral Mechanism  as  to  whether
    the appellant was a victim of trafficking, nor did it have to look  for
    public law reasons why that decision was flawed.

12. That is not the end of the matter because I must consider  whether  the
    erroneous approach adopted by the Tribunal was material to the  outcome
    of the appeal.  The appeal before the FtT was not a  challenge  to  the
    decision of the Competent Authority, but an appeal under  s82(1)(a)  of
    the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act   2002   against   the
    respondent's decision to  refuse  the  protection  claim  made  by  the
    appellant.  The  judge  was  not  required  to  determine  whether  the
    appellant is a victim of modern-day slavery, but it is necessary to say
    a little more about the appellant's claim to be a victim of trafficking
    or modern slavery and to consider the extent to which the resolution of
    the protection claim required the judge to make findings as to  whether
    the appellant has been the victim of trafficking or slavery.

13. I draw upon the decision of the Competent Authority dated 9th July 2018
    to set out the background to the trafficking claim and the decision  of
    the Competent Authority.  The decision states:

         "...


         You stated that you had been having an affair with [SB]  for  about
         one or two years before you travelled to the UK. Your  husband  and
         children found out about the  affair  and  started  to  mistreating
         (sic) you. You agreed to travel to the UK to be with  [SB]  as  you
         stated that you "used to love each other" you continued  to  pursue
         your relationship even though you knew your family  disapproved  of
         it because you "used to like each other". You travelled to  the  UK
         and lived with  [SB],  you  even  returned  to  Pakistan  and  then
         travelled back to the UK and continued  living  with  [SB].  During
         your time of living with [SB] you stated that if you  asked  to  go
         out, he would allow you to go out shopping or to the park. He would
         sometimes accompany you, but you  were  allowed  out  on  your  own
         sometimes.


         It is, therefore, not considered that you were subjected to an  act
         of transportation or harbouring.


         ...


         You stated that when you lived in Pakistan [SB] told  you  that  if
         you came to the UK he would  make  you  happy  and  you  would  get
         married. This did not happen as you had not divorced  your  husband
         in Pakistan, so you  could  not  re-marry,  therefore  he  did  not
         deceive you.


         ...


         You stated that you lived together with [SB], he was a  cab  driver
         and you used to do domestic jobs at home and look after  the  home.
         You would do the cooking and cleaning and when his children came to
         the UK you would do the same for them. You would have to  get  them
         ready for school on a morning. During your time living with [SB] he
         would provide you with food and toiletries a place where you  could
         keep your possessions safe and you described that you  had  a  good
         relationship with his children.


         It is,  therefore,  not  considered  that  you  were  subjected  to
         domestic servitude.


         Moreover, it is considered that your  treatment  is  indicative  of
         rape within a relationship  which  became  abusive  as  opposed  to
         trafficking for the purposes of domestic servitude. You stated that
         you were having an affair with [SB] whilst living with your husband
         in Pakistan. You chose to move to the UK to be with  [SB].  At  the
         beginning you described that you were in a  good  relationship  and
         you loved him. You may have had to do  the  domestic  work  in  the
         house and  look  after  the  home  and  children,  however,  it  is
         considered that the work you were required to do within the home is
         not disproportionate. You were also allowed to go out shopping  and
         to the park. Although you stated that you would sometimes  have  to
         be accompanied by [SB], it is not considered to be unreasonable for
         this to happen in a relationship. As time went by and  you  decided
         that you could no longer  tolerate  [SB's]  behaviour  towards  you
         which is when you called the police to help you to escape from your
         rape and abusive relationship."


14. It is clear from the matters relied upon by the appellant in support of
    her claim to be a victim of trafficking that it did not form  any  part
    of her claim that should would be at risk upon return to Pakistan  from
    SB, or at risk of re-trafficking.  At paragraph [92] of  his  decision,
    the judge recorded:

         "For completeness, the appellant also does not claim to  fear  [SB]
         here in the UK or if she were returned to Pakistan. She  claims  he
         comes from a big family but does not describe  him  or  his  family
         having any particular level of influence."


15. At paragraphs [68]  to  [75]  of  his  decision,  the  judge  carefully
    considered the documents relied upon by the appellant  to  support  her
    claim that she had had to leave Pakistan because of an attempt  by  her
    brother-in-law and [SB's] family to shoot  her.   The  judge  carefully
    considered the affidavits by the appellant and her  husband,  the  FIR,
    the 'Application for Registration of Case' and  the  undated  newspaper
    report.  The judge noted at paragraph [76] that he  was  not  satisfied
    that the documents submitted are reliable documents upon which he could
    place any weight. The judge rejected the appellant's claim that she was
    the victim of an attempted shooting as a result of an affair  with  SB.
    The appellant does not challenge that  finding.   The  judge  carefully
    considered the appellant's relationship with her husband and found that
    although the appellant's husband  may  have  been  annoyed  at  her  on
    finding out about her affair with SB, the appellant had  been  able  to
    continue residing in the  family  home  between  2001  and  2006.   Her
    husband did not  seek  to  divorce  the  appellant  and  there  was  no
    suggestion that the appellant's husband had tried to file  any  charges
    against her for adultery or taken steps to harm her in any  other  way.
    In any event the  judge  noted,  at  paragraph  [79],  the  appellant's
    evidence that her husband passed away about five or six years  ago  and
    at paragraph [82], concluded that the appellant has not established  to
    the lower standard that she has a subjective fear of her husband or his
    family.

16. The judge then addressed the appellant's  claim  to  be  at  risk  upon
    return from her children. As set out at paragraphs [83] and [84] of the
    decision, the appellant confirmed that she does  not  have  any  direct
    contact with her children, and she  has  not  been  threatened  by  her
    children directly. The  judge  noted  the  concerns  harboured  by  the
    appellant have come after speaking to her sister and SB.  At paragraphs
    [84] and [85], the judge stated:

         "84.   The appellant further confirmed  the  same  in  her  witness
         statement that she has not been threatened by her children directly
         and any such concerns have come after speaking to  her  sister  and
         [SB] [para 43WS]. There are no details provided when the  appellant
         was told by her sister that her children may seek revenge on her if
         she returned to Pakistan, or even if it was a credible threat.  Her
         response at Q95 indicates she had no direct relationship  with  her
         children and at Q.96  [SB's]  children  who  knew  the  appellant's
         children told her that her children do not like her because of what
         she has done. Her sister also confirmed they do not  like  her.  In
         relation to [SB]  telling  the  appellant  her  children  may  seek
         revenge, I note from the evidence he often made threats to kill the
         appellant or throw her out and  had  a  controlling  nature,  if  I
         accept that evidence then I could not place any weight  on  hearsay
         evidence purported to  have  come  from  him  given  he  would  say
         anything to control the appellant.


         85.         On this reading of the evidence, and that contained  in
         the bundle as a whole the appellant's children posed no  threat  to
         her at any time, nor have there been any  direct  credible  threats
         towards her since leaving Pakistan. The appellant  was  asked  what
         leads her to believe that there is any seriousness to their  threat
         in interview. At Q.113 she states "because at the time when  I  was
         attacked they did not try to save  me.  The  son  of  my  husband's
         sister saved me, but not my own children". I do not find this to be
         a rational basis giving rise  to  a  well-founded  fear  given  her
         account is that the children were very young at the time. The  fact
         that they did not take on three men with a pistol, if  indeed  they
         were even present, is not evidence of them intending to harm her in
         the future."


17. The appellant submits the judge rejected the evidence of the  appellant
    as hearsay evidence on the grounds  that  [SB]  would  do  anything  to
    control the appellant, and the judge erred in his  assessment  of  that
    evidence.  In my judgement, upon a careful reading of the decision,  it
    is clear the  FtT  judge  carefully  considered  the  protection  claim
    advanced by the appellant and looked at  the  evidence  in  the  round,
    giving due weight to all the evidence before reaching a decision as  to
    the credibility of the appellant's account.  At paragraph [84]  of  the
    decision, when read in context, it is clear in my  judgment   that  the
    judge was simply considering the weight to  be  attached  to  what  the
    appellant had been told by SB, taking the claim made by  the  appellant
    at its  highest.   In  my  judgment,  read  as  a  whole,  the  judge's
    consideration of the claim and his findings as to  the  credibility  of
    the appellant are not tainted by the erroneous approach adopted by  the
    Tribunal as to the decision  of  the  Competent  Authority.  The  issue
    before the FtT was whether the appellant qualifies for protection under
    the Refugee Convention.  The correct approach to determining whether  a
    person claiming to be a victim of trafficking is at  risk  upon  return
    and thus entitled to protection, is to consider all the evidence in the
    round as at the date of hearing, applying the lower standard of  proof.
    The judge clearly did so.  On the evidence and the claim advanced,  the
    error I have found would not have resulted in a different  outcome  for
    the appellant before the FtT and the error is therefore not material to
    the outcome of the appeal.

Ground 2

18. The appellant claims the judge accepted  at  paragraph  [60]  that  the
    appellant is a vulnerable individual, but other than a brief mention in
    paragraph [88] of appellant's cognitive difficulties,  the  judge  does
    not appear to have directed himself to the findings in the report of Dr
    Lawrence with respect to the consideration of the appellant's  evidence
    from the asylum interview  or  her  witness  statement.  The  appellant
    claims the judge has specifically not considered whether the  conflicts
    in her evidence in interview, arose from her  psychological  state  and
    failed to make allowance for that condition and her low intelligence.

19. The judge notes at paragraph [37] of his decision  that  the  appellant
    has been deemed unfit to give evidence by Dr  Robin  Lawrence  and  the
    appellant would not be giving evidence.  At paragraph  [56]  the  judge
    confirms that he has considered the  report  of  Dr  Lawrence  and  was
    satisfied that Dr Lawrence is suitably qualified.  At  paragraph  [57],
    the judge  summarises the conclusions reached by  Dr  Lawrence  and  at
    paragraph [58],  the  judge  confirmed  that  he  accepts  the  overall
    conclusion that the appellant is suffering from depression and  anxiety
    as a result of the unhappiness at the thought that her  children  would
    not accept her if she returned to Pakistan and  what  would  happen  to
    her. The judge was satisfied that the appellant should  be  treated  as
    vulnerable, and reminded himself that not giving  evidence  cannot,  of
    itself, be a factor tending to show the person is not to  be  believed,
    but equally, it is not a factor to  show  that  the  person  is  to  be
    believed.

20. I have carefully considered the content of the Psychiatric Report of Dr
    Robin Lawrence that was relied upon  by  the  appellant.   Dr  Lawrence
    noted in his report that he met with the appellant for  two  hours  and
    she was accompanied by a  professional  interpreter.  He  states  "[The
    appellant] is illiterate and unintelligent. Several of her answers were
    vague and self-contradictory...".  Dr Lawrence records  that  there  is
    nothing in the appellant's life that would suggest she  had  ever  been
    traumatised and he expresses the opinion that the appellant's  symptoms
    can be accounted for by anxiety and point to a diagnosis of  depression
    with marked anxiety features. He notes the appellant has a prescription
    for 'Citalopram 40mg daily', an antidepressant.  He  does  not  believe
    there is any evidence of PTSD, but the relevant symptoms point to  high
    levels of anxiety.  Dr Lawrence states his  impression  is  that  inter
    alia, the appellant is of low premorbid intelligence (she is illiterate
    and has not learnt English) and her level  of  function  is  profoundly
    impeded by her depression.  He considered the capacity of the appellant
    to take part in the appeal and in his opinion, the appellant was  unfit
    to give oral evidence.  The appellant's mental state  was  said  to  be
    such that she would find it impossible to answer questions clearly  and
    face any kind of cross examination. Dr Lawrence stated the  appellant's
    low intelligence should be remembered when/if she is questioned.

21. In reaching his decision as  to  the  credibility  of  the  appellant's
    account and the risk upon return to  Pakistan,  the  judge  noted  that
    there are a number of inconsistencies in relation to the  core  of  the
    appellant's account.  The judge noted that the respondent had  referred
    to a number of inconsistencies in her decision and  the  appellant  had
    sought to address matters in her witness statement. In considering  the
    evidence the judge  considered  not  only  the  answers  given  by  the
    appellant in interview, but  also  the  explanations  provided  by  the
    appellant  in  her  witness  statement  and  the  relevant   background
    material.  In my judgement, upon a careful reading of the  decision  it
    is clear the judge had in mind throughout, the opinion expressed by  Dr
    Lawrence  that  the  appellant  is  illiterate  and  of  low  premorbid
    intelligence.   At  paragraph  [86],  the   judge   referred   to   the
    inconsistencies and  matters  that  the  respondent  considered  to  be
    implausible, and in considering those matters expressly noted  that  he
    had reached his decision,  "...  taking  into  account  her  issues  of
    concentration and recollection of events...".  At paragraphs  [88]  and
    [89], the judge makes it clear that he has considered the  evidence  of
    the  appellant  taking  account  of  her  cognitive  difficulties.   At
    paragraph [94], the judge reminded himself that the burden  is  on  the
    appellant to prove her case to the lower standard and the  judge  again
    confirms that he has taken into account the medical evidence as part of
    his holistic assessment of the evidence in the round.

22. The medical evidence confirming the diagnosis of  clinical  depression,
    high  levels  of  anxiety  and  low  premorbid  intelligence  was   not
    determinative of the issue of credibility. The judge was not  satisfied
    that there was any reasonable explanation for the many aspects  of  the
    appellant's evidence and behaviour which led to the  rejection  of  her
    claim.  When properly read, in my  judgement,  the  judge  reached  his
    decision as to the credibility of the appellant and  the  core  of  her
    account by  reference  to  the  evidence  as  a  whole,  including  the
    explanations set out by the appellant  in  her  witness  statement  and
    after considering the background  material  before  the  Tribunal.  The
    medical evidence did not deprive the FtT of the right to rely upon  the
    inconsistencies in the appellant's account provided the judge took into
    account the medical view.  It is clear from a  proper  reading  of  the
    decision the judge had in mind throughout,  the  appellant's  cognitive
    difficulties when considering her claim, even to the lower standard.

23. In my judgement, the judge identified the issues and gave a proper  and
    adequate explanation for his conclusions on the central issues on which
    the appeal was determined. The findings made by the judge were findings
    that were properly open to the judge on the evidence  before  the  FtT.
    The findings cannot be said to be perverse, irrational or findings that
    were not supported by the evidence.  Having  carefully  considered  the
    decision, I am quite satisfied that the appeal was dismissed after  the
    judge had carefully considered  the  facts  and  circumstances  of  the
    claim, and all the evidence before him attaching appropriate weight  to
    the psychiatric report. It follows that I reject the second  ground  of
    appeal.

24. In my judgment, the appellant is unable to establish that there  was  a
    material error of law in the decision of the FtT, and it  follows  that
    the appeal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

25. The appeal is dismissed.

Signed      V. Mandalia                            Date  16th June 2020

 Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia
