
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/11067/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 21 February 2019             |On 26 February 2019             |
|                                |                                |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge MANUELL


                                   Between

                                   Mr K T
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms M Sirikanda, Solicitor (Ahmed Rahman Carr)
For the Respondent:    Ms S Cunha, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    Introduction

    1.     The Appellant appealed with permission granted by Upper Tribunal
         Judge Grubb on 21 January 2019 against the decision and reasons  of
         First-tier Tribunal Judge Onoufriou who had dismissed the appeal of
         the Appellant against the refusal of his  international  protection
         claim.  The decision and reasons  was  promulgated  on  26  October
         2018.

    2.     The Appellant is a national of Turkey, born on 16 January  1983,
         and of Kurdish ethnicity.  Neither his  nationality  nor  ethnicity
         were expressly challenged by the Secretary of State  for  the  Home
         Department. The Appellant claimed that he was  at  risk  on  return
         from the  Turkish  government  and  its  agencies  because  of  his
         separatist political opinion. After reviewing the  evidence,  Judge
         Onoufriou found that the Appellant was at best a low level activist
         for HDP, would  be  of  no  significant  interest  to  the  Turkish
         authorities and was not at real risk on return as a  failed  asylum
         seeker.

    3.      Permission  to  appeal  was  granted  in  the  Upper   Tribunal
         notwithstanding the earlier refusal of permission below because  it
         was considered arguable that  the  judge  had  had  wrongly  placed
         little weight on the psychiatric evidence and had fallen  into  the
         Mbanga [2005] EWCA Civ 367 error of failing  to  reach  credibility
         findings with sufficient regard to the medical evidence.

    4.     No notice under rule 24 had been served by the  Respondent,  but
         Ms Cunha indicated that the appeal was indeed opposed.




    Submissions

    5.     Ms Sirikanda for the Appellant  relied  on  the  Upper  Tribunal
         grounds  of  onwards  appeal  and  the  Upper  Tribunal  grant   of
         permission to appeal.  In summary, Ms Sirikanda contended that  the
         judge had failed to engage adequately  with  the  medical  evidence
         which had demanded  proper  and  close  attention,  and  had  given
         insufficient  weight  to  it.  The  judge  had  used  his   adverse
         credibility findings already reached as grounds for  giving  little
         weight to the expert's report. The Mbanga (above)  error  had  been
         committed,  and  other  relevant   judicial   guidance   concerning
         credibility assessment  had  not  been  followed.   The  judge  had
         confused the symptoms of PTSD with  its  causes,  which  were  life
         threatening events.  The judge had not recognised  the  Appellant's
         vulnerability when assessing his evidence.  The assessment of  risk
         on the case at its highest was mistaken.  The  whole  determination
         was problematic. The decision and reasons was unsafe and should  be
         set aside and the appeal reheard before another judge.

    6.     It was not necessary to call on Ms Cunha.




    No material error of law finding

    7.     The tribunal reserved its  decision,  which  now  follows.   The
         tribunal  must  reject  the  submissions  made  on  behalf  of  the
         Appellant.  In the tribunal's view, the errors asserted to exist in
         the decision and reasons are illusory. Indeed,  in  the  tribunal's
         view the grant of permission to appeal  was  a  very  liberal  one,
         because essentially the dispute is no more than one  over  findings
         of fact lawfully reached with which the Appellant disagrees.

    8.     The determination was carefully prepared  in  depth  by  a  very
         experienced judge who correctly placed the appeal into the  context
         of current country conditions in Turkey.  As the judge  noted,  the
         Turkish authorities have assumed sweeping powers and are accused of
         acting very  heavy  handedly  against  separatists,  and  suspected
         separatists, making it less probable that any persons perceived  to
         be of continuing interest to the  authorities  would  be  leniently
         treated.  It was thus a matter of significance that  the  Appellant
         had never been charged with any offence despite the number  of  his
         claimed  arrests.   As  Judge  Andrew  pointed  out  when  refusing
         permission to appeal in the  First-tier  Tribunal,  the  judge  had
         quite clearly taken full  account  of  the  medical  evidence  when
         reaching his  findings,  having  considered  the  medical  evidence
         provided as part of  his  "in  the  round"  assessment.   That  can
         readily be seen from the determination, where from [47] onwards the
         judge analyses and discusses the expert's  report  in  depth.   The
         judge had also specifically  considered  the  Appellant's  possible
         vulnerability and by necessary implication, any  effect  or  impact
         that vulnerability might have on the credibility assessment.

    9.     The structure of the appeal shows that  the  judge  applied  the
         correct, lower standard of proof  throughout.   Perhaps  even  more
         importantly, on a fair and full reading of the determination, it is
         clear  that  the  judge  was   constantly   testing   his   primary
         conclusions,  giving  anxious  scrutiny  to  the  evidence,   close
         attention  to   the   rival   submissions   and   considering   the
         alternatives: this can be seen (by way of example) at [47]  of  the
         determination, where the judge  examines  the  alleged  discrepancy
         raised  by  the  Respondent  over  the  number  of  detentions  the
         Appellant claimed to have had.

    10.    This was far from a situation of a judge placing the credibility
         cart before the medical evidence horse, as it were.   There  was  a
         genuine evaluation in the round, which among other matters properly
         noted the  absence  of  potentially  relevant  evidence  reasonably
         obtainable (see TK (Burundi)  [2009]  EWCA  Civ  40),  as  well  as
         implausible elements of the Appellant's story,  such  as  giving  a
         speech to a large crowd.   These were all matters for the  tribunal
         to  assess,  including  alternative  (and  it  might  be   thought,
         perfectly obvious) realistic explanations for the scarring observed
         by the expert, such as the Appellant's past work as a  builder  and
         decorator for a lengthy period.  The tribunal gave adequate reasons
         for giving little weight to the medical report.

    11.    Nor can this very experienced judge be held to have confused the
         symptoms of PTSD with its causes.  The judge adopted  the  analysis
         in HE (DRC) [2004] UKAIT 321 and gave proper  reasons  for  finding
         that the PTSD diagnosed was not  reasonably  likely  to  have  been
         caused by the Appellant's claimed mistreatment at the hands of  the
         Turkish authorities. The judge had demonstrably examined the  whole
         of the evidence with anxious scrutiny, in the  current  context  of
         country conditions in Turkey.  The judge's assessment  of  risk  on
         return, on the alternative basis of the claim at its highest  (with
         the exception of the speech) was open to him.

    12.     In  the  tribunal's  view,  the  submissions  advanced  on  the
         Appellant's behalf amount to no more  than  disagreement  with  the
         judge's adverse findings of fact, all of which  were  available  to
         him  on  the  evidence  presented,  which  evidence   was   plainly
         sufficiently considered  and  the  consequent  findings  adequately
         reasoned.  The tribunal finds that there was no material  error  of
         law in the decision challenged.




    DECISION

    The appeal is dismissed

    The making of the previous decision did not involve  the  making  of  a
    material error on a point of law.  The decision stands unchanged,  save
    that the anonymity order is discharged.




    Signed Dated 21 February 2019


    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell


