
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11763/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Heard at Field House   Decision and Reasons Promulgated
On 7th December 2018   On 15th January 2019


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FARRELLY


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                                   MR. S O
                          ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Ms Z Kiss, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the respondent:    Mr R Toal, Counsel, instructed by Wilson Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

   1. It is the Secretary of State who is the appellant in these
      proceedings. For convenience I will refer to the parties hereinafter
      as they were in the First-tier Tribunal.

   2. The appellant is a Turkish national of Kurdish ethnicity, born in [~]
      1989. He came to the United Kingdom as a child with his family. His
      father's claim for protection was refused. The family were
      subsequently granted exceptional leave to remain.

   3. The appellant is a foreign criminal who was deported in December 2013.
      He has a number of convictions, including conspiracy to commit
      burglaries for which he received 18 months imprisonment.

   4. He returned to the United Kingdom illegally and made a claim for
      protection in May 2017 on the basis of actual or imputed political
      opinions. He claimed he was at risk from the Turkish authorities. This
      was because of his association with his father who he claimed had been
      a member of the PKK, as well as his own involvement with the Turkish
      People's Democratic party.

   5. He claimed to have been targeted by the authorities and arrested on
      arrival. He said he joined the Turkish People's Democratic party on
      his return. He said he had been involved with the Turkish community
      centre in London. He claimed to have taken part in a number of events.
      As a consequence he said he was detained on a number of occasions by
      the authorities, abused and then released a short time later. He said
      that in September 2016 he was taken into a car by plainclothes police
      officers and released when he agreed to act as an informer. He then
      decided to leave Turkey

   6. A further aspect of his claim was an objection to undergoing
      compulsory military service. This had been rejected as a basis for
      claiming by the respondent and the First-tier judge.

The refusal

   7. His claim was refused on 3 November 2017.The respondent did not accept
      he was of interest to the Turkish authorities. His nationality and
      ethnicity were accepted. When his claim for protection was being
      assessed he was asked questions about the Turkish People's Democratic
      party and from his answers he was able to demonstrate a basic level of
      knowledge about the party. He had not claimed any specific role. He
      claimed to have attended a protest in 2014 marking the anniversary of
      the arrest of Mr Abdullah Ocalan, the founding member of the Kurdistan
      workers party. Country information confirmed protests were held in
      February on the anniversary across southern Turkey. He claimed that he
      had been arrested for unfurling banners and was then released without
      charge.

   8. The respondent accepted he may have been a low-level supporter of the
      party but did not have any profile. His claimed difficulties were not
      consistent with the low-level involvement described and the country
      information which indicated ordinary members were generally not
      targeted.

   9. He could not give any details about his father's involvement with the
      PKK. Furthermore, his father had returned to Turkey on a number of
      occasions without difficulty with the appellant claiming he had been
      granted an amnesty.

The First tier Tribunal

  10. His appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge R Chowdhury who, in
      a decision promulgated on 24 August 2018, allowed the appeal on
      protection grounds. The appellant was represented then, as he is now,
      by Mr Toal.

  11. At paragraph 16, under the heading: `The respondent's decision' the
      judge records that the refusal letter does not dispute his political
      activities in Turkey, including his support for the Turkish Democratic
      Party. It was also stated that the respondent had accepted he took
      part in demonstrations and that his claims of being arrested had not
      been explicitly disputed. His account of being released however
      undermined his claim to be of interest to the authorities.
      Furthermore, at paragraph 18 the judge queried why the appellant would
      be of interest to the Turkish authorities because of his father when
      he had been granted an amnesty and had returned to Turkey on a number
      of occasions without difficulty.

  12. Under the heading `Findings and conclusions 'the judge refers to an
      expert report submitted on behalf of the appellant which refers to the
      grant of an amnesty in 2003-2005 the certain PKK supporters. At
      paragraph 35 the judge commented:

         "... The significance of the appellant's father's profile is the
         context in which the appellant's own activities should be assessed
         and I find does place him at higher risk."

  13. The judge then refers to the expert report as indicating involvement
      with the Turkish Democratic party is seen by the Turkish State as
      support for the PKK. At paragraph 37 the judge comments about the
      claimed threats made by the authorities and states that his father's
      history would colour the authorities perception of him.

The Upper Tribunal

  14. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis it was arguable the
      judge misunderstood the refusal letter and the limited nature of what
      was being accepted by the respondent. It was contended the judge was
      wrong at paragraph 16 of the decision in suggesting the respondent
      accepted he took part in demonstrations.

  15. The appellant's credibility was in issue and the respondent was only
      accepting that at most he may have been a low-level supporter and not
      an activist. Paragraph 49 the refusal letter questioned his claim of
      being arrested on arrival and subsequently. Paragraph 52 records that
      his account of being detained and then released without charge
      undermined his claim of being of interest to the authorities and
      damaged his credibility.

  16. It was pointed out that the respondent had not accepted his father was
      involved with the PKK as evidenced by the refusal of his claim for
      protection. It was pointed out in the refusal that the appellant could
      not explain in any detail is father's claimed role and his ability to
      return to Turkey on number of occasions without problem.

  17. Furthermore, the judge refers to a statement from the appellant's wife
      of the police repeatedly visiting and questioning her about him.
      However, the judge failed to explain why she was apparently considered
      believable when, as the appellant's wife she was not wholly
      independent.

  18. At hearing, the presenting officer referred me para 16 of the
      decision. If this was compared with the reasons for refusal letter the
      presenting officer submitted the judge was simply wrong in believing
      the respondent accepted the appellant's claim of participating in
      demonstrations and being arrested. The judge records that the
      appellant was subjected to extensive cross-examination but the effect
      of this is not recorded. There was no reference to the challenge to
      the appellant's credibility by the respondent. I was referred
      paragraph 37 of the refusal letter which said the appellant may have
      been a low-level supporter of the Turkish Democratic party. The
      refusal letter was not even accepting he positively was a low-level
      supporter. She pointed out that the appellant's father had never been
      granted refugee status.

  19. Mr Toal, in response, contended that there was no misunderstanding by
      the judge of what was being accepted by the respondent. I was referred
      to the summary at paragraph 55 of the refusal letter where the
      respondent accepted his political activities. I was referred to
      aspects of his substantive interview, notably, paragraph 34, where he
      said he was a member of the Turkish Democratic party but was not
      active and that he joined demonstrations, protests and meetings. At
      question 15 he said whenever he had a chance he would go to meetings
      and at question 54 he referred to being arrested. I was referred to
      the medical report which said the appellant was suffering from post-
      traumatic stress disorder and this was referred to by the judge as
      explaining an inability to give a clear account. He pointed out that
      paragraph 19 of the decision confirms the judge was aware his father
      had not been granted refugee status and had been able to return to
      Turkey. However, his father had the protection of British citizenship
      and there was mention of the amnesty.

  20. Mr Toal stated that the presenting officer at hearing and in
      submissions had not disputed the appellant's account of participating
      in demonstrations or of being arrested. I was referred to the country
      expert evidence about low-level supporters being detained. I was taken
      to specific aspects of the report.

Consideration.

  21. The appellant's credibility was central. If the refusal letter is
      considered then the decision maker had regard to the substantive
      interview and concluded that at most the appellant may have been a
      supporter of the Turkish Democratic party. Notably, the reference was
      that he `may have been' rather than he was. Paragraphs 49 to 54 of the
      refusal indicate a rejection of his claim that he was wanted by the
      authorities. His claim had been of repeated short-term detentions
      culminating in him being threatened if it did not act as an informer.
      The respondent was not accepting these facts. The respondent recorded
      that demonstrations did take part in Turkey when the appellant said he
      was present. This was not acceptance of any involvement by him
      however. It is in this context that the summary at paragraph 55 has to
      be read. It is clearly not a global acceptance of the appellant's
      claim.

  22. The decision refers to a lengthy cross-examination but the content is
      not recorded. It was common case that his father had not been granted
      refugee status and had been able to return to Turkey without
      difficulty. Judge was influenced by the expert report and took the
      view that his father's history would have coloured how he was
      perceived by the authorities. However, this overlooks the fact that
      his father's claimed involvement had not been accepted.

  23. It is my conclusion that the judge has misunderstood the refusal
      letter and what the respondent was accepting. It is clear from
      paragraphs 36 to 37 and 49 to 54 that his account was being challenged
      and at the very most he may have been a passive supporter. The judge
      appears to take the summary at paragraph 55 as meaning the appellant's
      claim was accepted which is not the case. Consequently, judge was
      wrong at paragraph 16 to state is claimed activities were accepted. In
      doing so the judge materially errs in law and the decision cannot
      stand.

Decision

The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Chowdhury materially errs in law
and is set aside. The matter is remitted for a de novo hearing in the First-
tier Tribunal.


Francis J Farrelly
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge

27 December 2018


Directions.

   1. Re list for a de novo hearing in the First-tier Tribunal at Taylor
      house excluding First-tier Tribunal Judge R Chowdry.
   2. The rejection of the appellant's claim in relation to military service
      is not been challenged. Consequently, that finding shall stand.
   3. For the removal of doubt the appellant's credibility is an issue and
      the respondent has rejected his claim of events in Turkey. The appeal
      should be prepared by his representatives on this basis.
   4. The appellant's representative should advise if a Turkish interpreter
      is required.
   5. Updated appeal bundle should be prepared. The appellant's
      representative should advise the respondent if any article 8 claim as
      being pursued
   6. The hearing should last around 2 hours.

Francis J Farrelly
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge

