
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/11220/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard by Skype for Business          | Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|Heard On 30th September 2020         | On 12th October 2020                |

                                   Before

                              UT JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                   [S T R]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr E MacKay, of McGlashan MacKay, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms S Cunha, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant has permission to appeal  against  the  decision  of  FtT
    Judge Green, promulgated on 24 March 2020.  His grounds are set out  in
    his application dated 1 April 2020.

 2. The hearing on 30 September  2020  was  conducted  from  George  House,
    Edinburgh.  Representatives  attended  remotely.   No  members  of  the
    public  attended,  either  in  person  or  remotely.   The   technology
    functioned without difficulty.

 3. The first and main point in the grounds arises from the evidence of  Mr
    [KK], dealt with at [32] of the decision.  The  witness  said  that  he
    visited the appellant's family at their home in Sri Lanka in 2018.  The
    police came to the home and questioned the family because they  thought
    that the witness was the appellant; questioned the witness and  checked
    his identity and UK passport; and said they were aware of the appellant
    and that "he worked against the Sri Lankan government".  The judge said
    that he gave this evidence "very limited weight because it  relates  to
    claimed events ... 18 months ago and even if  it  supports  the  notion
    that the appellant  may  have  been  of  interest  to  the  Sri  Lankan
    authorities it is not evidence that they continue to be  interested  in
    the appellant".

 4. Mr MacKay submitted firstly that the judge accepted the  attendance  of
    the security forces with an interest in the appellant, and, against the
    background of their commitment against Tamil separatists abroad,  there
    was no reason to consider that their interest  would  have  disappeared
    over the period of 18 months; and so the decision should be reversed.

 5. There is force in the argument  that  a  positive  finding  of  adverse
    interest from the security forces, 18 months before the hearing,  taken
    with country guidance and background evidence, would be  sufficient  to
    establish a real current risk.

 6. Ms Cunha submitted  firstly  that  the  judge  made  no  such  positive
    finding.  She said that the judge gave the evidence of the witness very
    limited weight, and gave good reasons - he was a failed asylum  seeker,
    so his own account had not been given credit; his leave was obtained on
    the basis of marriage, not risk;  in spite of his claim, he had no fear
    of returning to Sri Lanka; he claimed that  the  security  forces  were
    aware he worked against the government, but he was not arrested, and so
    was obviously of no interest; the appellant would have been in no worse
    a position; the weight to be given to his evidence was up to the judge;
    and there was no error in finding that this evidence  did  not  advance
    the case.

 7. In my view, the judge's finding lies somewhere between the positions of
    the parties.

 8. I do not think that [32] is a record of evidence from  the  witness  by
    which he and the appellant would have been equally of interest  to  the
    authorities.  The witness said he was questioned about the  purpose  of
    his trip, but the allegation of working against the government concerns
    the appellant, not the witness.

 9. The other credibility points mentioned by Ms Cunha might be valid,  but
    they are not made by the judge, or at least not expressly.  Reasons  on
    such points need to be explicit.

10. The judge's finding is not positively to the effect that  the  security
    forces did show interest in the appellant.  The  evidence  is  said  to
    relate to "claimed events", i.e. not necessarily  actual  events.   The
    conclusion is expressed "even if" the evidence supports the  notion  of
    interest, which again suggests the point is left unresolved.

11. Ms Cunha argued that the rest of the decision contained  numerous  good
    reasons, in several of which no error  was  suggested,  for  concluding
    that the appellant's activities did not reach a level to place  him  at
    risk.  That is correct, but those reasons are not so overwhelming  that
    the decision must have been the same, even if it was accepted that  the
    security forces showed interest in the appellant.

12. I prefer the submission from Mr MacKay  that  if  the  finding  on  the
    evidence of the witness was not positive, but unclear, it was a  matter
    which might have made the difference, and  required  a  rehearing.   As
    indicated at [5] above, the lapse of 18 months is not  enough  to  hold
    that the security forces would have given  up  their  interest  in  the
    appellant, and the judge, although he qualifies his  finding,  provides
    no other reason.

13. I was not asked to preserve any findings, and it would be artificial to
    do so.  The decision of the FtT is set aside,  and  stands  only  as  a
    record of what was said at the hearing.

14. The nature of the case is such that it is appropriate under section  12
    of the 2007 Act, and under Practice Statement 7.2, to remit to the  FtT
    for a fresh hearing, not before Judge Green.

15. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.


      [pic]

      6 October 2020
      UT Judge Macleman





                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS


1.    A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must make
a written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any such application must be
received by the Upper Tribunal within the appropriate period after this
decision was sent to the person making the application. The appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the individual and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent.


2.    Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is in the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration Acts, the appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the notice of decision is
sent electronically).


3.    Where the person making the application is in detention under the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


4.    Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is outside
the United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to
appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if the
notice of decision is sent electronically).


5.    A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or a Sunday,
Christmas Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.


6.    The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on the
covering letter or covering email.

