

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                      Appeal
Number: PA/11604/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard                at                Manchester,                Piccadilly
  Decision & Reasons Promulgated
On                   8th                    December                    2017
         On 15th December 2017


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGINTY

                                   Between

                                   MR T E
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Karnick (Counsel) instructed by Broudi  Jackson  &
Canter
For the Respondent:    Mrs Aboni (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This is the Appellant's appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Alis promulgated on the 4th  April  2017,  following  a
      hearing on the 3rd March 2017 in Manchester.

   2. The Appellant is a citizen of Libya, who claims to have converted from
      Islam to Christianity, and who claims that he would be persecuted upon
      return as a convert to Christianity.  First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Alis
      rejected that account and  did  not  accept  that  the  Appellant  had
      genuinely converted from Islam to Christianity and did not accept that
      he would follow that religion in Libya were he to be returned.   Judge
      Alis went on to consider  the  question  as  to  whether  or  not  the
      Appellant would be at risk upon return as a civilian for the  purposes
      of Article 15(c) of the Qualification Directive, and as to whether  or
      not there was such a state of indiscriminate violence, as to mean that
      simply as a result of his presence there as a civilian, he would be at
      risk of serious harm upon return.  Judge Alis noted that the  previous
      Country Guidance case of AT and others (Libya) CG [2014] UKUT 318  had
      been held no longer to be good law and found that following  the  case
      of FA (Libya: Article 15(c)) Libya CG [2016] UKUT 00413, each case had
      to be decided on its own facts,  and  he  went  through  the  evidence
      before him regarding the risks to  a  civilian  upon  return  and  the
      question as to the level of violence but found the Appellant  was  not
      entitled to  humanitarian  protection  under  Paragraph  339C  of  the
      Immigration Rules.  He further found that the Appellant's Human Rights
      either under Article 3 or Article 8  would  not  be  breached  by  his
      removal.

   3. The Appellant now seeks  to  appeal  against  that  decision  for  the
      reasons set out both  within  the  original  and  renewed  Grounds  of
      Appeal.  Those documents are a matter of record and are therefore  not
      repeated in their entirety here, but I have  fully  taken  account  of
      both documents in reaching my decision.  However, in  summary,  it  is
      argued by the Appellant  in  the  first  ground  that  the  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge erred  in  his  treatment  of  the  assessment  of  the
      Appellant's credibility.  It is argued that  the  Appellant  had  been
      found credible in his own appeal and had appeared as a witness  in  an
      appeal in which conversion to Christianity was an essential aspect and
      in which another Appellant had been found credible and  that  his  own
      witness and that witness had given evidence  in  the  Appellant's  own
      appeal and that neither that witness nor the  Deacon  were  challenged
      about the Appellant's attendance at church.  It  is  argued  that  the
      Appellant's attendance at church was not doubted and  that  the  Judge
      was wrong to say that Deacon David Smith would  only  tell  the  Judge
      about his behaviour since he returned to Liverpool,  whereas  in  fact
      the Minister who baptised the Appellant had  also  told  Deacon  Smith
      that the Appellant had regularly attended at the Manchester  Methodist
      Central Hall.  It is argued that the Judge discounted the evidence  of
      the Appellant's witness on the basis the determination was not binding
      upon him, but that was argued to be  not  a  reason  for  refusing  to
      accept the evidence of a witness whose account had been genuine and it
      is argued that the principle in Devaseelan  applied  to  both  of  the
      decisions and the Judge was wrong not to apply them.

   4.  In the second ground of appeal it is argued that the Judge misapplied
      the case of Ali Dorodian (01/TH/1537), and that the Judge implied that
      only a Minister could give evidence  of  a  person's  faith  and  that
      evidence from someone who is not  a  Minister  should  be  given  less
      weight and it is argued that Ali Dorodian was decided before the  case
      of HJ (Iran), where it is said  that  it  was  determined  that  faith
      rather than church membership was a material consideration.

   5. In the third ground of appeal it is argued that the  Judge  failed  to
      adequately consider the risk upon return for the  purpose  of  Article
      15(c) and the evidence before the Judge had shown that the  conditions
      had deteriorated since the presidency council had been introduced  and
      that there were no internal flights to Tripoli and  nothing  had  been
      put forward to show that the Appellant would  be  able  to  travel  to
      Tripoli safely.

   6.  In the fourth ground of appeal it was argued the Judge erred  in  his
      approach to Article 8 and the Appellant had made  a  legitimate  fresh
      claim in June 2013 which the Respondent had delayed  consideration  of
      until October 2016.

   7. In the renewed Grounds of Appeal it is further argued that it was  not
      put to the Appellant in cross-examination that the frequency of church
      attendance was inadequate or insufficient to show it  was  genuine  by
      his conversion and the Judge failed to take account of the  fact  that
      the Appellant had been attending church for 5 years.   It  was  argued
      that the fact that a person is a retired Deacon is  not  a  reason  to
      give less weight to that evidence.

   8. Although permission to appeal in this case was  initially  refused  by
      First-tier Tribunal Judge Kimnell on the 27th April  2017,  permission
      to appeal was then granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Perkins on the 14th
      June 2017 who found it was arguable that a  Tribunal  gave  unlawfully
      low weight to the evidence of  Mr  Smith  and  his  explained  hearsay
      evidence about the Appellant's attendance at church before his baptism
      and it was arguable that the Judge should have given  more  weight  to
      the fact that the Appellant had previously been believed by a Tribunal
      and was not contradicting the earlier evidence that he gave.  He found
      that the decision may ultimately withstand criticism but he decided to
      give permission to appeal on each ground.

   9. In addition I heard oral submission from both Mr Karnick and Mrs Aboni
      and which I have fully taken account of in reaching my  decision,  and
      which are fully recorded within my record of proceedings.

   My Findings on Error of Law and Materiality

  10. Although it was argued in oral submissions by Mr  Karnick  of  Counsel
      that in respect of the Article 15(c) consideration, the  Judge  failed
      to properly assess all the evidence before him  in  finding  that  the
      Appellant was not at a risk of serious harm  simply  as  a  result  of
      being a civilian upon return, for the purposes of Article  15(c),  his
      submission that the Judge should have found that there was an  Article
      15(c) risk, and that such  risk  has  now  been  found  by  the  Upper
      Tribunal in the case of ZMM (Article 15(c)) Libya CG [2017] UKUT  263,
      the case of ZMM made clear that the Tribunal should not just  consider
      a body count for the purpose of an Article  15(c)  risk,  but  had  to
      consider the background evidence and the degeneration in the  security
      situation in the state, the  risk  of  kidnapping  and  violent  crime
      without impunity.  Mr Karnick referred me to the Appellant's  original
      bundle of  documents  with  the  numerous  highlights  in  yellow  and
      documents relied upon in respect of what was said to  be  the  Article
      15(c) risk.

  11. However, the fact that the Upper Tribunal in the case of ZMM, in  June
      2017, after the date of Judge Alis's decision on the 4th  April  2017,
      found that there was an Article 15(c) risk in Libya,  does  not  mean,
      per se, that Judge Alis was wrong in his findings on the basis of  the
      evidence before him.  The decision in ZMM postdates  the  decision  of
      Judge Alis, and therefore it is not a case  where  he  has  failed  to
      follow an existing Country Guidance case, and  as  stated  above,  the
      Upper Tribunal in the case of FA, made  it  clear  that  the  previous
      Country Guidance was no longer to be followed, and each Judge  had  to
      consider the risk on the basis of the evidence before them.   Although
      Mr Karnick sought to argue that largely similar evidence was submitted
      before Judge Alis, as opposed to that before  the  Upper  Tribunal  in
      ZMM, clearly the Upper Tribunal in  ZMM  had  the  benefit  of  expert
      evidence which was not available to Judge Alis, and in the absence  of
      the evidence being identical, I do not accept that it  can  be  simply
      said that as a result of ZMM having reached  a  different  conclusion,
      that Judge Alis erred in law on the evidence before him.

  12.   In his consideration of the evidence for Article  15(c)  Judge  Alis
      considered the risk of serious harm due to the  ongoing  situation  in
      Libya between paragraphs 54 and 71 of  his  Judgment.   He  has  fully
      recognised  at  [62]  that  Courts  and  Tribunals  should  not  limit
      themselves to a purely quantitative analysis of figures of  death  and
      injuries,  and  at  [63]  quoted  at  length  from  the  2017  Country
      Information Report from the Home Office.  Although Mr  Karnick  sought
      to criticise that on the basis of it being  submissions  by  the  Home
      Office, it was put forward as background evidence, and Judge Alis  has
      not simply relied upon the findings regarding the Article 15(c) within
      that report, but has quoted at [63] numerous paragraphs regarding  the
      security state situation within Libya.  Judge Alis found that although
      the country was in a state of flux, and the humanitarian situation  in
      Libya was poor, it had not reached such a level in  Tripoli  as  would
      breach Article 15(c) despite the fact there were  a  number  of  rival
      armed groups originating from the capital and nearby cities and areas.
       He further considered the question of vulnerable groups who were more
      likely to face problems than non-vulnerable groups and found that  the
      Appellant had not fallen into any of those vulnerable groups  at  [67]
      and also took account of the fact there  were  no  direct  flights  to
      Tripoli,  but  found  that  there  were  numerous  flights  via  other
      countries to Tripoli and the Respondent had an  expired  passport  and
      found there would be no reason why  a  fresh  passport  could  not  be
      obtained or a travel document obtained at [70].

  13.  Judge Alis further specifically set out  the  evidence  that  he  had
      taken account of and I therefore do accept that he has  taken  account
      of all of the evidence submitted, when making his findings.  It is not
      necessary for the Judge to quote from every single piece  of  evidence
      or document submitted, in order to substantiate his  reasons  as  this
      would make Judgments unduly long and complex.  What  is  necessary  is
      the fact that the Judge must provide sufficient reasons to enable  the
      losing party to know why they have lost, and it is necessary  for  the
      Judge to provide  clear,  adequate  and  sufficient  reasons  for  his
      findings.  I find  that  the  Judge  has  given  clear,  adequate  and
      sufficient reasons for his finding  that  the  Appellant  was  not  an
      Article 15(c) risk on the basis of the evidence before him,  and  that
      was a finding open to the Judge  on  that  evidence.   The  fact  that
      thereafter the Upper Tribunal in the case of ZMM  (Article  15(c))  on
      some different evidence reached a different conclusion and that ZMM is
      now the new Country Guidance case, does not mean that Judge Alis erred
      in his analysis of the evidence before him.

  14. Nor do I  accept  that  Judge  Alis  erred  in  his  approach  to  the
      Appellant's "conversion" to  Christianity,  or  the  evidence  of  the
      Dorodian witness.  Although Mr Karnick seemingly argued that the  case
      of Dorodian should no longer be followed given the case of HJ  (Iran),
      the case of HJ (Iran) was dealing with  the  risk  of  homosexuals  in
      Iran, rather than those who claimed to have converted to Christianity,
      with the evidence necessary to support such a claim of being  at  risk
      through conversion.  HJ (Iran) had not overruled Dorodian nor  did  Mr
      Karnick seek to rely upon any case where it had sought  to  be  argued
      that Dorodian had in fact been overturned.  Further,  Judge  Alis  did
      not seek to say that it was mandatory for a witness to attend and give
      evidence, and stated specifically at [46] that the Dorodian principles
      did not make it mandatory for a witness to attend  and  give  evidence
      but that the attendance of a witness enabled the Tribunal to  question
      him or her about the Appellant's  conversion  and  commitment  to  the
      religion. That was a correct statement of the law.

  15. Further, although Mr Karnick sought to argue that Judge Alis seemed to
      imply that less weight should be given to a retired Deacon's  evidence
      than that of an active Deacon, that was not the finding made by  Judge
      Alis.  At [47] the Judge found that Deacon Smith  did  not  appear  to
      hold any position at the West Derby Methodist Church as he retired  in
      September 2015 and the fact that according to their  rules  a  retired
      Minister must not attend the former church for a period of  12  months
      and thereafter Deacon Smith only started attending  the  church  after
      September 2016 and that although the Appellant's evidence was that  he
      came to live in Liverpool in July 2013, he did not attend  the  church
      in Liverpool until November 2016,  approximately  1  month  after  his
      current application was refused.  The point being made by  Judge  Alis
      at [47] was the fact that therefore Deacon Smith would not  have  been
      able to personally vouch for the Appellant's attendance at  church  or
      his commitment to Christianity given that Deacon  Smith  only  started
      attending the church in  September  2016,  after  the  period  of  his
      retirement and the Appellant himself did  not  attend  the  church  in
      Liverpool until November 2016.  The Judge was entitled to take account
      of that in respect of the weight to  be  attached  to  Deacon  Smith's
      evidence.  Further, the Judge was entitled to find that  the  Deacon's
      evidence was largely based on what he had been told and assumptions.

  16. Mr Karnick asserted that Deacon Smith had spoken to the  Minister  who
      actually baptised the Appellant and that in that regard it was clearly
      hearsay, and  evidence  from  that  Minister  directly  had  not  been
      produced and that Minister had not been asked  to  give  evidence.   I
      find that Judge Alis's findings that the Appellant was  now  attending
      church more regularly as well as attending bible study classes, but he
      would have been aware that his application had been  refused  by  that
      date and that his attendance appeared to  have  increased  since  that
      date with him now attending regularly, was  a  finding  open  to  him.
      Further the finding that there  was  little  or  no  evidence  of  his
      activities in the church between May 2013 and November  2016  and  the
      evidence from his witness was limited  in  nature  because  he  rarely
      attended church with the Appellant.  These were findings open  to  the
      Judge on the evidence before him and I do not accept that he erred  in
      respect of the way that he assessed  that  evidence  or  the  Dorodian
      witness.

  17. Further, although it is asserted that the  previous  decision  in  the
      Appellant's own case and the findings in the case of NS, were  subject
      to the Devaseelan principles, Judge Alis quite  properly  stated  that
      the findings in NS's case were not binding upon him, as  although  the
      Appellant had given evidence in that case, the Judge in that case  had
      specifically noted that he  was  not  making  findings  regarding  the
      Appellant's  own  credibility  in  respect  of  his  own   conversion.
      Further, that decision did not relate to the Appellant.

  18. As far  as  the  previous  decision  relating  to  the  Appellant  was
      concerned,  that  was  on  an  entirely  different  basis   that   the
      Appellant's  application  was  refused,  on  account  of  the  country
      situation existing at that time.  The previous decision in respect  of
      the Appellant's  own  case  was  not  on  the  basis  of  any  claimed
      conversion to Christianity.  There was no material error in the way in
      which the Judge dealt with these previous determinations.

  19. I find that the Judge was perfectly entitled on  the  evidence  before
      him to find that the Appellant had not shown that he  was  in  fact  a
      genuine Christian convert or that he would follow that  religion  upon
      return to his home country of Libya.  Although it is suggested  by  Mr
      Karnick that the Judge failed  to  take  account  of  the  Appellant's
      regular ongoing church attendance since 2015, as stated  above,  Judge
      Alis was not satisfied on the evidence before him  that  it  had  been
      established what his actual church attendance was during that  period,
      and again, I find that that was a finding open to him on the  evidence
      before him.

  20. In respect of the submission made by Mr Karnick that the Judge had not
      considered the Appellant's risk and taken account of his absence  from
      Libya  since  2011,  his  tribal  affiliations  and  the   number   of
      checkpoints and large number of militia, which he argued elevated  the
      Appellant's specific risk profile, although Mr  Karnick  was  able  to
      refer me to 1 reference to armed groups from the rival Warshafanah and
      Zawiyah having broken out on the 23rd March 2016 resulting in at least
      14 fatalities and that following several days of  clashing,  mediation
      by tribal elders and other armed groups put an end  to  the  fighting.
      That was not evidence that simply membership of the Appellant's  tribe
      actually put him at risk per se or was a heightened risk factor.   Nor
      was there clear evidence that his simple absence from Libya since 2011
      would put the Appellant at risk. On the evidence before the Judge, the
      Judge properly dealt with and considered  whether  the  Appellant  did
      fall within the categories  of  vulnerable  groups  from  the  country
      evidence at [67].

  21. Although Mr Karnick sought to argue that it had not  been  established
      as to how the Appellant could reach a safe area within Tripoli,  Judge
      Alis clearly found that there were  direct  flights  to  Tripoli  from
      other countries at [70] where he found that the Appellant would not be
      at risk.

  22. In respect of the submissions  regarding  there  being  a  substantial
      delay which had to be taken into  account  for  the  purposes  of  the
      Article 8 claim, although Mr Karnick referred me to a letter from  the
      Appellant's solicitors regarding a fresh claim on the 3rd  June  2013,
      in respect of which it was said a decision was made on the 18th August
      2015, that decision to refuse being then subject  to  judicial  review
      proceedings  but  following  those  judicial  review  proceedings  the
      decision was withdrawn  on  the  18th  August  2015,  leading  to  the
      decision under appeal before Judge Alis.  The fact  that  during  that
      period there were judicial proceedings in terms of the judicial review
      proceedings, does account for a significant period of the time between
      the initial further submissions on the 3rd June 2013 and the  decision
      under appeal.  It was not a case where the delays were  simply  caused
      by the Home Office, as there was a judicial review during that period.



  23. However, as far as the  Article  8  claim  is  concerned,  Judge  Alis
      properly and fully considered the Article 8 claim  between  paragraphs
      75 and 79 of the Judgment and took account of all of  the  factors  in
      that regard and found that the Appellant's Human Rights under  Article
      8 would not be breached by his removal.

  24. In such circumstances none of  the  Grounds  of  Appeal  or  arguments
      submitted reveal that the decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Alis
      contains any material error of law.  The grounds in effect  amount  to
      no more than a disagreement with the findings, both in respect of  the
      Christian conversion and  in  respect  of  the  Article  15(c)  claim.
      Although the Article 15(c) claim would now be decided  differently  in
      light of the Country Guidance decision in the case of ZMM,  such  that
      clearly it is for the Appellant if he so desires,  to  seek  to  claim
      again on the basis of Article 15(c), the decision of Judge Alis has to
      be considered on the evidence before him and  there  was  no  material
      error in his decision on that based upon that evidence at that time.

Notice of Decision

The decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Alis  does  not  contain  any
material errors of law and is maintained;

The Appellant was granted anonymity by the First-tier  Tribunal  and  it  is
appropriate given the circumstances of this case in  the  asylum  claim  for
the Appellant to be granted  anonymity.   I  therefore  do  order  that  the
Appellant is entitled to  anonymity.   No  record  or  transcript  of  these
proceedings may identify the Appellant or any member of  his  family  either
directly or indirectly.  This direction applies to both  the  Appellant  and
to the Respondent.  Failure to  comply  with  this  direction  can  lead  to
contempt of court proceedings;

Signed

[pic]

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGinty     Dated 8th December 2017


