
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11861/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5th March 2019                    |On 15th March 2019                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                  G A BLACK


                                   Between

                                     A C
                            ANONYMITY ORDER MADE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr F Habte Mariam (legal representative)
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kandola (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an error of law hearing.  The  appellant  appeals  against  the
    decision of the First Tier Tribunal (Judge Watson) (FtT) promulgated on
    26.11.2018 in which the appellant's protection claim was dismissed.



Background

2.   The appellant is a citizen of Zimbabwe who claimed to have entered  the
    UK in 2002 and claimed asylum in 2018 based on political grounds  as  a
    member of the MDC.  The respondent  accepted  that  her  mother  was  a
    longstanding and active member of the MDC and a councillor but did  not
    accept that she has been in hiding since 2013.  Reliance was placed  on
    external evidence to show that her mother was active  as  a  councillor
    (Refusal letter paragraph 43). The appellant claimed that she had  been
    victim to the dealings of an unscrupulous lawyer  in  the  UK  who  had
    obtained a working visa stamp in her passport enabling her to work as a
    carer in the UK.  This stamp dated 10.9.2003 was  counterfeit  [5]  but
    the appellant was unaware of this at the time.

FTT decision and reasons

3.   The FtT found  that  section  8  Asylum  &  Immigration  (Treatment  of
    claimant's etc.) Act 2004 applied as her claim  was  delayed.  The  FtT
    found that she had knowingly obtained and used a  fraudulent  stamp  in
    her passport to obtain employment, her claim for  asylum  was  made  on
    1.2.2018 after she was arrested and served with a removal notice  dated
    15.5.2017 [15]. The FtT did not  accept  that  the  appellant's  mental
    health difficulties had impacted on the timing of her decision to apply
    for asylum [15] & [22].

4.   The FtT found that the appellant's mother  was  politically  active  in
    the past but found that she was not presently in hiding  and  that  the
    appellant was in  contact  with  her  [21].  The  FtT  found  that  the
    appellant had little political interest and was not an MDC member [23].



5.   The FtT found no significant obstacles  to  reintegration  in  Zimbabwe
    [31]. She had lived in the UK since 2002 and throughout she  was  aware
    of her precarious status. The appellant's private  life  based  on  her
    long residence and work as a carer  carried  little  weight.   She  had
    family contacts in Zimbabwe.

6.   The FtT carried  out  a  balancing  exercise  and  concluded  that  the
    decision was proportionate.  The appellant had worked  in  the  UK  but
    this was unlawfully  [32]  and  contrary  to  the  public  interest  in
    immigration control.

Grounds of appeal

7.   In grounds of appeal  the  appellant  argued  that  the  FtT  erred  by
    failing to properly consider Articles 3 and 8 ECHR.

Permission to appeal

8.   Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal  (UT)  was  granted  by  FTJ
    Foudy on 27.12.2018.  In granting permission the FTJ considered that it
    was arguable that no reference was made to Article 3 and  that  it  was
    just arguable that the Article 8 claim was not adequately considered.

Submissions

9.   At the hearing before me Mr Habte  Miriam  representing  the  appellant
    argued that the failure to consider Articles 3 and 8 had  infected  the
    decision as a whole. There had been no consideration of the appellant's
    membership of a particular social group as a family member  of  an  MDC
    member. Mr Habte Miriam  went  into  detailed  submissions  as  to  the
    circumstances of the appellant's arrival in the UK and her past  mental
    health problems, which arguably had not been considered by the FtT  nor
    her account of dealing with the lawyer, rendering the findings made  by
    the FtT unsafe.  The FtT failed to evaluate the evidence correctly  and
    consequently its assessment under Article  3  was  defective.   It  was
    submitted that the  FtT  wrongly  cited  what  was  stated  to  be  the
    respondent's position on risk on return from the CPIN, whereas in  fact
    the reference was from CM (EM country  guidance;  disclosure)  Zimbabwe
    January 2013 (at 2.2.7). There was no  proper  assessment  of  risk  on
    return given the mother's MDC involvement. Article 8 was not considered
    outside of the rules; her length of stay in the UK for 17 years was  an
    exceptional factor.

10.  In response Mr Kandola contended that there was no error of law in  the
    decision.  The FtT considered Article 3 in its assessment  of  risk  on
    return and took into account the activities and political past  of  her
    mother as a member of the MDC.  The assessment was consistent with  the
    respondent's policy on returns  to  Zimbabwe.   The  finding  that  the
    mother was not in hiding was open to the FtT on the evidence.  The  FtT
    considered paragraph 276ADE (albeit  briefly)  but  the  findings  were
    sustainable.  Article 8 was adequately considered and there was nothing
    exceptional.  The submissions made by Mr Habte Miriam failed to  adhere
    to the grounds of appeal.

Discussion and conclusion

11.  At the end of the hearing I reserved my decision which I now give  with
    my reasons.  The appellant's grounds of appeal complained that the  FtT
    failed to properly consider Articles 3 and 8.  I found the  submissions
    made by Mr Habte Miriam tended to go astray from those grounds  and  at
    times were really a disagreement with the findings  made  by  the  FtT.
    There was no application to revise or amend the grounds of appeal.

12.  The FtT concluded that the appellant faced no risk  on  return  because
    of any links with her mother who was an MDC activist. It found that  in
    the alternative internal relocation was a viable option [29] given that
    the claim related only to a fear of return to Chitungwiza.  Whilst  not
    specifically referring to Article 3 I am satisfied that this was not  a
    material error in light of the assessment of risk on return. The  FtT's
    assessment of the respondent's current guidance in CPIN and the country
    guidance case applicable to Zimbabwe was correct [26 &  29].  Mr  Habte
    Miriam was unable to identify any aspects  or  evidence  that  the  FtT
    failed to consider that would have had any relevance under  Article  3.
    This was a case where the human rights stood or  fell  along  side  the
    asylum claim. The FtT considered paragraph 276ADE and found that as the
    appellant's mother was in Zimbabwe and they were in contact so that she
    could assist with the reintegration.

13.  As to Article 8, although there was  no  reference  to  any  compelling
    considerations  to  justify  consideration  of  Article  8,   the   FtT
    considered the appellant's private life in [32] and concluded that  the
    public interest in removal  was  proportionate  given  the  appellant's
    private life was established when her immigration status was precarious
    and she worked unlawfully, a deception of  which  she  was  aware.  The
    appellant is aged 35 years and would be able to  obtain  employment  in
    the caring field having trained as a nurse in Zimbabwe and since worked
    as a carer in the UK. Whilst acknowledging  that  the  FtT  could  have
    provided more detailed reasoning  and  analysis  in  particular  having
    regard to the length of residence  in  the  UK,  I  am  satisfied  that
    Article 8 was adequately considered and that there was no evidence that
    the FtT failed to take into account and none has been put to me at  the
    error of law hearing.

14.  There is no material error of  law  disclosed  in  the  decision  which
    shall stand.



Decision

15.  The appeal is dismissed.




                               Signed   Date 13.3.2019


                               GA Black
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal







NO FEE AWARD




                               Signed   Date 13.3.2019


                               GA Black
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


