
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Number:
pa/11457/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Newport                         | Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 7 September 2017                      | On 11 October 2017                 |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

                                     TH
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms E Fitzsimmons instructed by Migrant Legal Project
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/2698) I  make  an  anonymity  order.   Unless  the  Upper
    Tribunal or court directs otherwise, no  report  of  these  proceedings
    shall directly or indirectly identify the  appellant.   This  direction
    applies to both the appellant and to the respondent and  a  failure  to
    comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Introduction

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Iran.  She arrived in the United  Kingdom
    on 31 May 2016 and claimed asylum.  The basis of her claim was that she
    was a Christian convert and, together with her husband, was at risk  on
    return to Iran.  On 4 October 2016, the Secretary of State refused  the
    appellant's claims for asylum, humanitarian  protection  and  on  human
    rights grounds under Art 8 of the ECHR.

The Appeal

 3. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In a  determination
    sent on 6 April 2017, Judge Fowell dismissed the appellant's appeal  on
    all grounds.  He rejected the appellant's account that on 16 May 2016 a
    gathering of her church members was raided by the  Iranian  authorities
    and that they discovered documents relating to the appellant in her car
    which was parked near the house in which the gathering took place. As a
    result, the appellant is wanted by the Iranian authorities.  The  judge
    also rejected the appellant's account that she was a Christian convert.



 4. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal on four
    grounds.  First, the judge erred in law in finding that some aspects of
    the appellant's account were implausible.  Secondly,  the  judge  acted
    unfairly by taking a number of points against the appellant  which  had
    not been raised at the hearing and on which, therefore, she had not had
    an opportunity to comment or in respect of which she had  not  had  the
    opportunity to adduce supporting evidence.  Thirdly, the  judge  failed
    to take into  account  material  evidence  in  reaching  his  findings.
    Fourthly, the judge erred in law in failing to give  proper  weight  to
    the evidence of three witnesses from the appellant's church in  the  UK
    supporting her conversion to Christianity.

 5. Permission to appeal was initially refused by the First-tier  Tribunal.
    However, on 20 June 2017 the Upper Tribunal (UTJ Southern) granted  the
    appellant permission to appeal on the second, third and fourth grounds.
     He refused permission in respect of the first ground.

 6. On 17 July 2017, the Secretary of State filed a rule 24 notice  seeking
    to uphold the judge's decision.

The Claim

 7. The appellant claims that she converted to  Christianity  in  2015/2016
    when a friend, "M" supported her at a  time  when  she  was  depressed.
    Through talking to M, listening to CDs about Jesus and reading the  New
    Testament,  the  appellant  became  interested  in  Christianity.    On
    Christmas Day 2015, M invited her to a house  church  meeting  and  the
    appellant decided to convert to Christianity.  After that, she attended
    a house church every week and at Easter her husband came with her.

 8. At Pentecost in 2015, there was to be a gathering of a number of  house
    churches in the garden of a house outside  Tehran.   The  location  was
    secret and the plan was only to give the location an hour or two before
    the gathering.  M told the appellant that she was going to the  meeting
    early in order to help with preparations and so the appellant (and  her
    husband) lent  M  their  car.   The  appellant  and  her  husband  were
    collected by friends to travel to the gathering.  On the way,  however,
    another  friend  "S",  who  had  also  gone  early  with  M   to   help
    organisation, telephoned the appellant to say that the police had  come
    and arrested everybody.  As a result, the  appellant  and  her  husband
    decided that they could not go home and they took  a  taxi  to  another
    location four or five hours away where  they  stayed,  paying  for  two
    nights' accommodation.  After two days,  the  appellant  contacted  her
    family by telephone.  Her father told her on the phone that he had been
    arrested and detained for a few hours the previous day.   He  had  been
    told during his detention that  the  authorities  had  found  documents
    concerning the appellant and her Christian faith in her car  which  had
    been parked near the house  which  had  been  raided.  The  appellant's
    father made arrangements for the appellant and  her  husband  to  leave
    Iran which they did, arriving in the UK on 31 May 2016.

The Judge's Decision

 9. Before Judge Fowell, both the  appellant  and  her  husband  gave  oral
    evidence.   In  addition,  there  was  evidence  from  three  witnesses
    connected with the appellant's church in the UK.

10. The substance of the judge's  reasons  for  rejecting  the  appellant's
    account is set out at paras 36-58 of his decision.

11. At paras 36-38 the judge considered the appellant's  knowledge  of  her
    claimed Christian faith, concluding that: "her level of knowledge gives
    only modest support to her account".

12. Then, at paras 39-48 the judge set out seven  points  relating  to  her
    account of the raid by the Iranian authorities on the gathering  on  16
    May 2016 as follows:

         "39. Against that, in considering her account of fleeing Iran,  the
             factors relied on by the  Home  Office,  by  their  cumulative
             weight, appear to me strong, and in  fact  decisive.   I  will
             begin with the account of the raid itself.

         40.  The first point raised is  the  unlikelihood  of  such  a  big
             gathering.  I have been unable  to  find  any  country  report
             supporting the view that such gatherings take place,  although
             the possibility cannot be excluded.  The  Country  Information
             and Guidance report from February 2017  quotes,  at  paragraph
             5.5.3 a report of the Finnish Immigration Service which stated
             'At most a dozen people convene in individual home churches in
             order to not attract  the  attention  of  the  neighbourhood.'
             That seems to accord much better with the  general  background
             information about the risks run by attendees and the extent to
             which the authorities are able to monitor and penetrate  these
             groups.

         41.  Assuming  it  did  take  place,  there  is  then  a  chain  of
             circumstance relied on, none of which is impossible but  which
             taken together seems extremely implausible.

         42.  Firstly, they lent their car to [M] even though that left them
             without a car and reliant on a lift.

         43.  Secondly, the authorities then raided the  event  before  they
             arrived.  There was no mention that they were running late, so
             presumably, having through intelligence means worked  out  the
             time and place of the meeting, they  struck  before  the  main
             congregation turned up.

         44.  Thirdly, [S] was not caught in this gathering.  He had gone to
             do some shopping, a fact he presumably explained when  he  was
             calling to alert them, and returned to see police vehicles.

         45.  Fourthly, they had enough cash on them to leave immediately on
             a four or  five  hour  taxi  ride  and  pay  for  two  nights'
             accommodation.  Their choice of destination, in particular why
             they went so far if their purpose was simply to lie low for  a
             couple of days, was not explained.

         46.  Fifthly, when they telephoned the appellant's parents  on  the
             second day after their arrival, they found out a good deal  of
             fortuitous information:

             (a)  The police had been to the parents'  house  the  previous
                  day and arrested her father and taken him away.

             (b)   They  had  also  raided  the   appellant's   house   and
                  confiscated a bible and other property.

             (c)  They got their address from documents in their car.

         47.  Sixthly, there is the fact of this this obtaining of documents
             from the car, which  was  not  really  explained.   Ms.  Capel
             submitted that it was natural that the authorities would check
             registration numbers, but the  appellant's  account  was  that
             they actually entered the car by  one  means  or  another  and
             found there documents showing who the  owner  was.   This  was
             presumably explained by the police to her father  and  relayed
             to her in their phone call.  Again, this is not impossible  by
             any means, but having rounded up the individuals  involved  it
             does  not  necessarily  follow  that  they  would  search  all
             adjacent cars.   If  the  owners  were  different  from  those
             apprehended, it does not  follow  that  the  owners  too  were
             implicated.

         48.  Seventhly, the police also seem to have acted with  remarkable
             speed on this occasion, not only tracing  the  appellant,  but
             tracking down her father the day after these first arrests".

13. Then, at paras 49-54 the judge addressed a  number  of  further  points
    raising issues of "general plausibility" of the appellant's account and
    an inconsistency in the evidence of the appellant's husband as follows:

         "49. Some gaps also struck me from this account.  There was  little
             mention of what happened to the two friends who  were  in  the
             car when the warning came through.  They would  have  had  the
             same pressing need to lie low for a couple of days.  According
             to [the appellant's husband's] witness statement they went  to
             a friend's house  but  he  and  the  appellant  wanted  to  go
             further, but this strikes me a rather superficial explanation.
              They were not  mentioned  again.   No  claim  was  made,  for
             example, to have called them, or other members  of  the  house
             church to find out what had gone on.  The only  people  called
             were the appellant's parents.

         50.  If this was an invented account, it  depends  on  placing  the
             appellant's car at the  scene  of  the  raid.   That  in  turn
             requires a plausible reason for them not  to  be  in  it,  and
             hence that they were getting a lift with friends.  The friends
             however have dropped out of the story when  this  purpose  has
             been served.

         51.  Similarly, no real concern was expressed  in  the  appellant's
             account, or that of her husband, over what happened to [S]  or
             [M].  It was only in response to my  last  question  that  the
             appellant said that [M] was still in prison, and they too have
             dropped out of the story, but when this was learned or how was
             not explained.

         52.  These are all concerns about the general plausibility  of  the
             account.  Not all of them were explored  with  the  witnesses,
             although that is inevitable in such cases.  Not everyone  will
             agree about which aspects are plausible  and  which  are  not.
             But in one respect at least, there was a sharp  inconsistency,
             as set out above in the section  from  paragraph  15  of  [the
             appellant's husband's] statement.  Although  this  was  not  a
             consistency issue led by the respondent, it  is  difficult  to
             ignore.  This passage says in clear  terms  that  he  gave  an
             account in interview that he saw 'friends attending the church
             being arrested, before we went in so we fled.'

         53.  That is of course an entirely different account.  Although  he
             explained at the hearing that he was stating what [S] had told
             him, I cannot accept that.  That was not the explanation which
             [the appellant's  husband]  gave  in  his  witness  statement,
             prepared with the  help  of  his  solicitors  long  after  the
             apparent confusion arose.  There, he put it  down  to  stress;
             i.e. he did say this but he  was  confused.   The  explanation
             involving [S] has emerged in the week between  that  statement
             and the hearing.

         54.  More generally, on the appellant's account, they  then  simply
             left the country, presumably in just the  clothes  they  stood
             up, with the cash they had on  them,  her  father  making  all
             necessary arrangements.  They did not attempt to return to get
             their things or say farewells.  That is perhaps an  indication
             of the risk they felt they were running, but it also contrasts
             with the apparently casual way in which  first  the  appellant
             and then her husband became involved in Christianity.  In [the
             appellant's husband's] statement, for example, he expressed no
             surprise or concern about his wife's process of conversion and
             was simply pleased that  she  was  calmer  and  happier  as  a
             result.  Her account was much the same.  There was no sense of
             risk or fear until the final day".

14. At para 55, the judge  also  took  into  account  that  there  were  no
    supporting documents provided:

         "55. A further aspect is that no supporting documents of  any  kind
             have been produced, although the appellant remains in  contact
             with her parents and has been told by  them  that  the  police
             have returned three more times.  Despite this there have  been
             no warrants or summons issued".

15. The judge then went on to cite extracts from  the  Country  Information
    and Guidance, the Background Information Report, July 2016, in relation
    to Iran at paras 12.4.1-12.4.4.  At para 56 the judge, having done  so,
    reached the following conclusion:

         "56. The net result is that although the authorities do  resort  to
             arbitrary arrests to short-cut matters from time  to  time,  a
             warrant or subpoena ought to be issued.  I have been  referred
             to extensive country information about the  readiness  of  the
             police to take action against suspected converts, but from the
             point of view of the authorities these are genuine crimes, for
             which an appropriate procedure will have been established.  In
             a case  where  the  authorities  have,  as  is  claimed  here,
             attempted to find the appellant  at  her  parents'  house  and
             found her missing, they might be expected to  have  placed  an
             advert in a newspaper.  No documents of  any  sort  appear  to
             have been given to her father either, despite seizing him  and
             taking him to the station.  Again, it is not  impossible  that
             the appellant has been unlucky, and no proper process has been
             undergone, this lack of documentation is a further part of  an
             extended chain of implausible events".

16. Finally, at paras 57-58, the judge dealt with  the  evidence  from  the
    three witnesses from her church in the UK:

         "57. Against this I have to weigh the evidence  of  the  supporting
             witnesses from [......] Church.  In every case I have no doubt
             of their sincerity or integrity.  I accept that they genuinely
             believe in the reality of the  appellant's  conversion.   They
             have even gone to the lengths of having  interviews  in  which
             the person's history is explo/red (sic).  No  information  was
             given as to how these interviews were carried out, and whether
             the sorts of issues explored above were gone into.  It is hard
             to imagine that they had,  since  they  have  caused  me  very
             considerable concern, which was not at all  reflected  in  the
             evidence given.  Understandably on such occasions, their focus
             is likely to be on the spiritual aspect, and  how  the  person
             came to believe, rather than these practical  and  logistical.
             There will also be, as devout Christians, a wish to  help  and
             support someone in need, and not to turn them  away  or  doubt
             them when they claim to be Christian too.  I accept  too  that
             the appellant and her husband have been attending classes  and
             services as claimed.  It would be surprising if they did  not.
             It would also be natural for the appellant to  show  her  best
             side, to be diligent and to take an  intelligent  interest  in
             the classes provided.  It is not at all clear to me  in  these
             circumstances  how  any  lack  of  real  faith  is  to  become
             apparent.  Although, by way of example, [Mr S]  said  that  he
             was well versed in the tricks and techniques of  manipulation,
             he did not expand on what these were.  He  inferred  that  the
             appellant was a person of deep faith from the way she led  her
             life, but that appears to  boil  down  to  her  attendance  at
             services and perhaps her general conduct.  However  blameless,
             many non-Christians may lead blameless lives.

         58.  I have weighed all these factors and taken  into  account,  as
             stated above, the guidance in SA (Iran) about being  a  window
             into souls.  In the absence of the concerns I have  about  the
             truthfulness of the appellant's account  of  her  flight  from
             Iran, which may well not have struck her supporting  witnesses
             at all, I should have found it quite plausible  that  she  had
             made this religious conversion.  But it is far  less  easy  to
             accept an account as truthful if it has been granted  onto  an
             untruthful stem.  That, in my view, is what  has  occurred  on
             this occasion, and so I am not able to accept the  appellant's
             account.  It follows that  her  claim  to  asylum,  and  other
             claims based on the risk of return, must be dismissed".

The Submissions

17. On behalf of the appellant, Ms Fitzsimmons relied upon grounds 2, 3 and
    4 upon which permission had been granted.  In support of those grounds,
    Ms Fitzsimmons relied  upon  the  contemporary  Record  of  Proceedings
    provided by the appellant's (then) Counsel, Ms Capel  and  attached  to
    her  witness  statement  of  6  September  2017.   Mr   Richards,   who
    represented the Secretary of State, accepted  that  Ms  Capel's  record
    broadly corresponded with that of the Presenting  Officer's  record  in
    his file.

18. Dealing first with ground 2, Ms Fitzsimmons drew my  attention  to  the
    ten points set out in para 19 of the grounds as follows:

         "i.  That it was implausible that she would have lent  her  car  to
             [M] (at [42]);

         ii.  That a gathering of this size was implausible  on  account  of
             the risk it created (at [40]);

         iii. That it was implausible that [S] would not have been arrested,
             notwithstanding the Appellant's explanation that he  had  gone
             shopping for the event (at [44]);

         iv.  That it was implausible that the  Iranian  authorities  raided
             the gathering before the full congregation arrived (at [43]);

         v.   That it was implausible that the  Appellant  and  her  husband
             would  have  travelled  4-5  hours  to  Kelardasht  if   their
             intention was imply to 'lie low' (at [45]);

         vi.  That she had provided inadequate detail about what happened to
             [E] and [F], who gave the Appellant and her husband a lift  to
             the gathering (at [49]);

         vii.  That  her  account  of  her  father's  telephone   call   was
             implausible (at [46])

         viii.    That her account of the police being  able  to  trace  the
             Appellant and her father  within  2  days  of  the  event  was
             implausible, notwithstanding her account  that  they  obtained
             her personal information from the documents contained  in  her
             car, which was found on the  private  property  at  which  the
             event was to take place (at [48]);

         ix.  That she had showed 'n real concern' about what  had  happened
             to [S] or [M] (at [51]);

         x.   The absence of documentation relating  to  (i)  the  Appellant
             being  wanted  by  the  authorities;  and  (ii)  her  father's
             detention was not an issue raised by  the  Respondent  in  the
             RFRL, hence the Appellant did not adduce evidence  to  address
             the matter.  Nor, importantly, were any questions put  to  the
             Appellant by the Respondent or the FTTJ at the hearing".

19. In the course of her submissions, I raised with Ms Fitzsimmons which of
    the ten points made in para 19 in substance deprived the  appellant  of
    an opportunity  to  give  additional  evidence  or  present  additional
    evidence to deal with the point.  Ms  Fitzsimmons  accepted  that  only
    points  (i),  (v),  (vii)  and  (ix)  fell  into  that  category.    Ms
    Fitzsimmons continued to rely upon those points as ones upon which  the
    appellant could have given, or produced, further evidence.

20. In response, Mr Richards pointed out that the appellant, and indeed her
    husband, had been cross-examined in relation to the  events  that  they
    claimed occurred in Iran.   He  submitted  that,  although  the  cross-
    examination was not "aggressive", it was  clear  that  submissions  had
    been made as to the plausibility of aspects of the appellant's  account
    as was clear from Ms Capel's record.   Ms  Capel  had  not  raised  any
    unfairness with the judge.  Mr Richards submitted that, in  effect,  if
    matters had been put to the appellant, then she would have  simply,  no
    doubt, have confirmed that was what happened and that she  was  telling
    the truth.  He submitted that there was no unfairness.

21. In addition, Ms Fitzsimmons relying upon point (x) and para 20  of  the
    grounds, submitted that the judge had been wrong to take  into  account
    the absence of any supporting documentation (at [56]) given that he had
    accepted that the authorities did not always comply  with  requirements
    and conducted arbitrary arrests and detained individuals arbitrarily at
    para 56 of his determination.  Ms Fitzsimmons  relied  on  the  Country
    Information and Guidance document (at paras 5.2.4, 6.2.1 and 6.2.3)  as
    supporting the appellant's claim that arbitrary  arrest  and  detention
    took place.  Further, she relied upon a parliamentary document entitled
    "The Persecution of Christians  in  Iran"  at  C4  of  the  bundle,  in
    particular at C15 which noted that:

         "Each year, scores of Christians are detained for weeks  or  months
         without being formally charged without  access  to  a  lawyer,  and
         without any opportunity to be brought before a judge.  Due  process
         is flagrantly violated in the case of most Christians".

22. A comment is then cited relating to an arrest  where  the  individual's
    evidence was that no warrants were produced.

23. Ms Fitzsimmons submitted that the judge's inference in para  56  failed
    to take into account this evidence.

24. Mr Richards submitted that the judge had been  entitled  to  take  into
    account the absence of any supporting documents and, in relation to the
    arrest of the appellant's father, he was not a  Christian  and  so  the
    evidence concerning the arbitrary arrest and  detention  of  Christians
    was not relevant.

25. In respect of ground 3, Ms Fitzsimmons submitted  that  the  judge  had
    failed to take into account all the material evidence in  reaching  his
    findings.

26. First, she submitted that, contrary to the judge's statement at para 40
    of his determination, there was evidence that gatherings  of  the  size
    claimed by the appellant did take place.  Ms  Fitzsimmons  relied  upon
    the parliamentary report (to which I have already referred) at page C11
    where evidence is quoted that:

         "we had 30-40 members in our house church but they have  no  pastor
         at the moment; they have been scattered".

27. In doubting, therefore, that a gathering of the  size  claimed  by  the
    appellant would occur, Ms Fitzsimmons submitted that the judge at  para
    40 had been wrong to state that there was  no  background  evidence  to
    support such a gathering occurring.

28. Secondly, Ms Fitzsimmons submitted that it was not implausible, as  the
    judge found in para 47, that the police could have  obtained  documents
    relating to the appellant from her car.  She submitted that  the  judge
    was wrong to conclude that the way in which  the  police  obtained  the
    documents from the car "was  not  really  explained".   Ms  Fitzsimmons
    submitted that the appellant's evidence, in her witness statement,  was
    that her father had told  her  over  the  phone  that  the  police  had
    obtained the documents from the car.

29. Thirdly, Ms Fitzsimmons submitted that it was not implausible that  the
    police would track down the appellant's father.  She  relied  upon  the
    respondent's Country of Information Report dated February 2017 at paras
    2.2.5,  7.1.1  and  7.1.2  as  demonstrating  that  family  members  of
    Christian converts were targeted by the authorities.

30. Fourthly, she submitted that at para 51 the judge  had  been  wrong  to
    take into  account  adversely  to  the  appellant  that  she  had  only
    expressed concern about the fate of her friend, M until  she  responded
    in the last question put to her by  the  judge  that  M  was  still  in
    prison.   Ms  Fitzsimmons  submitted  that  was  not  the   appellant's
    evidence.  In her interview, she had said that M was in prison and  she
    had been told that by her father (see page 55 of 56 of the voice script
    transcript).

31. As regards ground 4, Ms Fitzsimmons adopted  para  22  of  the  grounds
    which contend that the judge impermissibly speculated, in  relation  to
    the three supporting witnesses, when he  stated  at  para  52  that  as
    Christians they would no doubt wish to support and help someone such as
    the appellant.  That, it is contended, ran counter  to  their  evidence
    that they had come to their view  that  the  appellant  was  a  genuine
    convert conscientiously and had previous experience.

32. In respect of this ground, Mr Richards submitted that the judge had not
    simply dismissed the evidence of the three witnesses on the basis  that
    they were gullible or na�ve.  He had merely commented upon their  noble
    motives and had given adequate reasons for not accepting that,  despite
    their genuinely held views, the appellant was,  in  fact,  a  Christian
    convert.

Discussion

33. I have set out at length the judge's reasons above.  Before turning  to
    Ms Fitzsimmons'  specific  submissions,  I  would  make  the  following
    general observations.  Whilst many of the judge's reasons are clear, it
    is not always readily apparent what weight, if any,  the  judge  places
    upon a particular reason, comment or observation that  he  makes.   So,
    for example, in para 40 whilst observing that the  background  material
    did not support a gathering of the size claimed by the  appellant,  and
    apparently taking that into account in assessing  whether  he  accepted
    her  account,  he  also  observes  that  "the  possibility  cannot   be
    excluded".  Likewise, at para 47 when doubting the appellant's  account
    that documents had been found in her  car  by  the  police,  the  judge
    comments that whilst this is "not impossible by any means ...  it  does
    not necessarily follow that they would search all adjacent cars".   The
    latter was, of course, no part of the appellant's claim.  So, if it was
    "not impossible" that her car had been  searched  it  is  not  entirely
    obvious why, given the appellant's explanation that she had  been  told
    this is what had happened by her father, the judge treats  this  as  an
    adverse point.

34. Turning now to Ms  Fitzsimmons'  specific  submissions,  I  begin  with
    ground 3.  In that regard, I accept that there a number of flaws in the
    judge's decision.

35. First, there was evidence  before  him  that  gatherings  of  Christian
    converts of the size claimed by the appellant did take  place  in  Iran
    (see page C11 of the bundle).  The judge  made  no  reference  to  that
    evidence  in  para  40  preferring,  instead,  to  cite   the   Country
    Information and  Guidance  Report  for  February  2017  at  para  5.5.3
    referring to gatherings of "[a]t most a  dozen  people".   The  judge's
    observation that that evidence "seems to accord much  better  with  the
    general  background  information",  fails  to  take  into  account  the
    evidence which did support the appellant's account.  In addition, as  I
    have already pointed out, it is not entirely clear  why,  in  para  40,
    having concluded that the possibility  of  a  gathering  of  that  size
    "cannot be excluded", the judge then treats the  claimed  size  of  the
    gathering as an adverse point turning against the  reliability  of  the
    appellant's account.

36. Secondly, in para 47, it was not correct for the judge to say  that  it
    was "not  really  explained"  how  the  authorities  had  obtained  the
    documents concerning the appellant.  The appellant's evidence was clear
    that her father had told her that during his interrogation  the  police
    had said that the documents were found in  the  appellant's  car.   The
    appellant's car was, on her account, parked near to  the  house  having
    been lent to, and taken there by, M.

37. Thirdly, in doubting the plausibility of the appellant's  father  being
    arrested, detained and interrogated, the judge makes  no  reference  to
    the  background  evidence  which,  consistently  with  the  appellant's
    account, shows that family members of Christian converts  are  in  fact
    detained and interrogated.

38. Fourthly, the point made by the judge at para 51 that the appellant had
    expressed "no real concern" about what had happened to M or, indeed,  S
    (who had telephoned to warn her of the authorities' raid),  is  perhaps
    an extremely weak point in doubting the plausibility of the appellant's
    account.  But, as Ms Fitzsimmons submitted,  the  judge  was  wrong  to
    assert that the appellant had only addressed the fact  that  M  was  in
    prison in her response  to  the  judge's  "last  question"  during  her
    evidence.  As Ms Fitzsimmons pointed  out,  that  was  the  appellant's
    evidence given in her asylum interview.

39. Finally, despite the judge's reference to the Country  Information  and
    Guidance document at para 55 of his determination, in counting  against
    the appellant the absence of a warrant or subpoena directed against her
    father, the judge did not grapple with the background  evidence  (which
    Ms Fitzsimmons relied upon and I set out earlier) which  is  consistent
    her account that it was plausible that her father would be arrested (as
    a family member) of a suspected Christian  convert  without  the  usual
    formalities being followed.

40. Ground 3 is, in my judgment, established.

41. In relation to ground 2, Ms Fitzsimmons accepted that a number  of  the
    points made in para 19(i)-(x) did not assist the  appellant.   However,
    she pointed out that a number of the points taken by  the  judge  could
    have been matters upon which the appellant could have  given  evidence,
    for example why it was that she and her husband had lent  M  their  car
    (19(i)); why she had her husband had travelled four-five hours to evade
    the authorities (19(v)); that her account that her father had given her
    "fortuitous information"  in  his  phone  call  was  implausible  (para
    19(vii)); and why she had shown  "no  real  concern"  as  to  what  had
    happened to S or M (para 19(ix)).

42. Whilst it is not necessary for every point to be put to  an  appellant,
    particularly one who  is  legally  represented,  points  that  are  not
    obvious but are ultimately taken against an appellant by a judge  in  a
    determination, raise the possibility that the appellant has been denied
    the opportunity to deal with matters considered to be  adverse  to  her
    claim.  In para 52 of his determination, having set  out  a  number  of
    matters  which  raise   concerns   about   the   appellant's   "general
    plausibility", the judge noted that: "not all  of  them  were  explored
    with the  witnesses,  although  that  is  inevitable  in  such  cases".
    Although taken alone, I am not persuaded  that  the  points  raised  in
    ground 2 would warrant setting aside the judge's decision,  when  taken
    with ground 3, I have very real concerns  as  to  whether  the  judge's
    reasoning and approach to the evidence can properly sustain his adverse
    findings.  The appellant was not given permission directly to challenge
    the  judge's  "implausibility"  reasoning  (Ground  1),  although  some
    aspects of that reasoning are effectively challenged in grounds  2  and
    3.  There are, for other reasons, flaws in his reasoning  but  it  must
    lie at the edge of sustainability that his reasons at paras  42-48  can
    properly support a finding that the appellant's account  is  "extremely
    implausible" as the judge concludes in para 41.

43. In the result, however, for the reasons I have given, a combination  of
    grounds 3 and 2 lead me to conclude that the judge materially erred  in
    law in reaching his adverse findings.

44. I need say little more about ground 4 which, as UTJ  Southern  observed
    in granting permission, in itself may lack  merit.   But,  as  the  UTJ
    Southern points out, the judge's rejection of the supporting witnesses'
    evidence in para 58, is, in part, tainted by  his  adverse  finding  in
    relation to her account of events in Iran.  At para 58, the judge  goes
    so far as to say that he would have

         "found  it  quite  plausible  that  she  had  made  this  religious
         conversion.  But it is far  less  easy  to  accept  an  account  as
         truthful if it has been grafted onto an untruthful stem".

45. In the result, for the reasons I have given the judge materially  erred
    in law and his adverse findings cannot stand.

Decision

46. Consequently, the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  to  dismiss  the
    appellant's appeal involved the making of  a  material  error  of  law.
    That decision cannot stand and is set aside.

47. Having regard to the nature and extent of  fact-finding  required,  and
    having  regard  to  para  7.2  of  the  Senior   President's   Practice
    Statements, the proper disposal of this appeal is to remit  it  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal for a de novo rehearing before a judge  other  than
    Judge Fowell.




                                                                      Signed

                                                                       [pic]
                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                                             11 October 2017




