
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11447/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 17th November 2020                |On 07 December 2020                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     MA
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs H Aboni, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr I Hussain, Lei Dat and Baig Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction


 1. The appellant in the appeal before me is the Secretary of State for the
    Home Department ("SSHD") and the  respondent  to  this  appeal  is  MA.
    However, for ease of reference, in the course of this decision I  adopt
    the parties' status as it was before the FtT.  I refer  to  MA  as  the
    appellant, and the Secretary of State as the respondent.


 2. The hearing before me on 17th November 2020 took the form of  a  remote
    hearing  using  skype  for  business.  Neither  party  objected.    The
    appellant joined the hearing by Skype and throughout, he  was  able  to
    see and hear me and the representatives.  I sat at the Birmingham Civil
    Justice Centre. I was addressed by the representatives in the same  way
    as I would have been if the parties had attended the hearing  together.
    I was satisfied: that this constituted a hearing in  open  court;  that
    the open justice principle has been secured; that  no  party  has  been
    prejudiced; and that, insofar as there has been any  restriction  on  a
    right or interest, it is justified as necessary and  proportionate.   I
    was satisfied that it was in the interests of justice and in accordance
    with the overriding objective to proceed with a remote hearing  because
    of the present need to take precautions against the spread of Covid-19,
    and to avoid delay.  I was satisfied that a remote hearing would ensure
    the  matter  is  dealt  with  fairly  and  justly  in  a  way  that  is
    proportionate to the importance of the  case,  the  complexity  of  the
    issues that arise, and the  anticipated  costs  and  resources  of  the
    parties.  At the end of the hearing I was satisfied that  both  parties
    had been able to participate fully in the proceedings.


Background


 3. The appellant is a national of the Palestinian Authority,  from  Burage
    in Gaza.  He claims to have left the Occupied  Palestinian  Territories
    at the end of March 2019 and to  have  travelled  to  Egypt.   He  then
    travelled to Turkey and  Bangladesh,  before  arriving  in  the  United
    Kingdom on 8th June 2019 and claiming asylum.  His claim was refused by
    the respondent for reasons set out in a  decision  dated  5th  November
    2019.  The claim made by the applicant was summarised in paragraph [11]
    of the respondent's decision.


 4.  The  respondent  accepted  the  appellant  comes  from  the   occupied
    Palestinian Territories, and accepted the appellant had encountered the
    difficulties claimed, due to the general situation in Palestine.    The
    respondent noted the appellant claims that he would  be  at  risk  upon
    return because he will  be  killed  by  either  Hamas  or  the  Israeli
    authorities due to the general situation in Palestine.   The respondent
    concluded that the reason given by the appellant for claiming  a  well-
    founded fear of persecution under the Refugee  Convention  is  not  one
    that engages the United Kingdom's obligations under the Convention. The
    respondent concluded that the appellant's removal from the  UK  to  the
    Occupied Palestinian Territories would not be in breach of the ECHR  or
    the Qualification Directive.  The respondent concluded the appellant is
    not entitled to a grant of humanitarian protection in  accordance  with
    paragraph 339C of the immigration rules and that the appellant has  not
    demonstrated that there are  substantial  grounds  for  believing  that
    there is a real risk that he would face treatment contrary  to  Article
    3.


 5. The appellant's appeal against that decision was  heard  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Turner ("Judge Turner")  on  31st  January  2020.    For
    reasons set out in a decision promulgated on 10th February 2020,  Judge
    Turner dismissed the appeal on  asylum,  humanitarian  protection,  and
    Article 8 grounds, but allowed the appeal on Article 3 grounds.


 6. The matters relied upon by the appellant in support of  his  claim  are
    summarised at paragraphs [4] to [16] of the decision of  Judge  Turner.
    At paragraphs [9] to [13] of her decision, Judge  Turner  sets  out  an
    additional claim made by the appellant that he has also been personally
    targeted by Hamas.


 7. Judge Turner heard oral evidence from the appellant with the assistance
    of an Arabic interpreter.  At paragraphs [35] to [45] of her  decision,
    Judge Turner addresses the additional claim made by the appellant  that
    he has been personally targeted by Hamas.  Judge Turner did not  accept
    that the  appellant  would  not  have  appreciated  the  importance  of
    disclosing the issues with Hamas, regardless of his cultural background
    and mistrust of systems. She found the failure of the appellant to make
    any mention of the problems with  Hamas  significantly  undermines  his
    credibility.  Judge Turner considered  documents  relied  upon  by  the
    appellant that he claimed were  from  Hamas  and  were  handed  to  his
    family.  At paragraph [45], she said:


         "I have stood back from the detail and considered the  evidence  in
         the round, weighing those matters that tell both  for  and  against
         the appellant's credibility as a truthful witness. Having done  so,
         I have overall concluded that there is not at  least  a  reasonable
         degree of likelihood that he has  given  truthful  account  of  the
         events that led him to leaving the Palestinian territories."


 8. Judge Turner was not satisfied that the appellant faces a real risk  of
    persecution on return to the Palestinian territories by reason  of  his
    imputed political opinion.    At paragraph [47] she said:


         "I need to then go on to consider the issue of Article 15(c).   The
         country guidance  case  of  HS  (Palestine)  remains  good  law  in
         relation to this point. I am  also  referred  to  the  case  of  MI
         (Palestine) which again suggests that Article 15(c) is not engaged.
         I have been provided with little evidence to suggest that I  should
         depart from  this  country  guidance,  albeit  I  acknowledge  that
         paragraph 34 of MI does suggest that HS is somewhat out of date.  I
         note the appellant's personal characteristics, namely  that  he  is
         educated, healthy and has family support back in Gaza.  He is not a
         vulnerable person. The appellant claims that he was shot at  whilst
         near the border with his cousin. I have to question why he was near
         the border in the first place, knowing that the majority of violent
         exchanges take place in that area of Gaza.  This, in my view,  only
         supports the fact that the appellant is able to protect himself and
         manage any risks of indiscriminate violence that may occur in Gaza.
          I do not find at this time that Article 15(c) is engaged.  I  also
         note in the case of MI that the Article  15(c)  challenged  by  the
         appellant at that time but rather the appropriate test to apply  in
         relation to Article 3 ECHR."


 9. The Article 3 claim is addressed at paragraphs  [48]  to  [52]  of  the
    decision.  Judge Turner refers to the background material  relied  upon
    by the appellant and at paragraph [51], she said  that  the  background
    material that she was able to place some weight upon, paints a  picture
    of an area where the humanitarian situation is dire. At paragraph  [52]
    she said:


         "I do find that the appellant has worked and saved and  has  always
         planned to leave Gaza due to the general situation there. As stated
         above, I find that the appellant has manufactured the claim that he
         was targeted by Hamas to bolster his claim to  remain  in  the  UK.
         That being said, if he were to return  in  these  circumstances,  I
         find that this would currently be a  breach  of  his  rights  under
         Article 3 ECHR."


The appeal before me


10. The respondent claims that in allowing the appeal on Article 3 grounds,
    Judge Turner failed to  apply  the  country  guidance  set  out  in  HS
    (Palestinian - return to Gaza) Palestinian Territories CG  [2011]  UKUT
    124 (IAC) and the decision of the Court of Appeal in MI  (Palestine)  v
    SSHD  [2018]  EWCA  Civ  1782.   The  respondent  claims  that   having
    recognised at paragraph [47] of her decision, that the country guidance
    set out in HS remains good law, and, that she had  been  provided  with
    little evidence to suggest that she  should  depart  from  the  country
    guidance, Judge Turner erred in failing to apply  the  conclusions  set
    out in the extent country guidance and materially erred in allowing the
    appeal on Article 3 grounds.


11.  Permission  to  appeal  was  granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal   Judge
    Nightingale on 24th August 2020.


12. Mrs Aboni adopted the written submissions settled by Mr Tufan and dated
    8th October 2020.  The respondent submits Judge Turner failed  to  give
    sufficient reasons for concluding that the appellant's Article 3 rights
    would be breached.  In HS, the Upper Tribunal  had  considered  whether
    the general situation in Gaza amounted to a breach  of  Article  3  but
    following a wide-ranging consideration of the evidence, concluded  that
    the harsh state of  affairs  in  Gaza  did  not  breach  the  threshold
    required to  cross  Article  3.  The  respondent  submits  that  having
    concluded that the appellant has not established that he  would  be  at
    risk contrary to Article 15(c), Judge  Turner  erred  in  allowing  the
    appeal on Article 3 grounds.  Mrs Aboni submits Judge Turner failed  to
    follow the guidance set out in HS  and  has  failed  to  give  adequate
    reasons for departing from the country  guidance.   Mrs  Aboni  submits
    that although HS does not address Article 3 specifically, the  Tribunal
    concluded, as set out in headnote 6, the conditions  in  Gaza  are  not
    such as to amount to persecution or  breach  of  the  human  rights  of
    returnees or place them  in  need  of  international  protection.   She
    submits the judge has departed from the findings in HS  and  failed  to
    give adequate reasons for doing so.


13. Mr Hussain relied upon the  rule  24  reply  filed  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant.  The appellant submits that it is evident from the  decision
    of Judge Turner that she  was  fully  aware  of  the  relevant  country
    guidance and referred to it in reaching her decision. It  is  submitted
    that it was open to Judge Turner to allow the appeal based on the  dire
    country conditions in Gaza following an adequate consideration  of  the
    background material  relied  upon  by  the  appellant.   The  appellant
    submits that in reaching her decision Judge Turner had  regard  to  the
    personal circumstances of the appellant and the situation he would find
    himself in, if returned to Gaza. In reaching  her  decision  the  judge
    properly referred to the background material regarding cuts to  various
    health and employment programs in  Gaza  and  the  impact  of  cuts  to
    financial support.  It is submitted Judge Turner was entitled  to  note
    that the country guidance set out in HS is somewhat dated, and in  fact
    predates the war that took place in  2014  following  which  there  was
    substantial  devastation  in  Gaza.   The  appellant  submits  that  in
    dismissing the appeal on humanitarian protection grounds, Judge  Turner
    was considering the claim in the context of indiscriminate violence  in
    the Palestinian  territories  and  she  properly  applied  the  country
    guidance set out in HS.  The appellant  submits  that  the  conclusions
    reached regarding the Article 3  claim  were  based  upon  the  broader
    prevailing conditions in Gaza  and  is  entirely  consistent  with  the
    respondent's published guidance on 'Humanitarian Protection  -  Version
    5' published in March 2017, that explains the circumstances in which it
    would be appropriate to grant humanitarian protection.


14.  Mr Hussain submits Judge Turner looked  at  matters  holistically  and
    separately considered the claims for asylum,  humanitarian  protection,
    and the Article 3 claim. At paragraph [47], the judge  was  considering
    the indiscriminate violence and the Judge followed the relevant country
    guidance.  The Judge was correct to follow the  country  guidance  when
    considering the Article 15(c) risk but was entitled to allow the appeal
    on Article 3 grounds, for the reasons set out in the decision  and  the
    dire humanitarian conditions.


15. I accept the starting point is the position  set  out  in  the  Country
    Guidance case of HS, in which the Tribunal said at [221] and [222]:


         "221.  We do not see any material difference in this  case  between
         the level of  risk  and  the  nature  of  the  risk  to  which  the
         appellants are exposed in respect of asylum and Article claims.  We
         note that it is not argued that Article 15(c) of the  Qualification
         Directive is applicable in this case.


         222.  Our assessment of the background evidence is that it  clearly
         shows  a  harsh  state  of  affairs  in  Gaza  which   reflects   a
         deterioration beyond the situation prior to the Operation Cast Lead
         hostilities. The infrastructure of Gaza is significantly  depleted,
         and there are problems of access to electricity and clean water and
         there are limits on the amount of products that  are  brought  into
         the territory. We do not seek to undervalue the level of difficulty
         that the appellants in this case, and  indeed  other  residents  of
         Gaza, face in the territory. But we consider that the tests set out
         in the Refugee Convention as applied in  the  case  law  and  under
         Article 3 are set at a level of risk  which  is  higher  than  that
         which would be experienced by the appellant and her family in  this
         case on return."


16. In R (SG (Iraq)) v SSHD  [2012]  EWCA  Civ  940  the  Court  of  Appeal
    considered the status of Country Guidance.  At paragraph  [27]  Stanley
    Burton LJ cited Irwin J (as he then was) in HM  (Iraq)  v  SSHD  [2011]
    EWCA Civ 1536 who said, when considering what the impact of  a  country
    guidance case should be: -


         "... one would look for clear and coherent evidence coming after
         the country guidance decision was reached, before the starting
         point and guidance given in such a case should be departed from....
         It seems to me adventurous to seek to draw quite general
         conclusions as to the reliability of any case or of any decision -
         and particularly a decision which is denominated as a country
         guidance case - merely from the fact that permission to appeal has
         been granted".


17. Stanley Burton LJ went on at paragraphs [46] and [47]:


         "46. The system of country guidance determinations enables
         appropriate resources, in terms of the representations of the
         parties to the country guidance appeal, expert and factual evidence
         and the personnel and time of the tribunal, to be applied to the
         determination of conditions in, and therefore the risks of return
         for persons such as the appellants in the country guidance appeal
         to, the country in question. The procedure is aimed at arriving at
         reliable (in the sense of accurate) determination.


         47. It is for these reasons, as well as the desirability of
         consistency, that decision-makers and tribunal judges are required
         to take country guidance determinations into account and to follow
         them unless very strong grounds supported by cogent evidence, are
         adduced justifying their not doing so".


18. I reject the claim that it was not open to Judge Turner  to  allow  the
    appeal on Article 3 grounds, or that she has failed to give  sufficient
    and adequate reasons for  doing  so  having  dismissed  the  appeal  on
    humanitarian protection  grounds.   In  MI  (Palestine),  Lord  Justice
    Flaux, with whom Lady  Justice  King  agreed,  summarised  the  law  on
    Article 3 in this context  and referred in particular to the  decisions
    of the Strasbourg Court in MSS v Belgium and Greece and Sufi &  Elmi  v
    UK (2012) 54 EHRR 9.  There, the Strasbourg Court rejected the claim by
    the UK that  the  appropriate  test  for  assessing  whether  the  dire
    humanitarian conditions (in Somalia) reached the  Article  3  threshold
    was that set out in N v United Kingdom so that humanitarian  conditions
    would only reach the threshold in  very  exceptional  cases  where  the
    grounds against removal were compelling.


19. Judge Turner referred,  at  paragraph  [48]  of  her  decision  to  the
    relevant paragraphs ([282] and [283]) of the decision of the Strasbourg
    Court.  In her final analysis, at paragraphs [49] to [52], Judge Turner
    refers to the background material before her and gives her reasons  for
    concluding that the return of the appellant to Gaza would be in  breach
    of his Article 3 rights.  The decision in HS is now somewhat dated  and
    Judge Turner reached her decision based  upon  more  recent  background
    material that as she was entitled to do.  She found that the conditions
    the appellant would himself in in Gaza were attributable to the  direct
    and indirect actions of the parties to the conflict and the  background
    material that the appellant had adduced paints a  picture  of  an  area
    where the humanitarian situation is dire, with a risk of a water  borne
    disease epidemic with reduced access to medical services , whether  the
    individual is rich or poor.  If the Tribunal judge applied the  correct
    test, and that resulted in an arguably generous conclusion, it does not
    mean that it was erroneous in law.


20. In my judgement the decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Turner  was
    one that was open to her on the evidence.  As Mr Hussain submits, Judge
    Turner had the relevant country guidance  in  mind  when  reaching  her
    decision. She departed from the country guidance based upon more recent
    background material. The findings and conclusions reached  by  the  FtT
    judge were neither irrational nor unreasonable in the Wednesbury sense.
     It follows that in my judgement there is  no  error  of  law  and  the
    appeal is dismissed.


DECISION


21. I dismiss the appeal  by  the  SSHD  and  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Turner stands.


    V. Mandalia                         Date     30th November 2020


    Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia

