
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA116932016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 21st August 2017                        |On 31st August 2017              |
|                                           |                                 |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     MHA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs R Pettersen, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Jones of Counsel instructed by Sutovic & Hartigan


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against the decision  of  Judge
    Heap made following a hearing at Bradford on 28th March 2017.

Background

 2. The claimant is a citizen of Iraq born on [ ] 1973.  He arrived in  the
    UK on 18th May 2011 and claimed asylum, was refused  and  a  subsequent
    appeal  dismissed.   There  then  followed  a  number  of  fresh  claim
    representations and successful  judicial  review  proceedings,  finally
    culminating in a further decision to refuse asylum  dated  7th  October
    2016. It was this decision which was before the Immigration Judge.

 3. The underlying facts in this case are not in dispute.  The claimant was
    arrested and tortured in July 2004 by the al-Sadr  Army  for  providing
    food supplements to the US Army and to  the  National  Guard.   He  was
    liberated after six weeks when US Forces re-took the town in  which  he
    was held.  In August 2005 ASA  supporters  came  to  the   family  shop
    looking for him and a  week  later  the  shop  was  burned  down.   The
    claimant was not there since he had relocated  to  work  some  distance
    away and subsequently left the country first, for Syria, then Libya and
    finally the UK.

 4. The judge accepted  that  the  claimant  had  been  a  victim  of  past
    persecution by the ASA on the basis of his imputed  political  opinion.
    He  also  accepted  that  he  continued  to  be  persecuted  after  his
    liberation and that his family had been forced to disown him  and  that
    there continued to be an interest in him by  the  militias  some  years
    after the events of 2004.

 5. The judge found that the claimant would be still at risk  in  his  home
    area, relying not only  upon  the  Secretary  of  State's  own  country
    guidance but also the significant amount of background country material
    produced by him showing  that  there  had  been  a  resurgence  in  the
    activities of those who  had  previously  persecuted  him.   The  judge
    recorded that he had the assistance of the recent decision of the Upper
    Tribunal in BA (Returns to Baghdad) Iraq CG  [2017]  UKUT  00018  (IAC)
    which showed that the militia have regained strength and those who were
    perceived  as  being  collaborators  with  the  coalition  forces  were
    targeted.

 6. There was no possibility of relocation to the IKR  since  the  claimant
    was a Shia Arab and not a Kurd.  He concluded that he would not be able
    to obtain a sufficiency of protection in Baghdad as  a  result  of  the
    preponderance of the Shia militia there with whom he had a profile.

 7. The judge then set out in some detail why it would  not  be  reasonable
    for the claimant to relocate to Baghdad.  His health is poor.  He has a
    significant bladder condition and mental health problems as a result of
    the torture which he suffered.  He no longer has the benefit of  family
    support in Iraq.   There  would  be  little  prospect  of  his  finding
    employment in Baghdad.  He had no friends or wider support  network  to
    turn to.  His business had been destroyed.

 8. The judge concluded:-

         "57.  The  appellant  -  a  vulnerable  individual  suffering  from
             significant mental health issues - would therefore be returned
             destitute and without any means of  supporting  himself.   The
             appellant's evidence before me was that if he had to return to
             Iraq then he would commit suicide.  Although not a  contention
             that I have accepted lightly, in view of the medical  evidence
             and the other material before me, I do  not  have  significant
             doubts in this case that the appellant might in fact do so.

         58.  I am satisfied that the circumstances set  out  above  do  not
             lend themselves to it being reasonable for  the  appellant  in
             all events to internally relocate and, indeed  that  he  would
             face insurmountable obstacles in being able to do so."

The Grounds of Application

 9. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal on the grounds  that
    the judge had failed to explain why the appellant  would  still  be  at
    risk from Shia militias in Baghdad given the conclusions in BA that any
    potential risk there was likely to emanate from Sunni extremist  groups
    and not from Shia militias who, together with the Iraqi authorities and
    the US military now had a common goal in fighting ISIL.

10. Permission to appeal was granted by Designated Judge  Manuell  for  the
    reasons stated in the grounds on 10th May 2017.

Submissions

11. Mrs Pettersen relied on her grounds but acknowledged that they did  not
    address the wider  aspects  of  the  judge's  conclusions  on  internal
    relocation.

12. Mr Jones submitted a detailed skeleton argument and submitted that  the
    judge had clearly understood the country guidance case of BA which  was
    principally concerned with Sunnis and not authority for  the  arguments
    set out in the grounds that Shia militias could pose no threat  to  the
    claimant.  In any event, the Tribunal in BA was dealing with protection
    issues and had nothing to say  to  the  factors  which  the  judge  had
    properly taken into account as to the reasonableness of  relocation  in
    Baghdad.  Indeed, the grounds made no challenge  to  the  core  of  the
    judge's  decision  that  it  would  be  unreasonable  to  expect   this
    particular claimant to relocate.

Findings and Conclusions

13. Mrs Pettersen realistically accepted that there was  little  she  could
    advance on behalf of the Secretary of State.

14. There is no challenge to the judge's  conclusions  that  the  appellant
    would be at risk in his home area of Al-Najaf due to  a  resurgence  in
    the influence of the Shia militia generally.  Nor to the evidence  that
    the claimant had been targeted in particular.

15. It was accepted by the original judge who had dismissed the  appeal  in
    2011 that the claimant  had  suffered  past  persecution  which  is  an
    indicator of future risk in the absence of durable change in Iraq.  The
    judge was entitled to conclude that there had in fact been  no  durable
    change given the resurgence of the militia who had previously  targeted
    him.  There has been no challenge to the  background  country  material
    which he relied on. It was accepted that the claimant had a  particular
    profile with the militia, and he had continued to  be  persecuted  even
    after his liberation by US Forces. His family had been forced to disown
    him because of their continued interest in him.

16. There is nothing in BA, which makes it clear that the decision is fact-
    sensitive, which is inconsistent  with  the  judge's  conclusions.  The
    Tribunal in that case was dealing with a person who had  worked  for  a
    western/international  company  and  who  might  be  perceived   as   a
    collaborator, and expressly concerned  with  whether  past  association
    with a western company may cause a risk of harm now.  In this case  the
    claimant had worked with the US Army and National Guard.  The  Tribunal
    did not deal with the risk to collaborators such as  the  claimant,  in
    particular those who had actually been tortured, charged and  convicted
    by the Shia militia under Sharia law and then escaped  their  detention
    because of the intervention of US Forces.  Moreover the main  issue  in
    BA was in relation to Sunnis.

17. The crux of this matter however is that the grounds fail to acknowledge
    that the issue before the judge was whether relocation to Baghdad would
    be reasonable.  Whether or not the claimant would be at risk from  Shia
    militias there was only a part of that assessment and not addressed  in
    the grounds. The judge took into account, as she was  required  to  do,
    the claimant's severe physical and mental health needs and his  ability
    to access care and treatment.  She accepted that there was  a  risk  of
    suicide.  There would be no support from  family  and  no  other  wider
    network to turn to.  He would be destitute, having little  prospect  of
    finding employment.  There is no engagement in  the  grounds  with  the
    judge's holistic conclusions.

Notice of Decision

18. The original judge did not err  in  law.   The  decision  stands.   The
    Secretary of State's challenge is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed[pic]                             Date 30 August 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor






