

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)           Appeal Number:  PA/11821/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Determined on the papers:        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated:      |
|31 January 2020                  |On 04 February 2020                  |
|                                 |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR

                                   Between

                                     AD
                         (Anonymity Direction Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent

                             Anonymity Direction

I make an order under r.14(1) of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008 prohibiting the disclosure or publication of  any  matter  likely
to lead members of the public to identify the appellant. No report of  these
proceedings shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  the  appellant.  This
direction applies to both the appellant and to the respondent and all  other
persons. Failure to comply with this direction could  lead  to  contempt  of
court proceedings. Liberty to apply.

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. It is not in dispute that the appellant is a national of  Sudan  and  a
    member of the Berti tribe  (and  therefore  a  "Non-Arab  Dafuri").  He
    appealed to the FtT against a decision of the SSHD of 24 September 2018
    refusing his protection and human rights claims.

 2.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  dismissed  the  appellant's   appeal,   but
    permission to appeal against such decision was subsequently granted.

 3. By way of rule 24 Notice sent to the Upper Tribunal on 13 January 2020,
    the  SSHD  invited  the  Upper  Tribunal  to  remake  the  decision  in
    accordance with the terms of the recent Upper Tribunal decision in  AAR
    & AA (Non-Arab Dafuris - return) Sudan [2019] UKUT 282 (IAC).  I  treat
    this as an invitation for the Upper Tribunal to set aside the  decision
    of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  on  the  basis  that  it  was  wrong  to
    distinguish the Country Guidance decision of MM [2015] UKUT  00010  and
    then, upon re-making the decision on appeal for itself, to  follow  the
    reasoning identified in AAR. Taking such a course inexorably leads  the
    appellant's appeal being allowed.

 4. I conclude, for the reasons set out in the  preceding  paragraph,  that
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal is vitiated by legal error  and
    I set it aside. Upon remaking, I conclude that the  appellant's  appeal
    should be allowed on the basis that his removal to Sudan would lead  to
    a breach of the Refugee Convention.

Decision

For the reasons given above,

     I) The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside;


  II) The appellant's appeal is allowed on the basis that his removal  would
      breach the United Kingdom's obligations under the Refugee Convention.



                    Signed: Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor
                                    [pic]
                            Date: 31 January 2020










