
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11556/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 24 May 2019                                |On 28 May 2019                |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J M HOLMES


                                   Between

                                    M. K.
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    In person
For the Respondent:    Ms Pettersen, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant, a citizen of Afghanistan, entered the UK illegally in
October 2016 and made a protection claim which was refused on 16 September
2018. The Appellant's appeal against that decision was heard, and
dismissed, by First-tier Tribunal Judge Bircher, in a decision promulgated
on 22 November 2018. The Appellant's application for permission to appeal
was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara on 1 March 2019 on all the
grounds advanced. The Respondent did not reply to that grant with a Rule 24
response.

The Appellant's case was that he had come to the adverse attention of the
Taleban, and that as a result he faced a real risk of harm upon return to
Afghanistan. He also argued that his removal from the UK would be a
disproportionate breach of his Article 8 rights.

Before me the Respondent accepts that the Judge's approach to the evidence
concerning the Appellant's experiences in Afghanistan suggested that she
was both employing the wrong standard of proof, and, speculating as to how
members of the Taleban might behave. It is also accepted that the Judge
failed to make any findings at all in relation to the Article 8 ground of
appeal. The Article 8 appeal was not withdrawn; it was advanced not only in
the grounds of appeal, but also specifically in the Appellant's witness
statement. No concessions were made before me as to whether the Appellant's
evidence would lead to a finding that he had established a "private life"
in the UK in the two years he had lived here, of sufficient strength and
quality to engage Article 8(1), but it was accepted that the Appellant was
entitled to at least have this ground of appeal addressed by the Tribunal.

In the circumstances both parties agree that a fresh hearing is the only
pragmatic course open. I agree. None of the findings of fact made by the
Judge are safe, or can be preserved. In circumstances such as this, where
it would appear that the relevant evidence has not properly been considered
by the First Tier Tribunal, the effect of that error of law has been to
deprive the parties of the opportunity for their case to be properly
considered by the First Tier Tribunal; paragraph 7.2(a) of the Practice
Statement of 13 November 2014. Moreover the extent of the judicial fact
finding exercise required is such that having regard to the over-riding
objective, it is appropriate that the appeal should be remitted to the
First Tier Tribunal; paragraph 7.2(b) of the Practice Statement of 13
November 2014.

    To that end I remit the appeal for a fresh hearing by a judge other
    than First tier Tribunal Judge Bircher, at the North Shields Hearing
    Centre.

    A Pushtu interpreter is required.

    The remitted appeal is suitable for the short warned list. The parties
    should expect the appeal to called on for hearing at short notice after
    10 June 2019.



Notice of decision

 1. The decision did involve the making of an error of  law  sufficient  to
    require the decision to be set  aside  on  all  grounds,  and  reheard.
    Accordingly the appeal is remitted  to  the  First  Tier  Tribunal  for
    rehearing de novo, with the directions set out above.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any member of his family. This direction  applies
both to the Appellant and to the Respondent.  Failure to  comply  with  this
direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 24 May 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J M Holmes
