
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11021/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Civil Justice Centre      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 1 May 2019                                 |On 15 May 2019                |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between

                                 Ms C A K M
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms H. Masih, counsel instructed by Braitch
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms H. Aboni, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Iraq from the IKR, born on 16 June 1976.
     She arrived in the United Kingdom on 17 December 2017,  with  her  two
    children and claimed asylum on 16 March 2018, on  the  basis  that  she
    feared an honour killing  from  her  brothers.   This  is  because  her
    husband subjected her  to  domestic  violence  and  they  separated  in
    February 2017.  He subsequently did not get  in  contact  with  her  or
    their two children, now approximately 10 and  15  years  of  age.   The
    Appellant then had a relationship with somebody that  she  met  at  the
    university that she attended and this was discovered by another student
    who informed the Appellant's in-laws, who in turn informed her  family.
    On 26 November 2017 two of her brothers came to her home and  assaulted
    her due to the rumours, which she denied.   On  3  December  2017,  the
    Appellant received a phone call from her  sister-in-law  informing  her
    that her brothers had been asking at the university about  the  rumours
    and that they were intending to find her and kill her.  Her  sister  in
    law also stated that she had seen video footage of the man,  [F],  with
    whom the Appellant had been having a relationship, entering  her  home.
    The Appellant then contacted  her  sister  who  asked  her  husband  to
    collect the Appellant from university and her sister was asked to  look
    after the Appellant's children.  She and the children were  then  taken
    to his brother's house where they  stayed  in  hiding  for  three  days
    before fleeing from Iraq.

 2. The Respondent refused the Appellant's asylum application in a decision
    dated 31 August 2018.  The Appellant appealed against that decision and
    her appeal came before Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Fowell  for
    hearing on 4 December 2018.  In a decision and reasons  promulgated  on
    11 December 2018 the judge dismissed the appeal.

 3. Permission to appeal was sought, in time, on the basis that  the  judge
    had  erred  materially  in  law:  firstly,  in  that  the  approach  to
    credibility was too narrow, failed to take account of all the  relevant
    matters, and in particular in approaching  the  credibility  assessment
    through the matters outlined in Article 4 of  the  QD,  the  judge  had
    essentially elevated those matters to mandatory requirements  which  if
    not met meant that the Appellant's  account  fell  to  be  rejected  as
    incredible but this was clearly not the correct approach and there  was
    no duty of corroboration in order to establish a credible asylum claim.
     Reference  was  made  to  the  judgment  of  Lord  Justice  Sedley  in
    Karanakaran [2000] Imm AR 271.  It was submitted that it  was  striking
    that the consistency of the Appellant's account  had  not  been  called
    into question, nor the basic fit between her account and the  objective
    material.  The judge had failed to assess the explanations provided  by
    the Appellant and from the point of view of  her  cultural  background.
    In particular, the Appellant had stated  that  to  contact  her  female
    relatives in Iraq would place them at risk and if she told  her  mother
    where she was, that might be too burdensome for her mother, not so much
    because she might tell her sons but because it would place  her  mother
    in a situation where in having contact with the Appellant and knowledge
    of her whereabouts, she may be seem as colluding with someone  who  has
    transgressed key social norms and potentially place her in  a  category
    of also having breached those social norms.  This was not considered by
    the judge in dismissing the Appellant's appeal.

 4. The second ground of appeal asserted that the judge had erred  at  [30]
    in relying on new and untested information as  to  the  feasibility  of
    return to Iraq because this departed from the country guidance decision
    in AAH (Iraqi Kurds - internal relocation) Iraq CG UKUT 00212 (IAC) and
    thirdly,  that  the  judge  had  further  erred  in   considering   the
    Appellant's return to Iraqi Kurdistan to be feasible in the absence  of
    any findings as to family support, bearing in mind that  the  Appellant
    is a single woman and cannot safely be returned absent such support  cf
    AAH.

 5. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Bird in a
    decision dated 7 January 2019 on the basis that:

         "It is arguable that in seeking corroboration  of  the  Appellant's
         account the judge sought to put a higher burden  of  proof  on  the
         Appellant in requiring the Appellant to corroborate her claim.  The
         judge is required to consider whether the Appellant's evidence as a
         whole  stands  up  to  scrutiny  against  the  objective   evidence
         produced.  Further the judge has failed to  give  adequate  reasons
         for seeking to distinguish the country guidance in the case of AAH.
          An arguable error of law has been made".

     Hearing

 6. At the hearing before the Upper Tribunal there was no Rule 24 response,
    however Ms Aboni indicated she was opposing the appeal.   Ms  Masih  on
    behalf of the Appellant sought to rely on the grounds of  appeal  which
    she summarised in the following manner: one, that the  judge  had  made
    flawed credibility findings;  secondly,  the  judge  erred  in  seeking
    corroboration in that this placed too high a burden  of  proof  on  the
    Appellant; and thirdly, that he erred in  seeking  to  distinguish  the
    country guidance decision in AAH.  She also sought to rely on  a  point
    raised in  [10] of the grounds of appeal in respect of the  feasibility
    of return bearing in mind the Appellant's evidence  as  to  family  and
    family support in the IKR.

 7. Ms Masih went through the grounds of appeal stating  that  the  judge's
    approach to  credibility  was  too  narrow,  that  rather  than  assess
    credibility in the round the judge appears to have taken  the  approach
    that only the factors set out in Article 4 of QD are the  benchmark  at
    [19]  of  his  decision.   Ms  Masih  submitted  whilst  this  was  not
    necessarily wrong in itself, when one looks at [20] it  is  clear  that
    the judge focuses on the issue of corroboration and what further effort
    the Appellant could have made to support  her  account.   However,  the
    Article 4 factors were not the beginning and end of the assessment  and
    the judge had erred in  treating  those  matters  as  a  benchmark  for
    assessing credibility.  She submitted this was an erroneous approach as
    there is no duty of corroboration and that the judge had erred at  [20]
    and [22] in requiring this.  She submitted that, in so doing, the judge
    had placed a higher burden  of  proof  on  the  Appellant.   The  judge
    focused on plausibility and states at [26]  that  these  are  the  main
    points of concern, however this is not correct.  What the judge  should
    have done was approach credibility and the assessment  of  evidence  in
    the round and matters capable of bearing on the credibility assessment,
    for example the  consistency  in  the  Appellant's  account,  were  not
    considered.

 8. Ms Masih submitted when one looks at the  screening  interview,  asylum
    interview and the oral evidence these were all consistent but were  not
    called into question, nor was the fact that the Appellant's account was
    generally corroborated by the background  country  evidence,  e.g.  the
    fact she was subjected to domestic violence from her  husband  and  the
    fact that honour killings were a key feature.  Ms Masih submitted  that
    the judge placed weight on the fact the Appellant's brother-in-law  was
    willing to help  and  take  steps  outside  the  usual  cultural  norms
    contrary to her brother's approach.  She submitted  there  were  always
    exceptions to prevailing cultural norms.  The Appellant's oral evidence
    was that the reason he assisted was to prevent  her  children  becoming
    orphans and this was simply not considered by the  judge.   This  point
    had not arisen in the interview as the Appellant was  not  asked  about
    this.

 9. The judge further failed to investigate the  Appellant's  evidence  and
    consider it from the point of view of the  Appellant's  very  different
    cultural context.  In particular, the Appellant's explanation as to why
    she did not inform her mother about her whereabouts was because she was
    concerned it would be too burdensome for her mother  and  she  did  not
    wish to place her mother or other  female  relatives  in  an  invidious
    situation because they could then be perceived as  also  going  against
    cultural norms.  This is neither considered  nor  factored  in  by  the
    judge in his assessment of the  plausibility  and  credibility  of  the
    Appellant's account.  It was not simply as a risk of her being  tracked
    down in the UK.  Ms Masih submitted that this infected his  credibility
    assessment.

10. In relation to ground 3, the judge relied on Annexes A  and  B  to  the
    CPIN October 2008 in respect of Iraq and internal relocation,  Annex  A
    being a letter from the Iraqi Ambassador to the UK  dated  5  September
    2018, and Annex B is a letter from the Iraqi Embassy of the UK dated  2
    October 2018.  Ms Masih took issue with the judge's  interpretation  of
    this evidence.  Firstly, neither letter states that laissez passers are
    no longer confiscated, and secondly that in any  event,  this  evidence
    does represent a departure from the country guidance  decision  in  AAH
    (op cit) and the judge failed to provide cogent reasons or very  strong
    grounds to justify departing from the country guidance  simply  on  the
    basis of these letters.  This was clearly a material error  of  law  in
    light of the decision in SG (Iraq) v Secretary of State  for  the  Home
    Department [2012] EWCA Civ 940 at [67].  Ms Masih submitted that  the
    judge had further erred at [29] in failing to assess the feasibility of
    the Appellant's return in the absence of findings as to whether or  not
    she could access family support given that she is a  single  woman  and
    thus could not be safely returned in light of the country  guidance  in
    AAH.

11. In her submissions, Ms Aboni  asserted  that  the  judge  had  directed
    himself  appropriately  and  gave   adequate   consideration   to   the
    credibility issues in the case.  Whilst the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    appears to have relied on the absence  of  corroborative  evidence,  he
    found that there was potentially such evidence, that the Appellant  was
    in a position to obtain it but had failed to do so.  Ms Aboni submitted
    that the judge had given adequate reasons for finding  the  Appellant's
    account lacked credibility.

12. With regard to the issue of return, Ms Aboni submitted it was  open  to
    the judge to attach weight to the letters attached to the CPIN  and  it
    was open to the Appellant to return  to  Baghdad  and  make  an  onward
    journey to the IKR.  In any event, Ms  Aboni  submitted  the  Appellant
    could now return directly to the IKR. As regards  to  whether  she  has
    family to return to, the judge found there was family in the IKR, there
    was no error as to the Appellant's circumstances  on  return,  and  her
    ability to travel from Baghdad to the IKR was no longer in issue as she
    could return directly.

13. In reply, Ms  Masih  submitted  that  the  explanations  given  by  the
    Appellant in respect of the fact she  had  not  obtained  corroborative
    evidence were not taken into consideration by the judge as part of  his
    assessment and this is simply one factor in  relation  to  credibility,
    nor  the  fact  her  account  was  consistent   with   the   background
    information.  In respect of the feasibility  of  return  she  submitted
    that it is not permissible to go behind the country  guidance  decision
    in AAH without cogent evidence to do so.

     Findings and Reasons

14. I find material errors of law in the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Fowell.  I announced my decision at the hearing and now  give  my
    reasons.

15. It is apparent from the manner in which the judge approached the appeal
    at [19] through to [28] that the judge's focus was  very  much  on  the
    criteria set out in Article 4 of the QD, viz:

      a) whether the applicant has made a genuine effort to substantiate her
         application;

      b) all relevant elements,  at  the  applicant's  disposal,  have  been
         submitted, and a satisfactory explanation  regarding  any  lack  of
         other relevant elements has been given;

      c) the applicant's statements are found to be coherent  and  plausible
         and  do  not  run  counter  to  available  specific   and   general
         information relevant to the applicant's case;
    (d)  the applicant has applied  for  international  protection  at  the
         earliest time, unless the applicant can demonstrate good reason for
         not having done so; and
    (e)  the general credibility of the applicant has been established.

16. Whilst these criteria are a useful checklist, they do not  represent  a
    mandatory and exclusive approach  to  an  asylum  appeal,  which  still
    requires a judge to look at all the evidence in the round and to assess
    credibility to the lower standard of proof cf. Karanakaran  [2000]  Imm
    AR 271 per Lord Justice Sedley at [16] and [18]-[19].

17. The judge relied heavily on the absence of documentary support.  I find
    there is merit in the assertions in the ground of appeal that the judge
    did not balance that absence of evidence against, or assess along  with
    the consistency between the accounts provided by the Appellant  in  her
    screening interview,  asylum  interview  and  oral  evidence,  nor  the
    explanation that she provided as to why it  is  she  did  not  seek  to
    obtain corroborative evidence, which was through fear  of  jeopardising
    the position of her mother and sister in the IKR.  Whilst at  [25]  the
    judge asserted the Appellant had not given a  satisfactory  explanation
    for the lack of evidence, it is clear that that evidence was given  but
    does not appear to have been taken into account by the judge.   I  find
    this is  sufficient  to  cast  doubt  on  the  safety  of  the  judge's
    assessment of the Appellant's credibility and to render those  findings
    unsafe.

18. I further find that the judge  erred  in  departing  from  the  country
    guidance decision in AAH (Iraqi Kurds - internal  relocation)  Iraq  CG
    UKUT 00212 (IAC) on the basis of  two  letters  appended  to  the  most
    recent CPIN, see  [10]  above.  In  light  of  the  judgment  of  their
    Lordships in the Court of Appeal in SG [2012] EWCA Civ 940 at [67] this
    is not permissible, unless or until the decision in AAH  (Iraqi  Kurds)
     set aside on appeal or replaced  by  a  subsequent  Country  Guidance
    determination.

19. Whilst the judge asserted at [31] that "the ambassador to the UK is  in
    a position to know the current position and so that in my view  amounts
    to the cogent evidence necessary to depart from what was  expressed  to
    be a temporary situation in AAH", I find the judge has not provided any
    further reasons or explanation for departing in its entirety  from  the
    country guidance decision.  I find, contrary to the  judge's  findings,
    that two letters without more cannot provide  sufficient  justification
    for departing from that guidance in the absence of further analysis  or
    guidance from the Upper Tribunal or the higher Courts.

     Decision

20. For those reasons I find material errors of  law  in  the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Fowell.  I set that decision aside and  remit
    the appeal for a hearing de novo before the First-tier Tribunal.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Rebecca Chapman                         Date 13 May 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman
