
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11738/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 1 November 2018                   |On 21 November 2018                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM


                                   Between

                                     GW
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms G Brown, Counsel, instructed by Luqmani Thompson
                    & Partners Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   An order for anonymity was made by the FTT and should continue  in  the
    light of the issues arising in the Appellant's case. She is  a  citizen
    of Sierra Leone and her date of birth is 9 December 1997.  She came  to
    the UK on 9 August 2014 with her stepmother (BBW) on a visit visa which
    was valid until 9 December 2014.    On 8 May 2016 she made a claim  for
    asylum.  Her claim in summary is that BBW would force  her  to  undergo
    FGM should she return to Sierra  Leone  and  that  there  would  be  no
    sufficiency of protection.  BBW is a Muslim and a Bondo society  leader
    and she wants the Appellant to succeed her.  The  Appellant  fears  the
    Bondo society and family members, including BBW.  The  Appellant  is  a
    Jehovah's Witness.   Her father who resides in Sierra Leone was  unable
    to protect her and she relied in support on an e-mail that he  sent  to
    her.  The contents of that e-mail are as follows;-

         "Your mum is one of the leaders and head of  this  society.   Being
         her eldest child, you cannot escape the  initiations  because  this
         will bring disgrace to her and what she stands for.  Secondly, know
         she keeps saying she will teach you every so you can take after her
         (to take her position).  For me I am fed up of going back and forth
         with her on this issue is.  She threatening me that your life  will
         be in danger and there is no way you can avoid the Bondo society as
         it is in your blood ... the ceremony will be in July  after  school
         classes.  You will  join  other  of  her  family  members  for  the
         ceremony.  Please understand that I do not want anything to  happen
         to you, they will do everything possible  to  get  their  wish,  so
         please let's just get this done once and for."

4.   The application for asylum was refused by the Secretary of State on  17
    November 2016.  There was, acknowledged  in  the  decision  letter,  an
    ongoing investigation by the Metropolitan  Police  regarding  potential
    coercion to remove the Appellant to Sierra Leone to undergo FGM. On  18
    October 2016 the Secretary of State was advised that there was a  civil
    application and ongoing proceedings in relation  to  a  FGM  protection
    order.

5.   The  Appellant  appealed  against  the  decision  and  her  appeal  was
    dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Oliver in a  decision  that  was
    promulgated on 5 September 2018, following a hearing on 26  July  2018.
    By the time the matter came before Judge Oliver the High Court had made
    a female genital mutilation (FGM) protection order. The order was  made
    on 17 November 2016, a few days after the decision of the Secretary  of
    State.   This  order  remains  in  force  until  the  Appellant's  21st
    birthday.

The decision of the High Court

6.   The FFT judge had before him a copy of the order  the  judgment  of  Mr
    Justice Peter Jackson. He made an order in the terms as set out  at  B2
    of the Appellant's bundle.  The judgment consists of 34 paragraphs.  At
    paragraph 8 of that decision, the judge reminded himself  of  the  task
    before him in dealing with FGM protection orders and that the court was
    dealing with the assessment and management of risk and did not need  to
    make specific findings of fact in relation to the central  question  of
    whether FGM will or will not be performed.  He stated  that  the  court
    had to draw conclusions from the evidence but it is essentially a broad
    canvass.

7.   The High Court heard evidence from the Appellant  and  BBW.  There  was
    evidence from the Metropolitan Police which  he  also  considered.  The
    above-mentioned  e-mail  was  considered  by  the  Judge  and  he  drew
    conclusions at paragraphs 14 and 15 as set out below: -

         14.  Insofar as that is concerned, my best interpretation  of  this
             message is that it is a message that was sent by the father to
             [the appellant], but it refers, from its context, to a  threat
             from [G] birth mother  and  not  from  her  stepmother.   That
             leaves open the question of whether it is giving a warning  of
             a genuine risk or whether it is  conducted  to  help  with  an
             immigration application.  I am of the view that it is genuine,
             at least as being  written  by  the  father,  because  of  the
             detailed message that the  father  subsequently  sends  to  DC
             Roberts in his message of 25 October.  It gives some  detailed
             contents which explained why he was warning of a risk  by  the
             birth mother, and apologies if he was misunderstood as  having
             referred to the stepmother.  Nobody suggests that that message
             to DC Roberts is not a genuine message from the father, and it
             seems to me to be written in fairly similar  language  to  the
             earlier message.

         15.  On 28 April,  there  was  an  incident  between  [G]  and  her
             stepmother.  Both agree that there was an incident.  [G]  said
             that the stepmother slapped her, causing a  slight  cut.   The
             following day, 29 April, [G] reported  to  a  teacher  at  her
             college that she had been assaulted,  and  also  produced  the
             email from her father.  When the  police  came,  she  gave  an
             account of the assault, but she did  not  produce  the  email,
             which was instead provided to the police by the  teacher.   At
             that point, the police began their involvement and a statement
             was taken from [G] and the mobile phones of the stepmother and
             [MB] were also seized.  Those messages  show  that  there  was
             discussion between all  three  adults  about  the  immigration
             status of [G].  In  the  case  of  [MB],  it  was  on  19  and
             24 April.  In the case of the stepmother, there was a  series
             of messages dated 2 May, referring to  conversations  with  a
             friendly solicitor about something the stepmother referred  to
             as a 'fake plan'.   I  find  it  difficult  to  take  anything
             reliable from those messages.

8.   He also stated the following: -

         20.  I have from Ms Carter-Manning a useful attempt to  balance  up
             the various speeches of the evidence, which I shall read  with
             some  adjustments  for  information   subsequently   received.
             Elements that might support the allegation of a  risk  of  FGM
             are firstly the father's emails, which I find to emanate  from
             him and, secondly, the fact that the stepmother  and  possibly
             the birth mother, are from tribal backgrounds which have or do
             practice FGM and, indeed, that  both  ladies  have  themselves
             been victims, which is a significant  risk  factor.   Thirdly,
             that [G] herself has given evidence of conversations with  her
             stepmother in which she says the threat of FGM was raised and,
             lastly, that the stepmother gave evidence in a way  which  did
             not encourage confidence that she would be a  protective  kind
             of person.   It  is,  I  add,  certainly  true  that  her  own
             distress, which  contrasted  markedly  with  [G's]  composure,
             seemed to focus most on the very  difficult  experiences  that
             she has had this year having been held in England as a  result
             of criminal proceedings, very recently  dropped,  and  finding
             herself now in the midst  of  what  is  undoubtedly  a  family
             crisis,  involving  not  only  her   relationship   with   her
             stepdaughter, but also her relationship with her husband.

         21.  As against that evidence that  might  support  the  allegation
             that  FGM  has  been  concocted,  are  these.   Firstly,   the
             immigration position was certainly  a  very  live  issue  just
             before the allegation surfaced.  Secondly, the evidence of the
             witnesses, [A] and [K] about the probabilities of [G's]  level
             of knowledge.  Thirdly, the fact that FGM was not a feature of
             [G's] earlier applications for leave to remain.  Fourthly, the
             inconsistencies in the account given by the  father,  and  the
             somewhat surprising  lack  of  any  communication,  since  the
             lifting of the bail conditions, between the stepmother and the
             father, to present a clear account of what has been going  on.



         22.  Coming to my conclusion, it is  the  court's  normal  task  to
             consider all the evidence and the arguments and give  a  clear
             account of what has  happened  in  any  particular  situation.
             Where the court can do that, it  is  of  great  assistance  to
             those involved in the litigation and  to  others  who  may  be
             considering the rights of those concerned.   Having  given  my
             best consideration to the information with which I  have  been
             provided, I find that the task of providing a clear account of
             what has happened here is an impossible one.

         23.  I have heard evidence from [G] and from her stepmother  which,
             if each was heard on its own, might readily be  accepted,  but
             they are in fact in contradiction.  The normal means by  which
             one might draw conclusions as to  who  was  and  who  was  not
             telling the truth are hard to find.   Even  if,  at  times,  I
             might have suspected one or the other of the witnesses was not
             telling the full truth, I would have no means of knowing  what
             conclusions to draw from that.

         24.  There is here an absence of sufficient evidence.  There  is  a
             triangle involving the father, the stepmother and  the  child,
             possibly even a further point involving the birth mother.   It
             is, I regret to say, impossible for me to tell what  the  real
             family dynamics are here.  The absence of  evidence  from  the
             father is a crucial matter, and, indeed, there is no  evidence
             of any kind whatever from the birth mother.  To add  to  that,
             the stepmother has not been legally represented, and  has  not
             even had formal interpretation, although by the  good  offices
             of Mr Suleiman Bah, I am satisfied that she  has  had  a  fair
             opportunity  to  present  her  case.   In  such  confused  and
             unsatisfactory circumstances, the court can only do its  best,
             and I must, I believe guard against going further than  would
             be safe.

         32.  Having reviewed matters in that way, I return to consider  all
             the circumstances including the need  to  secure  the  health,
             safety and well-being of [G].  I  do  consider,  in  agreement
             with the submission made by the police, that [G]  is  a  young
             person  who  requires  the  protection  of  a  female  genital
             mutilation order.  She is someone who is in the  middle  of  a
             family conflict that has proved very hard to  penetrate.   She
             has a  mother  and  a  stepmother  who  have  themselves  been
             subjected to female genital  mutilation.   She  has  a  father
             whose motives and ability to protect her are  not  known,  and
             her ability to remain in this country is similarly  uncertain.



         33.  I therefore consider that there is a risk and that an order is
             necessary for her protection.  However, I do not consider that
             the order should have, as  a  respondent,  [MB].   If  he  was
             considered to be somebody who increased  the  risk,  he  would
             fall to be made, but in this case I do not find  him  to  fall
             into that category.  I will therefore make the order  directed
             to Ms Binta Bah Williams.  Subject to any further submissions,
             I consider that the order should last until Gladys is 21 years
             of age.

The Decision of the FTT

9.   The FFT judge heard evidence from the Appellant and her cousin, R,  and
    reached the following conclusions: -

         34.  The appellant has stated that her stepmother  first  mentioned
             FGM when she was nine years old. She has given no  reason  why
             she did not take seriously the several warnings her stepmother
             gave about her intentions and as late as the eve of journey to
             the United Kingdom  still  thought  that  her  stepmother  was
             joking. Her grandfather had protected while he was  alive.  He
             died in 2007 and she remained in Sierra Leone from the age  of
             10 to 17, prime FGM years, during which the practice  was  not
             enforced. She stated at one point that her stepmother had only
             recently become the  leader  of  the  Bondo  Society,  but  at
             another that that had  occurred  in  2011.  The  practice  was
             clearly not universally accepted in the appellant's family. It
             was not only her grandfather who was strongly opposed  to  the
             practice, but also [R's]  mother.  While  I  accept  that  the
             reference in her father's email, if it is  genuine,  does  not
             necessarily imply that she has siblings, it does  assert  that
             the leadership of the Bondo Society is passed from  mother  to
             eldest daughter. There is no evidence of the circumstances  in
             which the appellant's stepmother inherited the  role.  On  any
             view, however, it is surely unrealistic that the leader of the
             society would seek to pass on that role to someone who did not
             believe in the practice and who had  not  even  undergone  the
             practice herself.  Furthermore, it would  be  known  that  the
             appellant came from a family which had embraced the  Jehovah's
             Witnesses. Whereas the Bondo Society  appears  to  be  closely
             linked to Muslim beliefs, the Jehovah's Witnesses are  clearly
             against the practice. Their website declares:

                  Many mothers, however, have come to realize that there  is
                  no legitimate reason - religious, medical, or  hygienic  -
                  to support this painful practice. The Nigerian documentary
                  Repudiating Repugnant Customs reveals  that  many  mothers
                  have courageously refused to subject  their  daughters  to
                  it.

         35.  I find the judgement of the High Court to be  of  no  help  in
             establishing the genuineness of the appellant's claim  because
             any judge, in the absence of any evidence against  the  making
             of such an order, would have made one on the  receipt  of  any
             possibly credible evidence that  such  an  abhorrent  practice
             would be carried out.

         36.  The appellant did not seek the assistance of  the  authorities
             in Sierra Leone, which included not only the police  but  also
             NGO organisations.  Nor  did  she  seek  assistance  from  the
             Jehovah's Witnesses, who may be heavily outnumbered by Muslims
             there, but nevertheless have a number of congregations in  the
             country.

         37.  I note too the opportunities that the appellant had  prior  to
             calling the police to make a claim. Taking into account all of
             the circumstances,  including  section  8,  I find  that  the
             appellant's claim has been fabricated and that the  email  has
             been sent disingenuously by her  father  to  support  a  false
             claim. Had I any fear that her claim might  be  true  I  would
             unhesitatingly have allowed the appeal (Fornah  v  SSHD;  K  v
             SSHD [2006] UKHL 46).

10.  The judge essentially did not accept the Appellant's evidence. He  gave
    the following reasons; he found that she did not give a good reason why
    she did not take seriously the several warnings that BBW gave  her  and
    why she thought that she was joking;  the Appellant's  grandfather  had
    on her evidence  protected her whilst he was alive and he died in  2007
    and yet she remained in Sierra Leone from the age of  10  to  17  which
    were "prime FGM years"; the Appellant's evidence at one point was  that
    BBW had only recently become the   member  of  the  Bondo  society  but
    elsewhere in evidence she stated that she became the leader in 2011 and
     FGM was not  universally  accepted  in  the  Appellant's  family  (her
    grandfather was strongly opposed to it, as was R's mother).

11.  The judge concluded that the father's e-mail did not necessarily  imply
    that the applicant had siblings and therefore was  not  necessarily  at
    odds with the Appellant's own evidence, but found  that  there  was  no
    evidence of the circumstances in which the BBW inherited the role.  The
    judge concluded that it was unrealistic that the leader of the  society
    would seek to pass on that role to someone who did not believe  in  the
    practice and who had not even  undergone  the  practice  herself.   The
    judge stated that it would be known that  the  Appellant  came  from  a
    family which had embraced Jehovah's Witnesses whereas the Bondo society
    had close links to Muslim beliefs.

12.  The judge found  that  Jehovah's  Witnesses  are  clearly  against  the
    practice and he  cited  an  extract  from  what  he  described  as  the
    Jehovah's Witness website at paragraph 34 to support  this  conclusion.
    There is also reference to the "JW website" at paragraph 32.   What  is
    recorded at paragraph 32 may be a summary or a quote from that  website
    but it is not entirely clear.

13.  The judge said that the judgment of the High Court was of  no  help  to
    him for the reasons he gave at para 35 (see above).

14.  The judge considered that the Appellant did not seek the assistance  of
    the Authorities in Sierra Leone which included not only the police  but
    NGO organisations.  She did not seek the assistance from the  Jehovah's
    Witnesses who may be heavily outnumbered by Muslims  as  found  by  the
    judge, nevertheless have a number of congregations in the country.  The
    judge attached weight to delay in the context of Section 8 of the  2004
    Act at paragraph 37.

Conclusions

15.  The first ground is that the judge erroneously  rejected  the  evidence
    of the  order  and  judgment  of  Mr  Justice  Peter  Jackson  and  his
    conclusions about that evidence are irrational.  The judge referred  to
    the judgment of the High Court at paragraph  35.   I  accept  that  the
    judge did not properly engage with this  evidence.   Whilst  there  are
    obvious limitations in terms of the corroborative value of  it,  it  is
    undoubtedly a piece of evidence which  is  capable  of  supporting  the
    Appellant's case.  The reason the judge gave for effectively  attaching
    no weight to it, was that in his view the High Court had no alternative
    but to make the order. This does not properly reflect the  decision  of
    the High Court and does not take into account that the High Court heard
    evidence from the Appellant and  her  stepmother.   I  agree  that  the
    judge's conclusions at para 35 are irrational.

16.  Ground 2 asserts that the judge failed to assess  the  evidence  and/or
    provide  adequate  reasons.   There  is  substance   in   this   ground
    considering the extent of the Appellant's  evidence  contained  in  her
    witness statement.     The judge  heard  evidence  from  R.   She  also
    provided a witness statement.   The  judge  recorded  R's  evidence  at
    paragraph 27.  This  is  a  piece  of  evidence  that  was  capable  of
    supporting parts of the Appellant's  account.  However,  there  are  no
    clear  findings  about  this  evidence.   I  accept  that  the  judge's
    attention was drawn to background evidence relating to  FGM  in  Sierra
    Leone and there has been no proper engagement with this.

17.  Ground 3 asserts that the judge made findings that are not grounded  in
    the evidence with reference to paragraph 34 where the judge found  that
    it was "surely unrealistic that the leader of the society would seek to
    pass on that role to someone who did not believe in  the  practice  and
    who had not even undergone the practice herself".  There is some  merit
    in the ground of appeal. If it was the only ground of appeal it may not
    in itself cause me too much concern. However, it is an example  of  the
    judge having not properly engaged with the  Appellant's  evidence  (see
    paragraph 5 of her witness statement) and overlaps with ground 2.

18.  Ground 4 asserts that the judge relied on post-hearing evidence from  a
    Jehovah Witness website. My attention  was  drawn  to  EG  post-hearing
    internet research Nigeria [2008] UKAIT 0015 and AM fair  hearing  Sudan
    [2015] UKUT 00656.  It is without doubt that the  judge  in  this  case
    relied on evidence that was not before the parties.  It was not  relied
    on by the parties. He did not  give  the  parties  the  opportunity  to
    consider it. In addition, it  is  not  made  clear  from  the  decision
    exactly what website the judge was relying on.  This  is  a  procedural
    irregularity giving rise to unfairness.

19.  I have taken on board Mr Whitwell's submissions  that  any  errors  are
    not material. In support he highlighted the findings of the judge  that
    are not, in his view effected by the  alleged  errors.  These  are  the
    judge's findings in relation to the Appellant's age, that the Appellant
    would not be of interest to her stepmother, the issue of delay and  the
    findings in relation to the father's e-mail.  I do not  agree  with  Mr
    Whitwell.  My view is that the grounds are made out. It is not possible
    for me to conclude that had  the  errors  properly  identified  in  the
    grounds not been made out,  the  judge  would  have  reached  the  same
    conclusions.

20.  For the reasons I have given, I set aside the decision of the judge  to
    dismiss the Appellant's appeal on asylum grounds. Part of the  material
    error  arises  from  a  procedural  irregularity   which   results   in
    unfairness. In these circumstances,  with  reference  to  the  Practice
    Statement 2012, I remit the matter to the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  be
    reheard afresh.  None of the findings should be maintained.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Joanna McWilliam                    Date 19 November 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam

