
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeals: PA/11400/2017
                                                             & PA/11404/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 1 August 2019                     |On 9 August 2019                     |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                  A S & M S
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. On 1 August 2019, Mr K Forrest, Advocate, appeared for both appellants,
    instructed by Latta & Co, Solicitors, for the first, and  by  Katani  &
    Co,  Solicitors,  for  the  second.   Although  it  was  suitable   and
    convenient for both appellants to have one advocate on  this  occasion,
    they have been separately  represented  in  prior  proceedings.   Mr  A
    Govan, Senior Presenting Officer, appeared for the respondent.

 2. The appellants are brothers, citizens of Jordan.   FtT  Judge  Buchanan
    dismissed their appeals by a single decision, promulgated on  10  April
    2018.

 3. Procedure then went awry, beginning  with  significant  errors  in  the
    grant of permission issued by the FtT  to  the  first  appellant  only,
    muddling up names and references, and mistaking whether both had sought
    permission.

 4. Following on from that grant, the respondent conceded error of  law  in
    the first appellant's case; the UT set  aside  the  decision  of  Judge
    Buchanan; by  a  decision  promulgated  on  4  April  2019,  FtT  Judge
    Montgomery again dismissed his appeal; and on  15  May  2019,  the  FtT
    granted permission to appeal to the UT.

 5. In the case of the second appellant, the FtT at a  later  date  granted
    permission to appeal to the UT against the decision of Judge Buchanan.

 6. The cases were brought together again in the UT today.

 7. I recognise that the cases of the  two  appellants  do  not  inevitably
    stand or fall together, and that the grant of permission to the  second
    appellant to appeal against the decision of Judge Buchanan is not based
    on the same grounds or made for the  same  reasons  as  for  the  first
    appellant.  However, their cases are closely interlinked.  It would not
    be tenable for the decision of Judge Buchanan to stand as a  resolution
    of one but not of the other.

 8. The main reason for granting permission to appeal against the  decision
    of Judge Montgomery was arguable procedural irregularity  by  resolving
    the case partly by reference to information from the case file  of  the
    second appellant (see paragraphs  12  &  32  )  to  which  he  and  his
    representative did not have access.  That ground is not entirely devoid
    of merit.

 9. Before Judge Montgomery, neither side sought adjournment to  bring  the
    cases back  together,  and  they  appear  to  have  misapprehended  the
    position in the other appeal (see paragraph 12).  It may well have been
    an error all round for parties and the tribunal to proceed as they did,
    rather than ensuring that the two cases were again linked.

10.  In  the  round,  there  has  been  procedural  irregularity,   arising
    principally from the botched grants of permission to appeal against the
    decision of Judge Buchanan, such that the only satisfactory outcome  is
    a fresh hearing of both appeals.

11. The decision of Judge Montgomery, as to the first  appellant,  and  the
    decision of Judge Buchanan, as to the second appellant, are set  aside,
    and stand only as a record of what  was  said  at  the  hearings.   The
    member or members of the FtT chosen to reconsider the case are  not  to
    include any of the judges previously involved.

12. The cases should be set down for hearing on the same  day  and  in  the
    same list.  Whether to hear them together, and whether to issue one  or
    two decisions, is for the FtT.  As Mr Forrest said,  and  as  mentioned
    above, the outcome is not inevitably the same in each  case.   However,
    they have not applied to have their cases separated, and neither  could
    sensibly be resolved without some reference to the other.

13. An anonymity direction applied in the FtT in one case but  not  in  the
    other.  The matter was not addressed in the UT,  so  this  decision  is
    anonymised.



            [pic]

           UT Judge Macleman
           Dated 1 August 2019
