
                                    [pic]

|Upper Tribunal                       |                                     |
|(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)     |Appeal number: PA/11477/2018         |
|the immigration Acts                                                        |
|                                                                            |
|Heard at:|Field House               |        |Decision & Reasons           |
|         |                          |        |Promulgated                  |
|On       |31 August 2021            |   On 2 September 2021               | |
|via Microsoft Teams                 |                                     | |
|                                                                            |
|Before                                                                      |
|Upper Tribunal Judge Gill                                                   |
|Between                                                                     |
|           |Mr M M T                                          |Appellant    |
|           |(ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)                            |             |
|                                                                            |
|And                                                                         |
|           |The Secretary of State for the Home Department    |Respondent   |

                                  Anonymity
I make an order under r.14(1) of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008 prohibiting the disclosure or publication of  any  matter  likely
to lead members of the public to identify the appellant. No report of  these
proceedings shall directly  or  indirectly  identify  him.   This  direction
applies to both the appellant and to the respondent and all  other  persons.
Failure to comply with this  direction  could  lead  to  contempt  of  court
proceedings.
I make this order because this is a protection claim.
The parties at liberty to apply to discharge this order, with reasons.

Representation:
For the appellant:         Ms A Mughal, of AMB Advocates.
For the respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Presenting Officer.

                                  Decision


 1. The appellant, a national of the Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC)
    born on 6 January 1990, appeals against a  decision  of  Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal S Gillespie (hereafter the "judge") promulgated  on
    2 April 2020 following a hearing on 21 February  2020  which  dismissed
    his appeal on asylum, humanitarian protection and human rights  grounds
    against a decision of the respondent of 13 September 2018 by which  the
    respondent refused his asylum and humanitarian  protection  claims  and
    also refused his human rights claim.

 2. The grounds (in summary) contend that the judge materially erred in law
    in reaching his adverse credibility assessment and  also  in  assessing
    the risk arising from the appellant's sur place activities.

Basis of asylum claim

 3. The appellant first arrived in the United Kingdom on 11  November  2017
    in order to attend a three-day conference in  Coventry  connected  with
    his employment with the Ministry of Fisheries and Agriculture.  He  did
    not return to the DRC immediately after the conference but remained  in
    the United Kingdom until 15 January 2018. During the period before  his
    return to the DRC on 15 January 2018, he became involved for the  first
    time in the political organisation, The Alliance of  Patriots  for  the
    Refoundation of  the  Congo  (APARECO)  and  attended  a  demonstration
    outside the DRC embassy in London. His activities in the United Kingdom
    on behalf of APARECO came to the attention of the Congolese authorities
    after he returned in January 2018. His cousin was arrested in  the  DRC
    on 15 February 2018 and tortured into telling the authorities where  he
    lived. The authorities went to look for the appellant at  his  home  at
    7.a.m. on the same day. His neighbour contacted him and told  him  what
    had happened. The soldiers found some 'small' APARECO leaflets  at  his
    home. The appellant did not return home. He fled to his  uncle's  house
    and then left Kinshasa at night on 11 March 2018. He crossed the  river
    by canoe to Congo Brazzaville.

 4. The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on 13 (or 14)  March  2018.
    Subsequent to his arrival in  the  United  Kingdom,  his  original  DRC
    passport was sent to him.

The grounds

 5. The grounds contend that the judge erred in law as follows:

     (i) Ground 1: The judge erred in his consideration of  the  appellant's
         sur place activities in that he failed to  consider  five  Facebook
         posts and 51 photographs of the appellant attending  demonstrations
         outside the DRC Embassy in London. He therefore  erred  in  finding
         (para 39) that the appellant was an ordinary member of the  APARECO
         in the United Kingdom.

      (ii)      Ground  2:  The  judge  erred  in  his  assessment  of   the
         appellant's credibility in that he erred in stating at para  10  of
         his decision that the original of the appellant's DRC passport  had
         not been produced at the hearing. In fact, the  original  had  been
         produced at the hearing and it had been examined by the judge.

     (iii)    Ground 3: In his assessment  of  the  risk  arising  from  the
         appellant's sur place activities, the judge erred (at para  29)  by
         rejecting  the  risk  arising  from  the  appellant's   sur   place
         activities on the basis that the activities had been undertaken  by
         the appellant because he needed time to prepare  his  asylum  claim
         and to engage in some form of  political  activities  in  order  to
         mount his asylum claim.

Assessment

 6. In relation to ground 2, I have the  benefit  of  a  witness  statement
    dated 5 July 2021 from Mr Bruno Augusto Kormann Rodrigues  of  Cassadys
    Solicitors. He represented the  appellant  before  the  judge.  In  his
    witness statement, he says that he distinctly recalled that the hearing
    was conducted in one of the small rooms at Taylor House and  that  when
    the issue of the passport came up in the proceedings, he  informed  the
    judge that he was in possession of the passport.  As  the  hearing  was
    being conducted in a small hearing room, he was able to reach out  with
    the passport in his hand. He handed it to the judge who  then  examined
    it. He then walked to the respondent's representative  and  handed  the
    document over to her to give her an opportunity to  inspect  it,  which
    she did following which she returned the passport to him.

 7. Mr Rodrigues was not available at the hearing before me  to  give  oral
    evidence. It appears  that,  by  the  time  the  appellant's  file  was
    received from Cassadys Solicitors on 17 August 2021, Mr  Rodrigues  had
    already undertaken other work commitments today. In the  event  that  I
    considered it necessary for Mr Rodrigues to be available to  give  oral
    evidence, Ms Mughal asked me to adjourn the hearing.

 8. Ms Mughal confirmed that she was in possession of the original  of  the
    appellant's passport. In view of the fact that the judge had stated (at
    para 25) "in the absence of [the appellant's] entire passport I am  not
    persuaded that he came back to the UK in the way he claims", I asked Ms
    Mughal to show me via Teams the entire passport, page  by  page,  which
    she then proceeded to do.

 9. Having had an opportunity to see the passport  in  that  way,  page  by
    page, I am satisfied that Ms Mughal  was  indeed  in  possession  of  a
    passport in the appellant's name, that it was a complete passport  with
    no missing pages and that page 9 of the passport had a DRC entry  stamp
    dated 15 January 2018.

10. Ms Everett informed me that she  could  see  no  reason  to  doubt  the
    evidence of Mr Rodrigues  that  he  had  handed  the  original  of  the
    passport to the judge and that the judge had examined it.

11. I am in the position where I have to choose between the evidence of  Mr
    Rodrigues and the fact that the judge stated in his decision  that  the
    original of the passport had not been produced at the hearing.

12. I bear in mind that the judge had stated clearly in his  decision  that
    the original of the passport had not been produced at the hearing.  His
    record of the proceedings  ("RoP")  made  no  mention  at  all  of  the
    passport having been produced at the hearing.

13. I considered the possibility that the passport had been produced to the
    judge but the judge had failed to record that fact in his RoP. Assuming
    that he consulted his RoP during the preparation of his decision, which
    in my view it is reasonable to assume, the fact that it  did  not  make
    any mention of the passport having been produced  may  explain  why  he
    stated that it had not been produced. On the other hand, it may also be
    the case that the RoP was silent on this point because the passport was
    not produced at the hearing, contrary to the evidence of Mr Rodrigues.

14. I concluded that I could not exclude the  possibility  that  the  judge
    simply omitted to mention  in  his  RoP  that  the  passport  had  been
    produced at the hearing and that he relied upon the fact that  his  RoP
    was silent on the point in stating in his decision  that  the  passport
    had not been produced. The decision of the judge was signed on 17 March
    2020, i.e. some 24-25 days after the hearing date. It is not known when
    he commenced preparation of his decision and therefore it is unsafe for
    me to assume that, when he prepared his decision, he would have  had  a
    clear recollection of events that had taken place at the hearing before
    him.

15. On the other hand, the  evidence  of  Mr  Rodrigues  is  clear.  He  is
    detailed in his recollection of events.

16. In all of the circumstances, I accept the  evidence  of  Mr  Rodrigues,
    notwithstanding that he was  not  available  before  me  to  give  oral
    evidence, that he was in possession of the original of the  appellant's
    passport at the hearing before  the  judge,  that  he  had  handed  the
    passport to the judge  and  that  the  judge  had  examined  it.  I  am
    therefore satisfied that the judge had simply made a  mistake  when  he
    stated in his decision that the passport had not been produced.

17. I am therefore satisfied that the judge did err in law in  stating,  at
    paras 10 and 25, that the appellant's passport had not  been  submitted
    in evidence.

18. Ms Everett accepted that this error was material to the outcome.  I  am
    satisfied that it was material to the outcome.

19. Ground 2 is therefore established. For the reasons given above,  I  set
    aside the judge's entire decision. None of the findings of  fact  shall
    stand.

20. Credibility will therefore need to be re-assessed. It is not  necessary
    for me to consider grounds 1 and 3. This is  because  the  future  risk
    will need to be re-assessed following a re-assessment on the merits  of
    the credibility of the appellant's account of the basis of  his  asylum
    claim. At that stage, his sur place activities  will  fall  to  be  re-
    assessed on the merits and taken into account in the assessment of  the
    future risk.

21. The final issue is whether this appeal should be remitted to the First-
    tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing.

22. Given that credibility needs to be re-assessed afresh and that this  is
    a protection claim, it is plain that this case falls within para 7.2(a)
    of the Practice Statements for the Immigration and Asylum  Chambers  of
    the First-tier Tribunal and the Upper Tribunal.

23. I take into account that the hearing before the judge  was  the  second
    time this appeal has been heard in  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  It  was
    first heard by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Sangha  on  3  December
    2018. His decision was set aside by Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge  Jordan
    in a decision promulgated on 2 September 2019 and the  appeal  remitted
    to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing on the merits.

24. I do not agree that this is a complicated case such that  the  decision
    on the appeal should be re-made in the Upper Tribunal. The  appellant's
    account of the basis of his asylum claim is not complicated.  The  fact
    that two judges of the First-tier Tribunal have had their decisions set
    aside does not, in itself, mean that the  case  is  complicated.  Judge
    Jordan found that Judge Sangha had materially erred in law  by  failing
    to indicate  what  he  made  of  documentary  evidence  that  had  been
    submitted in support of the appellant's asylum claim.  I  am  satisfied
    that the judge had materially erred in law in stating that the original
    of the appellant's passport was not produced. These are  simple  errors
    that  have  no  material  bearing  on  whether  or  not  the  case   is
    complicated.

25. If the decision on the appellant's  appeal  is  re-made  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal, the appellant will be nearer to a  resolution  of  his  case,
    whether that is favourable to him or not. However, he will be  deprived
    of an opportunity  to  challenge  an  adverse  decision  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal, if the decision is adverse. He should not be lightly deprived
    of that opportunity, given that two judges of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    have made adverse credibility assessments against him.

26. In all of the circumstances, I have concluded  that  fairness  requires
    that the appeal be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a hearing on
    the merits on all issues.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the  making  of  errors  on
points of law such that the decision is set  aside  in  its  entirety.  This
appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a hearing  on  the  merits
on all issues by a judge other than Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Sangha
and Judge of the First-tier Tribunal S Gillespie.


Upper Tribunal Judge Gill                        Date: 31 August 2021


        _____________________________________________________________

                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS

1. A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must  make  a
written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any  such  application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:

2. Where the person who appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).

 3. Where the person making  the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).

4. Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is  outside  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if the notice  of
decision is sent electronically).

5. A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or  a  Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.

6.  The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on  the  covering
letter or covering email
