
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11782/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Cardiff Civil Justice Centre|Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 23 May 2019                       |On 13 June 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                                    ANAa
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms M Bayoumi, instructed by Qualified Legal
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Howells, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008  (SI  2008/2698)  I  make  an  anonymity  order  prohibiting   the
    disclosure or publication of any matter likely to lead  to  members  of
    the public identifying the appellant.  A failure to  comply  with  this
    direction could lead to Contempt of Court proceedings.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Yemen who was born on  15  January  1992.
    He entered the United Kingdom on 19 November 2008 when he  was  granted
    indefinite leave to enter.

 3. On 27 May 2016, he was convicted of a sexual assault on a female at the
    Cardiff Crown Court and sentenced on 12 August  2016  to  three  years'
    imprisonment.

 4. On 2 September 2016, he was notified that he was liable to be  deported
    as a foreign criminal.  On 22 November 2016, representations were  made
    on  his  behalf  as  to  why  he  should  not   be   deported.    Those
    representations included a claim for  asylum.   Following  a  screening
    interview and asylum interview, on 19 June 2017 he  was  notified  that
    the Secretary of State was minded to apply  s.72  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (the "NIA Act 2002") to  the  appellant
    on the basis that he had committed a  particularly  serious  crime  and
    constituted a danger to the community.

 5. A deportation order was signed against  the  appellant  on  28  October
    2017.   On  31 October  2017,  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the
    appellant's claims for asylum, humanitarian protection  and  under  the
    ECHR.  In addition, the Secretary of State  certified  the  appellant's
    asylum claim under s.72 of the NIA Act 2002.

 6. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In a  determination
    sent  on  1 February  2018,  Judge  Suffield-Thompson  dismissed  the
    appellant's appeal on all  grounds.   First,  she  upheld  the  judge's
    certification under s.72 on  the  basis  that  the  appellant  had  not
    rebutted the presumption  that  he  was  a  danger  to  the  community.
    Secondly, she concluded that the appellant could not establish that  he
    was entitled to humanitarian protection as the required risk under  Art
    15(c) of the Qualification Directive did not exist in areas of Yemen to
    which it would not  be  unduly  harsh  for  him  to  return  and  live.
    Finally, the judge dismissed the appellant's appeal under Art 8 of  the
    ECHR, concluding that it would  not  be  disproportionate  for  him  to
    return to Yemen.  Although the judge  also  dismissed  the  appellant's
    appeal under Arts 2 and 3 of the ECHR, she made no specific findings in
    relation to them.

 7. The appellant was granted permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal by
    the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Hodgkinson) on 6 March 2018 on the basis
    that the judge had arguably failed properly to consider the appellant's
    claims under Arts 2, 3 and 8 of the ECHR.

 8. At an initial hearing before the Upper Tribunal, UTJ Rintoul  concluded
    that the First-tier Tribunal's decision had involved an error  of  law,
    in that the judge had failed properly to consider the appellant's claim
    under Arts 3 and 8 of the ECHR.  As a consequence,  he  set  aside  the
    First-tier Tribunal's decision and adjourned the appeal for  a  resumed
    hearing in which the Upper  Tribunal  would  remake  the  decisions  in
    respect of Arts 3 and 8.  That resumed hearing was listed before me  on
    23 May 2019.

 9. At that hearing, Mr Howells, who represented the  Secretary  of  State,
    conceded that the appellant was entitled to succeed under Art 3 of  the
    ECHR.  He made that concession on the basis of the Secretary of State's
    position in relation to the risk on return to Yemen set out in the CPIN
    Report for January 2019 at para 2.3.12 that  the  conditions  in  Yemen
    breached Art 15(b) of the  Qualification  Directive  which  Mr  Howells
    acknowledged mirrored the requirements  of  Art  3  of  the  ECHR.   In
    addition, he accepted that the new bundle of evidence submitted for the
    hearing contained  evidence  relating  to  the  financial  position  of
    relatives in the UK which, he accepted, demonstrated  that  they  would
    not be able to provide necessary financial support to the appellant  in
    Yemen.  Mr Howells accepted, therefore, that on the  basis  of  current
    circumstances in Yemen, the appellant's deportation would breach Art  3
    and he invited me to allow the appeal  on  that  basis.   In  addition,
    following some discussion, Mr Howells also accepted that I should allow
    the appeal under Art 8 on  the  basis  that  a  breach  of  Art  8  was
    established for the very same reasons that he  conceded  the  appellant
    succeeded under Art 3.

10. Mr Howells pointed out that the Secretary of State would  now  consider
    what period of leave to grant the appellant and that the  Secretary  of
    State's concession in these proceedings did  not  preclude  deportation
    proceedings in the future should the position in Yemen change.

11. On behalf of the appellant, Ms Bayoumi indicated that she  was  content
    that the appeal should be allowed on this basis under Arts 3 and  8  of
    the ECHR.

Decision

12. Accordingly, the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  having  been  set
    aside by UTJ Rintoul in his decision  sent  on  10  September  2018,  I
    remake the decision allowing the appellant's appeal under Arts 3 and  8
    of the ECHR.

13. The First-tier Tribunal's decision to dismiss the appellant's appeal on
    asylum and humanitarian protection grounds stands.


                                                                      Signed
                                                                       [pic]
                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                                                11 June 2019
