
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/11769/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11 December 2018                  |On 5 February 2019                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CONWAY


                                   Between

                                     WM
                           (Anonymity Order Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Mustafa of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Kandola, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka born in 1970.  He is Sinhalese.



 2. He appealed against a decision of the respondent  made  on  31  October
    2017 to refuse his claim for asylum.

 3. The basis of his claim is that  he  was  a  sergeant  in  the  security
    division looking after the President and his family.  At the request of
    a friend in 2007 he facilitated meetings between a group of Tamils  who
    lived in Malaysia and the President's son.  The Tamils wished to invest
    in a golf course and hotel estate. Although he  arranged  meetings  the
    appellant eventually lost interest in the project as it was taking  too
    long.

 4. In 2009 he resigned from the army.  About a year later, in 2010, he was
    detained by the CID who accused him of working for the  LTTE.   He  was
    released some ten days later and told by the CID to leave  the  country
    or he would be killed.

 5. The application was refused as lacking in credibility.

 6. He appealed.

First-tier Hearing

 7. Following a hearing at Taylor House on 31 July 2018 Judge of the First-
    tier Tribunal Aujla dismissed the appeal.

 8. His findings are at paragraph [28] ff.  In summary, first  noting  that
    the events started in 2007 when the conflict  between  the  authorities
    and Tamils was at its height, and only two years before the  LTTE  were
    finally eliminated, it was not accepted that his Tamil  friends  "would
    be interested in investing funds at that time" [29].

 9. Second, it was not credible that the  appellant  would  compromise  his
    position and put himself at risk as an army sergeant and  a  person  in
    charge of protecting the President and his family by allowing access to
    them by Tamils.  They may not have been genuine  investors  but  people
    who wished harm to the President [30].

10. Third, following release from custody he did not leave  Sri  Lanka  for
    seven months during which time he had no problems.  Also, he  was  able
    to exit via the airport through proper immigration controls on his  own
    passport.  If he had been recorded as an absconder following payment of
    a bribe, such lack of difficulty was not credible [31].

11. Fourth, he overstayed his student  visa  and  delayed  for  five  years
    before claiming asylum [32].

12. Finally, what purported to be court documents from proceedings  in  Sri
    Lanka soon after he arrived in the UK in 2011 were not produced to  the
    respondent until much later [33].

13. He sought permission to appeal which was granted on 2 November 2018.



Error of Law Hearing

14. At the error of law hearing Mr Mustafa focused on two  points.   First,
    documentary evidence  from  the  Magistrates  Court  in  Colombo  which
    included an arrest warrant had been produced  to  the  respondent.   An
    earlier hearing before the First tier Tribunal had  been  adjourned  at
    the respondent's request to carry  out  verification  checks  on  these
    documents but the respondent failed to do so.  Case law indicated  that
    having failed in her legal duty to verify the documents the effect  was
    that for the purpose of the hearing the authenticity of  the  documents
    could not be disputed.  The further consequence  was  that  the  arrest
    warrant would mean the appellant will be on a wanted list and would  be
    at risk of arrest on return.

15. The other main point made by Mr Mustafa was that the  judge  failed  to
    have  regard  to  material  aspects  of   the   appellant's   evidence,
    particularly in his witness statement, about his ability to  leave  Sri
    Lanka through the airport by way of an  agent  and  corrupt  officials.
    That corruption is widespread is clear from  the  background  material.
    It was also not his evidence that he had been living at home and moving
    about freely before his exit.

16. Mr Kandola's brief response was in line with that in the rule 24 reply,
    namely, that the judge directed himself appropriately and gave adequate
    reasons for  finding  the  account  not  credible.   He  gave  adequate
    consideration to the documentary evidence in line with  the  principles
    in Tanveer Ahmed.

Consideration

17. I do not find merit in the submission about the non-verification of the
    purported court documents. It is not apparent from  the  submission  by
    the  appellant's  then  representative,  recorded  (at  [24])  of   the
    decision, that this issue was raised before the First-tier Judge.   Nor
    is it mentioned in the skeleton  argument  lodged  for  the  first-tier
    hearing  or  in  the  record  of  proceedings.   The  judge  cannot  be
    criticised for failing to deal with  an  issue  which  was  not  raised
    before him.

18. However, I do find merit in the submission that  the  judge  failed  to
    have regard to material aspects of the appellant's evidence.   At  [31]
    the judge found that the appellant did not leave  Sri  Lanka  for  over
    seven months after his release during which he had no problems from the
    authorities.  He went on: "Not only that, he  was  able  to  leave  the
    country through the proper immigration channels  on  his  own  properly
    issued passport without any problems. If the appellant were recorded as
    an absconder from detention and suspected of supporting the LTTE, I  do
    not for a moment find it plausible that the authorities would not  have
    gone to his house to pick him up or at least detain him at the  airport
    since it is reasonably likely to assume that his name would  have  been
    on a stop list.  The fact that the appellant was able to move freely in
    the country and then leave the country  without  any  problems  further
    undermined the  credibility  of  his  account  that  he  was  arrested,
    detained and released with payment of a bribe."

19. The problem is that in his witness statement (31  July  2018)  he  said
    that he did not stay at home but at a mine owned by a friend because no
    one was there, and that he only went out once with the agent to  submit
    his visa application (at para 17). Moreover, in  respect  of  his  exit
    through the airport he stated that once he got the visa the agent  took
    him in his vehicle with the immigration officer who was in the  vehicle
    as well.  The statement continues: "Before the airport, there were some
    checkpoints outside of the airport  (2  air  force  checkpoints).   The
    Immigration Officer showed his ID.  We were allowed to go.  Inside  the
    airport the immigration officer came with me ... He said  something  to
    the officer at the counter and my passport  was  stamped.   He  himself
    brought me up to the boarding area and put me on the plane."

20. He said much the same at his asylum interview on 12  October  2017  (eg
    Q48,59,60).

21. In GJ and Others (post-civil war: returnees) Sri Lanka CG  [2013]  UKUT
    319 the Upper Tribunal noted that bribery and corruption was  pervasive
    in Sri Lanka (see [394]).

22. It is not necessary for me to examine in further detail the grounds  of
    the application. I am satisfied that the judge's failure to have regard
    to relevant evidence on matters which were central to his claim  was  a
    material error of law. The findings made by the judge  are  unsafe  and
    should not be allowed  to  stand.   The  decision  of  the  First  tier
    Tribunal is accordingly set aside.

    Decision

23. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.   The  nature  of
    the case is such that it is appropriate  under  section  12(2)  of  the
    Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 and Practice  Statement  7.2
    to remit to the First-tier Tribunal for an entirely fresh hearing.   No
    findings are preserved. The member(s) of the First-tier Tribunal chosen
    to consider the case are not to include Judge Aujla.

    An anonymity order is made.  Unless  and  until  a  tribunal  or  court
    otherwise directs, the appellant  is  granted  anonymity.   Failure  to
    comply with this order could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                             Date 29 January 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Conway

