
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11291/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 18 April 2018                              |On 4 May 2018                 |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                                     FA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Sandhu of Montague Solicitors LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008  (SI  2008/2698)  I  make  an  anonymity  order  prohibiting   the
    disclosure or publication of any matter likely to lead  to  members  of
    the public identifying the appellant.  A failure to  comply  with  this
    direction could lead to Contempt of Court proceedings.





Background

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Turkey, of  Kurdish  ethnicity,  who  was
    born on [ ] 1983.

 3. The appellant claims to have entered the United Kingdom on  27  January
    2013 using a false Bulgarian passport.

 4. On 16 December 2013, the appellant was  encountered  at  a  residential
    property owned by his father and was served with notice IS151A that  he
    was subject to removal as an illegal entrant.

 5. On 6 January 2014, an application was  made  in  the  appellant's  name
    (FLR(O)) for leave outside the Rules.  That application was refused  on
    19 February 2014 with no right of appeal.  On 1 April 2014, a  judicial
    review claim was lodged challenging the legality of that  decision  but
    permission was refused on 10 December 2014.

 6. On 30 January 2015, the appellant lodged an asylum claim.   That  claim
    was withdrawn on 11 March 2015.

 7. The appellant was in detention and sought voluntary return  to  Turkey.
    On 28 April 2015, the appellant was placed on a flight to Turkey.

 8. Further representations were made and the appellant's claim  reinstated
    and he was returned to the UK.

 9. On 14 October 2017, the Secretary  of  State  refused  the  appellant's
    claims for asylum, humanitarian protection and on human rights grounds.



The Appeal

10. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In a  determination
    sent on 15 January 2018, Judge J J  Callow  dismissed  the  appellant's
    appeal on all grounds.

11. Whilst the judge accepted that the appellant was of  Turkish  ethnicity
    and a supporter of the HDP Party in Turkey, he  found  the  appellant's
    account not to be credible.  He did not accept that the  appellant  had
    been  politically  active  by  taking  part   in   demonstrations   and
    distributing leaflets and had been detained and tortured by the Turkish
    authorities and also that he had  been  assaulted  and  ill-treated  by
    political opponents in Turkey.  The judge found that the appellant  had
    fabricated his claim and that he was, as a consequence, not at risk  on
    return to Turkey.

12. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  On  6
    February 2018, the First-tier Tribunal  (Judge  Cruthers)  granted  the
    appellant permission to appeal.

The Judge's Decision

13. Before Judge Callow, the appellant, his father and  partner  gave  oral
    evidence.

14. At para 18 of his determination, Judge  Callow  set  out  his  ultimate
    finding, namely that  he  made  an  "adverse  finding  of  credibility"
    against the appellant having considered all the evidence in the  round.



15. At para 19,  Judge  Callow  relied  upon  the  appellant's  immigration
    history, in particular that he had not claimed asylum until he had been
    encountered as an illegal entrant in  December  2013.   Further,  Judge
    Callow also took into account that the appellant had,  in  March  2015,
    withdrawn his asylum claim and had  voluntarily  agreed  to  return  to
    Turkey - which in fact he did.

16. Judge Callow said this at para 19:

         "The appellant's immigration  history  is  not  consistent  with  a
         genuine fear of persecution in Turkey.  In the first  instance  the
         appellant did not claim asylum until after he had been  encountered
         as an illegal entrant  to  the  UK.   Had  he  been  identified  as
         politically active  and  had  an  adverse  political  opinion  been
         imputed to him, or had  he  feared  such  imputation  or  otherwise
         entertained a genuine fear of persecution, it is not credible  that
         he would not have brought an asylum claim  other  than  as  a  last
         resort and  after  agreeing  to  voluntarily  return  to  his  home
         country.  Notwithstanding the fact of having  made  an  application
         for leave to remain essentially founded on grounds  of  asylum,  it
         defies belief that the appellant would claim that this  application
         was not made and if it was made, despite being countersigned by the
         appellant's father who met the costs  thereof,  that  it  was  only
         after he had voluntarily agreed to return to Turkey that a  renewed
         claim was in fact made in April 2015".

17. Judge Callow returned to this issue at para 23 as follows:

         "The appellant's immigration  history  is  not  consistent  with  a
         genuine fear of persecution in Turkey.  In the first  instance  the
         appellant did not claim asylum until after he had been  encountered
         as an illegal entrant  to  the  UK.   Had  he  been  identified  as
         politically active  and  had  an  adverse  political  opinion  been
         imputed to him, or had  he  feared  such  imputation  or  otherwise
         entertained a genuine fear of persecution, it is not credible  that
         he would not have brought an asylum claim  other  than  as  a  last
         resort and  after  agreeing  to  voluntarily  return  to  his  home
         country".

18. In his evidence, the appellant claimed to  have  no  knowledge  of  the
    application made in January 2014 on his behalf in which he first raised
    his asylum claim.  The judge set this evidence out at  para  9  of  his
    determination as follows:

         "While he accepted that he had not immediately  claimed  asylum  on
         arrival in the UK and only did so after he had been arrested as  an
         illegal entrant, this was because of advice that it was best not to
         do so straight away as there was a high risk of being detained  and
         returned to Turkey".

19. In other words, he sought to blame his previous legal representatives.

20. The appellant's father, in his oral evidence, stated that he was  aware
    of the application and had indeed paid for  it  (see  para  10  of  the
    determination).

21.  At  para  20  of  his  determination,  Judge  Callow  dealt  with  the
    appellant's evidence blaming his former representatives as follows:

         "As the appeal is based in part on an allegation about the  conduct
         of a former representative,  it  is  noted  that  contrary  to  the
         guidance in BT (Former solicitors' alleged misconduct) Nepal [2004]
         UKIAT  00311  there  has  been  no   evidence   that   the   former
         representatives  made  an  application  without   the   appellant's
         approval and knowledge.  The complaint does not appear to have been
         put to the  former  representatives.   Certainly,  no  evidence  of
         correspondence addressed to the  former  representatives  has  been
         tendered in evidence.  In all the circumstances a finding  of  fact
         based on an allegation against  former  representatives  cannot  be
         made in the present appeal".

22. At para 21, the judge dealt with a rule 35 report prepared by Dr Jabbar
    whilst the appellant was in detention and dated 25 April 2015 (at pages
    12-14 of the appellant's bundle) as follows:

         "No weight is attached to Dr Jabbar's very  brief  medical  report.
         Aside from the fact that it is the function  of  this  tribunal  to
         consider the plausibility of an asylum claim, the  details  of  the
         scars seen  by  the  doctor  are  inconsistent  with  the  injuries
         described by the appellant in making his asylum claim.   In  making
         his  asylum  claim  he  claimed  that  he  had  been  sprayed  with
         pressurised cold water and  subjected  to  falaka.   In  a  further
         incident when he was assaulted by nationalists, he felt burning  on
         his sides and was hit on his arms with something  sharp.   None  of
         the foregoing bears a resemblance to the details  of  the  doctor's
         physical examination of the appellant - a 2cm scar on the bridge of
         the nose, a circular mark due to cigarette burns on the right hand,
         two separate scars on the lower stomach and multiple scars  on  the
         lower right leg and two scars on the back of his left  arm  in  the
         vicinity of the elbow".

23. Then, at para 22 Judge Callow, whilst accepting that the appellant  was
    a member of HDP, a political party in Turkey, he noted the  absence  of
    any supporting evidence from the  appellant's  mother  and  friends  as
    follows:

         "Whilst it has been accepted that the appellant is a member of HDP,
         a recognised political party in Turkey, it has not been shown  that
         the events which led to the  appellant  leaving  Turkey  have  been
         established.  While I am sensitive to the fact  that  a  claim  for
         asylum does not require corroboration,  it  could  reasonably  have
         been  expected  of  the  appellant  that  he  would  have  obtained
         supporting evidence from his mother and friends.  If the  incidents
         had occurred and not least of all had enquiries been made about his
         whereabouts, he could have obtained statements from his mother  and
         friends confirming such information.   This  evidence  was  readily
         available, but has not  been  produced.   The  failure  to  provide
         evidence that the appellant is being sought without explanation  is
         a factor of weight where there are  doubts  about  the  appellant's
         credibility: TK (Burundi) [2009] EWCA Civ 40; [2009] Imm  AR  3  at
         488".

24. Finally, at para 24 the judge stated his ultimate finding, namely  that
    the appellant's account was not credible and that he had  fabricated  a
    claim:

         "The cumulative effect of these considerations  is  such  that  the
         appellant's account of political activity, and  of  the  consequent
         adverse interest in him of the authorities and  other  parties,  is
         not credible.  I find that the appellant has fabricated his claim".

Discussion

25. Mr Sandhu, who represented the appellant, relied on a number of  points
    derived from the grounds of appeal which,  he  submitted,  demonstrated
    that the judge had materially erred in  law  in  reaching  his  adverse
    credibility finding and that his decision could not stand.

26. First, he submitted that the judge had placed  undue  weight  upon  the
    appellant's immigration history.

27. Mr Kotas, who represented the Secretary of State,  submitted  that  the
    appellant's immigration history was clearly relevant in that he had not
    claimed asylum until he had been encountered and served with notice  as
    an illegal entrant.  That was clearly relevant to his credibility under
    s.8(5) of the Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of Claimants, etc.) Act
    2004.

28. I accept Mr Kotas' submission on this point.  Plainly, the  appellant's
    failure to claim asylum  until  after  he  had  been  notified  of  the
    decision that he was liable to be removed as an illegal entrant,  which
    was in December 2003, fell within s.8(5), namely that:

         "This section also applies to failure by the claimant  to  make  an
         asylum claim or human rights claim before  being  notified  of  the
         immigration decision, unless the claim  relies  wholly  on  matters
         arising after the notification".

29. The effect of s.8 of the 2004 Act applying is  set  out  in  s.8(1)  as
    follows:

         "In determining whether to believe a statement made by or on behalf
         of a person who makes an asylum claim or a human  rights  claim,  a
         deciding authority shall take account, as damaging  the  claimant's
         credibility, of any behaviour to which this section applies".

30. Providing that the whole of  an  individual's  circumstances,  and  the
    evidence, are considered,  the  appellant's  failure  to  claim  asylum
    earlier was potentially damaging of his credibility (see JT  (Cameroon)
    v SSHD [2008] EWCA Civ 878).

31. It is readily evident from the judge's reasoning at paras  18-24,  that
    he did not rely solely upon the appellant's  failure  to  claim  asylum
    earlier.

32. The judge dealt with the appellant's evidence that he had not made  the
    claim in January 2014 and that it was done  without  his  authority  by
    solicitors at para 20.  There  was  no  supporting  evidence  of  their
    misconduct.  Indeed, as I have already  pointed  out,  the  appellant's
    father was aware of the application and paid for it.

33. In any event, even if the appellant  had  not  raised  his  persecution
    claim in the context of that application made on 6 January 2014, on his
    evidence, he would not have raised it until twelve months later when he
    lodged an asylum claim on 30 January 2015.  That would, with even  more
    force, engage the effect of s.8 of the 2004 Act.

34. Mr Kotas also drew my attention to the  fact  that  the  appellant  had
    voluntarily sought return to Turkey  following  refusal  of  his  claim
    outside the Rules and subsequent unsuccessful  judicial  review  claim.
    Further, his claim on 30 January 2015 for asylum had been withdrawn  on
    11 March 2015.  He had returned to Tukey in April  2015.    Whilst  the
    appellant claimed he had been misadvised, as  I  have  already  pointed
    out, the judge dealt with this perfectly properly in para  20  and,  in
    the absence of any supporting evidence,  was  entitled  to  reject  the
    appellant's explanation.  This aspect of the  appellant's  "immigration
    history" was also relevant to his credibility and, as the judge pointed
    out in para 23, whether he "entertained a genuine fear of persecution".



35. Consequently, I reject this ground of appeal.

36. Secondly, Mr Sandhu submitted that the judge's treatment of Dr Jabbar's
    rule 35 report, at para 21 of his determination,  was  inadequate.   He
    submitted that the appellant's evidence of  torture  was  not,  as  the
    judge stated, inconsistent with the identified scars on the appellant's
    body.   He  referred  me  to  the  evidence  at  question  139  of  the
    appellant's asylum interview (page C14 of the respondent's bundle)  and
    also question 166 where, in addition to being subjected to  pressurised
    cold-water sprays and falaka by the Turkish authorities, the  appellant
    claimed that he  had  suffered  burning  when  assaulted  by  political
    opponents.

37. The rule 35 report (which is at pages 12-14 of the appellant's  bundle)
    is brief.  In section C, Dr Jabbar confirms that:

         "I have concerns that this detainee may have  been  the  victim  of
         torture".

38. Then, in section 5 he states:

         "[The appellant] states that he was tortured in Turkey in  2012  by
         the  Turkish  police  as  he  is  Kurdish  and  was   part   of   a
         demonstration.  He was taken to  the  police  station  and  he  was
         beaten with hot blunt instruments overnight.  He has scars.

         Since then he is unable to sleep and gets flashbacks of the events.
          We have referred him to our inhouse mental  health  team.   He  is
         also getting migraines and tension  type  headaches  which  we  are
         treating.

         His account is plausible".

39. Then at page 14, on two pictorial  depictions  of  the  human  body,  a
    number of scars/marks are highlighted.  The only one referring  to  any
    potential cause is on the right arm where it is stated: "circular marks
    due to cig burns".

40. Mr Kotas submitted that the rule 35 report was not the equivalent of  a
    medical report which was Istanbul Protocol compliant.  It  only  stated
    that the appellant "may" have been the victim of torture.

41. I accept that submission.  The report is clearly not Istanbul  Protocol
    compliant.  It goes no further than stating that  the  appellant  "may"
    have been the victim of torture.  Together  with,  of  course,  stating
    that his account is "plausible" based upon what the appellant  told  Dr
    Jabbar.  It is worth noting that as recorded, and as  I  have  set  out
    above, the account given by the appellant  does  not  square  with  his
    evidence before the judge, in that the appellant did not claim that  he
    was "beaten with hot blunt instruments" by the police.  His account (as
    set out in para 6 of the determination) was that he had been subject to
    pressurised cold-water spray and falaka by the police.   The  reference
    to him feeling "burning on his  sides"  was  to  an  incident  that  he
    claimed occurred later, on 20 December 2012, when he was  accosted  and
    assaulted by political opponents.

42. Whilst it may be  that  Judge  Callow  understated  the  weight  to  be
    attached to Dr Jabbar's report,  namely  that  "no  weight"  should  be
    attached to it - given its brevity and the fact that apart from a  mark
    being attributed to a cigarette burn - the report offers no  basis  for
    concluded a  causal  connection  existed  between  what  the  appellant
    claimed ill-treatment on the two occasions he  was  assaulted  and  his
    injuries.  It was, self-evidently, not  consistent  with  the  approach
    required under the Istanbul Protocol because, of course, it was  not  a
    medical report produced for the purposes of litigation.  It was a  rule
    35 report relevant to  whether  the  appellant  could  continue  to  be
    detained.  Its form and substance reflected  that  underlying  purpose.
    Whilst, therefore, it was capable  of  being  independent  evidence  of
    torture, I am not satisfied that the judge's treatment of it in para 21
    amounted to an error of law.  The report provided no significant weight
    in favour of the appellant's claim and, in particular, his credibility.



43. Thirdly, Mr Sandhu submitted that the judge had been wrong to take into
    account, in para 22 of his determination, that there was no  supporting
    evidence from the appellant's mother and friends.

44. That argument is, in my judgment,  wholly  unsustainable.   The  judge,
    correctly, recognised that  the  appellant  did  not  have  to  provide
    "corroboration".  Nevertheless, given that part of his claim  was  that
    his mother had told  him,  since  his  arrival  in  the  UK,  that  the
    authorities had been looking for him at his home (see  para  9  setting
    out his oral evidence), it was properly open to the judge to take  into
    account in assessing whether he believed, at least that aspect  of  his
    claim, that evidence which could have readily been made available  was,
    in fact, not produced (see TK (Burundi) v SSHD [2009] EWCA  Civ  40  at
    [10]).   Consequently, I also reject this ground.

45. For these reasons, I reject the grounds of  appeal.    I  am  satisfied
    that the judge did not materially err in law in  reaching  his  adverse
    credibility finding.

46. Finally, in the grounds of appeal it is contended that the judge failed
    to properly consider the "risk factors" set  out  in  IK  (Returnees  -
    Records - IFA) Turkey CG [2004] UKIAT 00312.  The factors are  set  out
    in [14] of IK which is set out at para 10 of the grounds.   Mr  Sandhu,
    in his oral submissions, did not press this ground of  appeal.   In  my
    judgment, he was correct not to do so.  Having found the appellant  not
    to be credible and having rejected his account as a fabrication,  there
    was no basis for concluding that the appellant would be at  risk  based
    upon his support of HDP and that he is a Kurd.

47. In fact, the judge dealt with this issue at para 25 as follows:

         "The issue of treatment of Kurds remains as sensitive today  as  it
         was at the time of promulgation of the decision in IK (Returnees  -
         Records - IFA) Turkey CG [2004] UKIAT 00312, a decision  which  was
         not referred to at the hearing of  the  appeal.   However,  as  his
         claim for asylum has not been established he will not be at risk on
         return to Turkey.  In the absence of an adverse profile in  Turkey,
         he will not be of any interest to the authorities on return".

48. It does not seem that the appellant's legal  representatives,  then  as
    now Montague Solicitors, relied upon IK before Judge Callow.  The judge
    was certainly not referred to that decision at  the  hearing.   In  any
    event,  the  appellant's  claim  to  be  at  risk,  given  the  adverse
    credibility finding, was simply unsustainable.

Decision

49. For the above reasons, the First-tier Tribunal's  decision  to  dismiss
    the appellant's appeal did not involve the making of an error  of  law.
    The decision stands.

50. Accordingly, the appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.






                                                                      Signed
                                                                       [pic]
                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                                                  2 May 2018
