
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11717/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 13 February 2019                    |On 28 February 2019                  |
|                                              |


                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

                                   Between

                                     J M
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr K Scott, Pickup Scott Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms C Cunha, Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS


1.   The appellant, a citizen of Kenya,  has  permission  to  challenge  the
    decision of Judge NMK Lawrence of the First-tier Tribunal (FtT) sent on
    18 December 2018 dismissing her appeal against a decision made  by  the
    respondent on 20 September 2018 refusing her protection claim.

2.   The basis of her claim was two pronged.  She claimed she  would  be  at
    risk on return first because she would again be targeted  by  the  same
    individuals who had harmed her in Kenya and second because  she  would,
    having been subsequently trafficked to the UK, she would be at risk  of
    re-trafficking.

3.   I can be  brief  in  stating  my  decision  as  both  parties  were  in
    agreement that the judge's treatment of the issue of the credibility of
    the appellant's account was vitiated by legal error.  At  paragraph  27
    the judge stated:

         "In my analysis, to the lower standard, the  appellant's  claim  is
         based on fantasy and it does not possess the smallest  fraction  of
         an atom of a grain of truth.  Consequently, I find I am  unable  to
         attach much weight to the "TO WHOM IT MAY CONCERN" letter, at  page
         20 of "App 1"."

4.   And at paragraph 37 he said:

         "The respondent appears to have accepted  that  the  appellant  was
         trafficked to the UK (see: para 18 of the  respondent's  DECISION).
         On the evidence before me I find her credibility has  been  damaged
         to such an extent I find she  has  not  been  trafficked.   In  any
         event, there is sufficiency of protection."

5.   Juxtaposition of these two paragraphs points up the acute problem  that
    the judge failed to consider the appellant's asylum claim  holistically
    and in deciding on the  appellant's  credibility  failed  to  take  any
    account whatsoever of the reasons given by the respondent for endorsing
    the NRM conclusion that the appellant had been trafficked.  It does not
    appear that the judge paid any attention to the NRM  decision.   If  he
    had, he would have seen that they considered her account internally and
    externally consistent.  That is not to say that, had he  taken  account
    of the NRM and respondent's views on this issue, he  would  necessarily
    have come to a different view, but he clearly could not have  continued
    to propound the absolutist statement of paragraph 27.

6.   I am satisfied that the judge's error was material.   Although  he  did
    venture a finding in the alternative  -  that  the  appellant  even  if
    accepted as credible would have available state  protection  either  in
    her home area or through internal relocation see paragraphs 37 and 42 -
    there was no consideration of the risk of re-trafficking.

7.   Given the manifest error it is unnecessary to address  the  appellants'
    other grounds.  The decision is set aside.  I see no alternative to the
    case being remitted to the FtT.

8.   The parties sought clarification as to whether the remittal  should  be
    for a de novo hearing in every respect.

9.   In view of the centrality to the  appellant's  case  is  the  issue  of
    credibility, I direct that the next hearing  deal  with  the  facts  de
    novo.  However, in relation to the Article 8 claim I would record  that
    I see no real dispute between the parties as to the basic  particulars;
    it is accepted as I understand matters  that  the  appellant  is  in  a
    family life relationship with Mr Paul  Hammond.  The  issue  concerning
    Article 8 is principally about how these accepted particulars are to be
    evaluated.

10.  For the above reasons:

    The decision of the judge is set aside for material error of law.


    The case is remitted to the FtT (not before Judge NMK Lawrence)  for  a
    de novo hearing.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                                  Date: 25 February 2019
               [pic]

Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal


