
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: PA/11610/2017
                                                               PA/11612/2017
                                                               PA/11613/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 23 January 2019                            |On 13 February 2019           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                            t k (first appellant)
                           n d (second appellant)
                            v k (third appellant)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellants and to the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr R Spurling, Counsel, instructed by Nag Law
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is a challenge by the three Appellants  against  the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Hussain  (the  judge),  promulgated  on  18
    December  2018,  in  which  he  dismissed  their  appeals  against  the
    Respondent's refusal of their protection and human rights claims, dated
    1 November 2017.

 2. Put briefly, the first Appellant's claim was that in 2009 he  had  been
    travelling back from work with a Tamil colleague when  they  were  both
    stopped at an army checkpoint.  They were  briefly  detained  and  then
    allowed to go.  Subsequently, the first Appellant was  visited  by  the
    authorities at home and taken for questioning about his work colleague.
     He was  released  on  the  same  day.   Following  this  incident  the
    Appellant made a complaint to the Human Rights Commission and  then  to
    the Lessons Learned and Reconciliation Commission (LLRC).  Having taken
    this step the  Appellant  received  threatening  phone  calls  and  was
    attacked by individuals on the street.  He came to the  United  Kingdom
    in February 2011 but did not make his claim to the Respondent until May
    2017.  He asserted that his complaint to the LLRC resulted in an arrest
    warrant being issued against him in  Sri  Lanka.   These  circumstances
    would place him at risk, in particular within the category set  out  at
    paragraph 356(7)(c) of GJ and others (post-civil  war:  returnees)  Sri
    Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC).




The judge's decision

 3. At [30] the judge identified what he saw  as  the  core  issue  in  the
    appeal, namely whether or not the Appellant had given evidence  to  the
    "Truth and Reconciliation Commission", and whether he was  the  subject
    of an arrest warrant.  The judge's findings and reasons are set out  in
    [31]-[40].

 4. In summary,  the  judge  did  not  accept  the  core  elements  of  the
    Appellant's account.  On that basis the first  Appellant's  appeal  was
    dismissed and it followed that the appeals of his wife and their  young
    child also failed.




The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

 5. There are three grounds  of  appeal  and  they  may  be  summarised  as
    follows.  First, the judge's credibility assessment was flawed  on  the
    basis that he found certain aspects of the evidence to  be  implausible
    without full regard to the evidence before him, and that he  overlooked
    material evidence in the form of a letter by Ms KS.  Second,  that  the
    judge misstated  the  evidence  from  the  Appellant,  particularly  in
    relation to the finding at [39] that the authorities knew that  he  was
    not in Sri Lanka from February 2011 onwards.  Third, the judge  entered
    into impermissible speculation when relying on what appeared to be  his
    own experiences in cases from Sri Lanka.

 6. Permission to appeal was refused by the First-tier Tribunal,  but  then
    granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara on 19 December 2018.




The hearing before me

 7. Mr Spurling relied on the grounds of appeal.   As a  preliminary  point
    he  submitted  that  the  phrase  "given  evidence  to  the  Truth  and
    Reconciliation Commission" was  sufficiently  broad  to  encompass  the
    Appellant making his complaint to that body in July 2010 even if he did
    not subsequently give a more  detailed  statement.   Mr  Spurling  then
    pointed out the number  of  alleged  errors  committed  by  the  judge,
    located at various points in the decision.  He submitted that it  could
    not have properly been said that aspects of the Appellant's  case  were
    "wholly implausible" in light of the  evidence  before  him,  that  the
    judge was wrong to have believed that the Appellant himself  said  that
    the neighbours knew that he had left Sri Lanka,  that  the  failure  to
    take account of Ms KS's letter was important as she  had  gone  to  the
    LLRC together with the Appellant in 2010,  and  that  there  were  also
    numerous  uses  of  words  which  related  more  to  the   balance   of
    probabilities as opposed to the lower standard applicable in protection
    cases.

 8. Having heard Mr Spurling's submissions, Mr Wilding took what I consider
    to be a fair and realistic position.  Whilst taken  in  isolation,  the
    challenges may not have been enough to disclose material errors of law,
    he accepted that on a cumulative basis it was likely that the  decision
    as a whole was unsafe.




Decision on error of law

 9. Whilst in the course of my preparatory reading I had some doubts as  to
    whether the Appellant would be able to establish material errors of law
    by the judge, having looked more closely at the papers  before  me  and
    having heard the submissions of the representatives,  I  conclude  that
    there are indeed errors sufficient  to  warrant  setting  the  decision
    aside in its totality.

10. My reasons for this conclusion are as follows.

11. In principle, there is nothing  wrong  with  a  judge  finding  that  a
    particular aspect of the evidence is  "wholly  implausible".   However,
    this must be based on an accurate view of the evidence and supported by
    adequate reasons.

12. At [34] the judge found it to be "wholly  implausible"  that  the  LLRC
    letter, being of real importance, would have remained unopened  by  his
    mother for a period of some six years.  On the evidence before  him  at
    least, the difficulty with this finding is that neither  the  Appellant
    nor his mother would have known whether or not the letter was important
    in the first place.  There seems to be nothing indicating that  it  was
    from the LLRC on the face of the envelope in which it was sent.  It  is
    difficult to determine when it in fact arrived at the  mother's  house,
    but in any event the Appellant was not living  there  at  the  relevant
    time: on his evidence he was away from home while still  in  Sri  Lanka
    and then left the country in February 2011.  In light of  this  and  on
    the face of what is said in [34], it is difficult to see how the  judge
    could have concluded that it was indeed "wholly implausible"  that  the
    letter remained unopened for a significant period of time.

13. Further, I note what is said in [36], namely that the  judge  took  the
    view that the Appellant had not thought at the time that the LLRC would
    have been contacting him again.  This  would  support  the  Appellant's
    challenge to the finding at [34] that it was extremely unlikely for the
    letter from this organisation to have remained unopened.

14. The term "wholly implausible" is used again in [39].  The judge  states
    that his neighbours would have known that he was in the United  Kingdom
    and that the Appellant himself had accepted that they knew that he  was
    at least out of Sri Lanka.  Having heard argument and with reference to
    [17] of the judge's decision, I cannot see  the  evidential  basis  for
    this finding.  At [17] the Appellant is recorded as  having  said  that
    the neighbours were unaware that he was no longer in the country.   If,
    as I conclude it is, this initial premise is flawed then the subsequent
    conclusion that the authorities would not have bothered  going  to  his
    home in the knowledge that he was not there is also flawed.

15. I have looked at the evidence from Ms KS.  In my view, it did go to the
    important issue of whether the Appellant went to make a complaint  with
    the LLRC in 2010.  Her evidence  supports  this  aspect  of  his  case.
    Whilst not in any way decisive, it was relevant to the fact  of  making
    the complaint in the first place and, in turn, whether the  LLRC  would
    have sent a letter to the Appellant asking for further evidence,  which
    would have gone to the question of whether any adverse consequences for
    the Appellant arose out of this chain of events.  The judge has  failed
    to deal with this evidence when setting out his findings of fact.

16. Next, I appreciate that the use of particular words when  dealing  with
    the standard of proof does not necessarily disclose a material error of
    law.  In this case I note that a standard paragraph is set out at  [23]
    relating to the correct standard of proof.  Having said that, it is  of
    real concern that in amongst the actual findings, the  judge  uses  the
    terms "on balance" and "unlikely" in [33] and [40].  These concerns are
    added to by the fact that at [31] the  judge  had  concluded  that  the
    account as set out in the witness statement was "plausible".  There is,
    in my view, a real  tension  here  between  the  appropriate  usage  of
    different standards of proof, something that compounds my  concerns  as
    previously set out.

17. Taken together, these errors clearly go to the material issues  in  the
    case.  I set aside the judge's decision.




Disposal

18. Both parties were agreed that if there were material errors of  law  in
    the decision, then this appeal should be  remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  Having regard to paragraph 7.2 of the Practice Statement,  I
    will follow this course of action.  This appeal needs to be  looked  at
    afresh with no preserved findings of fact.

19. No specific procedural  directions  for  the  First-tier  Tribunal  are
    required, save to say that the remitted appeal shall not  be  heard  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Hussain.

20. I would add that a very recent judgment of the Court of Appeal, KK (Sri
    Lanka) [2019] EWCA Civ 59 (handed down on 1 February  2019),  addresses
    issues related to the LLRC and risk categories under  GJ.  The  parties
    and First-tier Tribunal will no  doubt  wish  to  consider  this  case,
    although, given the specific nature of the Appellant's account  as  put
    forward, it does not necessarily fatally undermine the existence  of  a
    risk on return.




Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains material errors of law  and
I set it aside.

I remit this appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.





Signed   [pic]             Date: 8 February 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor
