

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
PA/11867/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |Decision Promulgated             |
|On 16 June 2017                           |On 19 June 2017                  |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before


                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                                     CA
                         (anonymity direction made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Khan, instructed by Abbey Law Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The appellant is a national of Sri Lanka born on 10 June  1977.  He  arrived
in the United Kingdom on 31 March 2011 with a  Tier  4  (General)  Dependant
Partner visa valid until 13 April 2012 which was subsequently extended to  3
August 2015. He returned to Sri Lanka on 10 August 2014  and  came  back  to
the UK on 8 September 2014. His  wife  made  an  application  for  leave  to
remain on  private  and  family  life  grounds,  with  the  appellant  as  a
dependant, on 29 July 2015, but that application was refused  and  certified
as clearly unfounded on 28 January 2016.  On  6  April  2016  the  appellant
claimed asylum. His claim  was  refused  on  4  October  2016.  He  appealed
against that decision  and  his  appeal  was  heard  before  the  First-tier
Tribunal and was dismissed in a determination  promulgated  on  12  December
2016. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted on 9 May  2017.


The appellant claims to have worked for an organisation  called  Centre  for
Policy Alternatives (CPA) in its  media  unit,  taking  pictures,  producing
leaflets and magazines and leading picket lines as well as  reporting  about
the Sri Lankan army. As a  result  of  his  work  he  claims  to  have  been
attacked by the Sinhalese group "Bodu Bala Sena" on 20  May  2008  during  a
peaceful rally in Colombo. He  also  received  threatening  telephone  calls
from the group. On 2 June 2008 members of the Bodu Bala  Sena  came  to  his
house looking for  him  and  threatened  his  parents  and  looked  for  his
cameras. He continued to work for CPA until March 2011,  when  he  left  Sri
Lanka and came to the UK. In February 2012 members of  the  Bodu  Bala  Sena
visited his house and threatened his brother in regard to  his  whereabouts.
On 1 September 2014, after he had returned to Sri Lanka, four men  attempted
to kidnap him but he managed to escape. He then returned to the  UK  a  week
later. He feared being killed  by  Bodu  Bala  Sena  or  Sinhealay,  another
Sinhalese organisation, if he returned to  Sri  Lanka.  In  support  of  his
asylum claim the appellant submitted  a  supporting  letter  from  CPA,  two
magazines as proof of his photography work, evidence of  a  poster  that  he
had designed and an article he had written for a newspaper.


The respondent, in refusing the appellant's claim,  considered  his  account
of his work for CPA and the problems that he claimed to have experienced  as
a result to be inconsistent and incoherent and rejected it.  The  respondent
considered that the appellant's delay  in  claiming  asylum  undermined  his
credibility and concluded that he would not be at risk on return.

The appellant appealed against that decision and his  appeal  was  heard  by
First-tier Tribunal Judge Sweet on  30  November  2016.  Judge  Sweet  heard
evidence from the appellant about his work for the CPA  and  as  a  reporter
and journalist. He  said  that  he  found  the  appellant's  account  to  be
entirely lacking in credibility. He did not accept that he would be at  risk
on return because he was able to leave Sri Lanka  without  any  difficulties
in 2011 and was able to return to Sri Lanka in 2014 and  leave  for  the  UK
without any  difficulties  and  there  was  no  evidence  of  any  attempted
kidnapping. He found that the appellant did not fall into any  of  the  risk
categories in GJ (post-civil war: returnees) Sri Lanka  CG  (Rev  1)  [2013]
UKUT 319 and dismissed the appeal on  asylum,  humanitarian  protection  and
human rights grounds.


Permission to appeal was sought by the appellant and granted by myself on  9
May 2017,  on  the  grounds  that  the  judge's  credibility  findings  were
arguably unclear.

The matter then came before me on 16 June  2017.  Having  heard  submissions
from both parties I advised the parties  that  I  was  setting  aside  Judge
Sweet's decision.


As Mr Khan submitted, it is not at  all  clear  from  the  judge's  decision
whether or not he accepted  the  appellant's  claim  to  have  worked  as  a
journalist in Sri Lanka. The judge's general finding at [28], that he  found
the appellant's account to be entirely lacking in  credibility,  appears  to
suggest that he did not accept any part of his claim including his claim  to
be a journalist, yet his observations at [29]  possibly  suggest  otherwise.
If it is the case that he did not accept that claim, there is an absence  of
full and proper reasoning by the judge. Although the judge was  entitled  to
place some weight on the factors set out at [28], he failed to  explain  why
he did not accept any of the supporting evidence referred to  at  [29].  If,
on the other hand, he accepted the appellant's claim  to  be  a  journalist,
the judge failed to give any reasons for concluding that  he  did  not  fall
within the risk factors in GJ, in particular the category at [7(b)]  of  the
head-note.


For all of these reasons, given the lack of clarity in the judge's  findings
on the core issue in the appellant's case, it seems to me that the  decision
cannot stand and has to  be  re-made  in  its  entirety,  with  no  findings
preserved.

DECISION

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making
of an error on a point of law. The decision is  set  aside.  The  appeal  is
remitted to the First-tier Tribunal, to be dealt with  afresh,  pursuant  to
section 12(2)(b)(i) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement  Act  2007  and
Practice Statement 7.2(b), before any judge aside from Judge Sweet.

     Anonymity


    The First-tier Tribunal made an anonymity order. I uphold  that  order,
    pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269).



Signed

[pic]


Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede                               Dated: 16 June
2017
