
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:  PA/11500/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House, London         |Determination Promulgated            |
|On Wednesday 3 April 2019            |On Monday 29 April 2019              |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                                     QSK
                         [Anonymity direction made]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms K Tobin, Counsel instructed by Shanthi & Co,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
An anonymity order was not made by  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  However,  as
this is an appeal on protection grounds, it  is  appropriate  to  make  that
order.  Unless  and  until  a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
Appellant, QSK, is granted anonymity. No report of these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.  This
direction applies, amongst others, to both parties. Failure to  comply  with
this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

Background

1.    By a decision promulgated on 11 February 2019, I  found  an  error  of
    law in the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Quinn promulgated on 1
    November 2018 allowing the Appellant's appeal.  I therefore  set  aside
    that decision and gave directions for a resumed hearing to re-make  the
    decision.  My error of law decision  is  annexed  hereto  for  ease  of
    reference.

2.    The first of my  directions  required  the  Respondent  to  provide  a
    written explanation why the Appellant had been granted leave to  remain
    based on her private and family life.  This was a factor on which Judge
    Quinn relied  when  allowing  the  appeal  and  which  I  found  to  be
    speculative reasoning.   By  a  letter  dated  22  February  2019,  the
    Respondent wrote to the Tribunal in the following terms:

         "In accordance with directions received (12th February 2018).   The
         Respondent confirms that the appellant was granted leave to  remain
         under Section D-LTRP.1.2 of Appendix  FM  on  the  basis  that  her
         relationship with her partner for 30 months expiring  on  15  March
         2021."

3.    Unfortunately, Mr Avery did not have a complete  copy  of  my  earlier
    decision and had not recognised the significance of the  letter  of  22
    February.  As such, he was able to provide only very limited assistance
    in his submissions when dealing with this point.  I intend no criticism
    of either him or the writer of the letter, but I was  not  assisted  by
    the Respondent's response on this point as I come to below.

The Issue

4.     As  I  identified  at  [2]  and  [3]  of  my  earlier  decision,  the
    Appellant's protection claim is that she  will  be  at  risk  from  her
    family because she has married in the UK and her family will force  her
    into an arranged marriage if she returns to Pakistan.   The  Respondent
    does not dispute the credibility of that claim but says  that  she  can
    relocate to another area of Pakistan to avoid her  family.   The  issue
    therefore is whether  internal  relocation  will  avert  the  risk  and
    whether it is unduly harsh for the Appellant to be expected  to  go  to
    live  in  another  part  of  Pakistan.  The  Appellant  says  that,  in
    particular, her brothers would be able to trace  her  if  she  were  to
    return to any part of Pakistan.  It is also  submitted  on  her  behalf
    that it would be unduly harsh to expect her to go to  live  in  another
    part of Pakistan, particularly in circumstances  where  the  Respondent
    must accept that there are "insurmountable obstacles" to the  Appellant
    returning to Pakistan with her husband as  otherwise  leave  to  remain
    would not have been granted based on that family life.

The Evidence

5.    Although I set aside the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Quinn,
    it is convenient to adopt the facts as set out at [1] to [9]  and  [22]
    to [26] of his decision, save that,  in  relation  to  the  Appellant's
    eldest brother, he is no longer a Major in the Pakistan Army.  That was
    one of the errors which I identified in my earlier decision.

6.    In addition, I have read and take into  account  the  content  of  the
    Appellant's asylum interview, her statement dated 19 October 2018, that
    of her spouse, [EM], also dated 19 October 2018, the statement  of  the
    Appellant's sister  similarly  dated  19  October  2018  and  the  oral
    evidence given by the Appellant at the hearing before me. I  have  also
    had regard to the Respondent's  reasons  for  refusing  the  protection
    claim as set out in the letter dated 17 September 2018.

7.    The Appellant gave her evidence via an Urdu interpreter.  She and  the
    interpreter confirmed that they understood each other.

8.    The Appellant was asked questions specifically about her two  brothers
    who remain in Pakistan.  Her father is dead  and  therefore  those  two
    brothers are the head of the household in Pakistan.

9.    In terms of the brother who was a Major in  the  Pakistani  army,  the
    Appellant confirmed that he resigned six or seven years ago.  She said,
    however, that he  retains  contact  with  former  colleagues  including
    friends and other relatives who  are  also  in  the  army.   Her  other
    brother is the Assistant to the General Manager  of  Pakistan's  Atomic
    Energy Agency which forms part of the Pakistani military.

10.   When asked how she knew about her brothers' contacts in Pakistan,  the
    Appellant admitted that she had no direct contact with them and has not
    spoken to either of them since she left Pakistan.   However,  she  says
    that her sister who lives in the  UK  and  with  whom  she  remains  in
    contact still  speaks  to  their  brothers  and  it  is  through  those
    conversations that she is aware of the contacts that both brothers have
    and retain which would allow them  to  find  her  if  she  returned  to
    Pakistan.  There is  no  mention  of  any  such  conversations  in  the
    statement of the Appellant's sister.

11.    The  Appellant  deals  with  the  risk  and  difficulty  of  internal
    relocation in her witness statement as follows:

         "[39]    The Home Office letter states at paragraph  33  that  '[I]
         could relocate to another area of Pakistan to avoid coming  to  the
         attention of [my] brothers'.  I do not  think  this  is  reasonably
         possible.  Both my older brother, [SQH] (now  aged  52)  and  [SAH]
         (aged 45 years), both have strong links to the  Pakistani  Military
         by  either  having  held  the  rank  of  Major  (until  his  recent
         retirement, but which has not reduced/mitigated the close links  he
         has with the establishments and those in operation control) in  the
         case of the former and Assistant to  the  General  Manager  of  the
         Pakistan's Atomic Energy Agency which falls within the Military and
         has  overall  responsibility   for   Pakistan's   Nuclear   Weapons
         Programme.

         [40]     My  brother's  high  ranking  positions  both  within  the
         Military hierarchy and their relatively high social profile  within
         the country, coupled with the fact that each arrival to the country
         is biometrically scanned and tagged at passport control, means that
         they will be immediately alerted to my arrival to the  country  and
         given the very tight security restrictions  that  operate  in  that
         country and the reach of the army to anywhere, I do not think it is
         realistic to expect my return to Pakistan  being  unnoticed  by  my
         brothers or my family.

         [41]     Separately, in my entire life I have never lived alone  in
         Pakistan; I have always been cocooned inside my  family's  home  in
         Rawalpindi, being taken/escorted to and from school, tuition,  even
         when I worked for a travel agency run  by  a  close  friend  of  my
         brother-in-law for a few months as receptionist, I was escorted  to
         and from work, etc, and have no idea how I can live and/or  survive
         in that country either on my own or with my foreign  husband.   Nor
         do I have the skill, experience or know-how to live under the radar
         or in anonymity to  such  an  extent  to  evade  detection  by  the
         authorities.  Both of us will stand out like sore thumbs  and  will
         be easily picked out by those who will be looking for us."

12.   The Appellant's lack of independence is reflected in the statement  of
    her spouse who speaks of her as a "delicate and  fragile  human  being"
    and the statement of her sister who says the following:

         "[12]    Even though she has lived  in  the  UK  these  past  three
         years, either her husband or I have  to  escort  her  whenever  she
         leaves the house otherwise  she  gets  frightened  and  afraid.   I
         believe this is because of the trauma she suffered in Pakistan  and
         I fear what would happen to her if  she  is  returned  to  Pakistan
         either now or in 30 months time."

Discussion and Conclusions

13.   I begin with the risk which the Appellant claims of  being  discovered
    by her brothers on return to another part  of  Pakistan  due  to  their
    connections.  I am unpersuaded by her evidence in this regard.  Her own
    views of the connections which she claims they have and  would  use  to
    find her may well be genuinely held.  However,  they  are  speculative.
    There is no evidence that the Appellant's brothers in  fact  have  such
    contacts or how those contacts would be  used  to  alert  them  to  the
    Appellant's return via the use of biometric passport information.   The
    Appellant's sister who the Appellant says has maintained  contact  with
    their brothers has provided no evidence about the  conversations  which
    she  has  with  them  nor  provided  any  supporting  testimony  as  to
    continuing high level contacts which would enable them to discover  the
    Appellant's  return.   Nor  indeed  does  the  Appellant's  sister  say
    anything in her  statement  about  any  continuing  interest  of  their
    brothers in the Appellant.

14.   Neither do I accept Ms Tobin's submission that the grant of  leave  to
    remain based on the Appellant's Article 8 rights  leads  inexorably  to
    the conclusion that it would be  unduly  harsh  for  the  Appellant  to
    internally relocate within Pakistan.  I have set out the content of the
    Respondent's explanation for the grant of leave to remain on this basis
    at [2] above.  That makes clear that the grant is on the basis  of  the
    Appellant's relationship with her partner.

15.   Mr Avery accepted that the grant could  only  be  on  the  basis  that
    there  are  insurmountable  obstacles  to  family  life  continuing  in
    Pakistan because the Appellant did not have any leave  to  remain  when
    she married and applied for leave based on her family life.  The  grant
    must therefore be on the basis that paragraph EX.1 of  Appendix  FM  to
    the Immigration Rules applies (unless the grant is based on a  casework
    error).

16.   However, that does not mean that the  insurmountable  obstacles  which
    the Respondent  accepts  have  anything  to  do  with  the  Appellant's
    protection claim.  I find it extremely unlikely that this is  the  case
    having regard to the evidence.  The Appellant's  spouse  is  a  British
    citizen but originally a Turkish Cypriot.  Although he is a Muslim,  he
    speaks no Urdu.  He has an adult daughter and grandchildren  living  in
    the UK.  Most importantly, he has a variety of medical  conditions  set
    out at [5] of his statement which have  rendered  him  unable  to  work
    since 2012.  He also  refers  at  [7]  of  his  statement  to  "a  very
    traumatic  set  of  circumstances"  which,  coupled  with  his  medical
    conditions and inability to work set him at "a  particularly  low  ebb"
    before he met the Appellant.   He says at [10] of  his  statement  that
    his  own  circumstances  make  the  prospect  of  relocating  with  the
    Appellant and evading her family impossible.  I  find  it  more  likely
    that it is those "personal, medical, financial and other circumstances"
    which have led to the Respondent accepting that family life  could  not
    continue in Pakistan, a country moreover with which [EM] has absolutely
    no familiarity or connection.

17.   However, since it is accepted that family life could not  continue  in
    Pakistan and [EM] himself says that it would be impossible for  him  to
    go there to live, I have to consider  the  prospect  of  the  Appellant
    returning there alone and going to live in  a  part  of  Pakistan  with
    which she is unfamiliar and where she has no connections.

18.   I have regard to the prevailing country guidance of  SM  (lone  women-
    ostracism) Pakistan (CG) [2016] UKUT 67 (IAC) which states  as  follows
    so far as relevant:

         "...

         (2)      Where a risk of persecution or serious harm exists in  her
         home area for a single woman or a female head of  household,  there
         may be an internal relocation option to one  of  Pakistan's  larger
         cities, depending on the family, social and  educational  situation
         of the woman in question.

         (3)      It will not be normally be unduly harsh to expect a single
         woman or female head of household  to  relocate  internally  within
         Pakistan if she can access support from family members  or  a  male
         guardian in the place of relocation.

         (4)      It will not normally be unduly harsh for educated,  better
         off, or older women to seek internal relocation to a city. It helps
         if a  woman  has  qualifications  enabling  her  to  get  well-paid
         employment and pay for accommodation and childcare if required.

         (5)      Where  a  single  woman,  with  or  without  children,  is
         ostracised by family members and other sources of  possible  social
         support  because  she  is  in  an  irregular  situation,   internal
         relocation will be more difficult and whether it  is  unduly  harsh
         will be a question of fact in each case."

19.   The Appellant would be returning to an  area  of  Pakistan  which  she
    does not know, on her own.  Her husband  describes  her  as  a  fragile
    person.  That is echoed in the evidence of her sister.   The  Appellant
    herself is obviously fearful of returning anywhere in Pakistan  because
    she considers there to be a risk that her brothers will  find  her  and
    force her into an arranged marriage (as has happened with her sisters).
    Although I consider the risk of discovery to be speculative,  that  she
    has what is accepted to be a genuine  fear  of  being  forced  into  an
    arranged  marriage  is  a  relevant  factor.   Added  to  that  is  the
    Appellant's own description of her circumstances in Pakistan before she
    came to the UK where she was always escorted when she went  to  college
    or work.

20.   I accept that the Appellant has a  college  education.   She  attended
    college in Pakistan for  one  year  after  school  and  then  moved  to
    university but did not complete her degree.  However,  as  I  found  at
    [22] of my earlier decision (agreeing with  Judge  Quinn's  finding  in
    this regard), the Appellant does not have much work  experience.  There
    is no evidence that she has  worked  in  the  UK.   Her  experience  is
    limited to a few months before she came to the UK and, even  then,  the
    job she obtained was in  an agency run by a close friend of her brother-
    in-law.  I accept, as  stated  at  [41]  of  her  statement,  that  the
    Appellant does not  have  the  wherewithal  to  live  independently  in
    another part of Pakistan where she would be without  any  male  support
    (because [EM] would not be able to go with her). Obviously, she  cannot
    rely on support of family members in Pakistan as it  is  they  who  she
    fears.  In spite of her education, and having regard to the  prevailing
    country guidance, I am satisfied that it would be unduly harsh for  the
    Appellant to internally relocate within Pakistan.

21.   For those reasons, I allow the appeal on the basis that the  Appellant
    has a well-founded fear of persecution on return to Pakistan.   Removal
    would therefore breach  the  United  Kingdom's  obligations  under  the
    Refugee Convention.

DECISION

The Appellant's appeal is allowed.


Signed           [pic] Dated: 23 April 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Smith



                        ANNEX: ERROR OF LAW DECISION

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:  PA/11500/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House, London         |Determination Promulgated            |
|On Wednesday 30 January 2019         |                                     |
|                                     | 11 February 2019                    |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and
                                    Q S K
                         [Anonymity direction made]
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Jones, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr R Solomon, Counsel instructed by Shanthi & Co,
Solicitors

Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
An anonymity order was not made by  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  However,  as
this is an appeal on protection grounds, it  is  appropriate  to  make  that
order.  Unless  and  until  a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
Appellant, QSK, is granted anonymity. No report of these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.  This
direction applies, amongst others, to both parties. Failure to  comply  with
this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

Background

1.    This is an appeal brought by the Secretary  of  State.   For  ease  of
    reference, I refer hereafter to the parties as they were in the  First-
    tier Tribunal.  The Respondent appeals against the decision  of  First-
    tier  Tribunal  Judge  Quinn  promulgated  on  1  November  2018  ("the
    Decision").  By the Decision, the Judge allowed the Appellant's  appeal
    against the Respondent's decision dated 16 September 2018 refusing  her
    protection claim.   The Appellant has  been  granted  leave  to  remain
    based on her family and private life but is still  entitled  to  appeal
    the refusal of her protection claim in order to receive recognition  of
    her status as a refugee in the event that  her  claim  on  this  ground
    succeeds.

2.    The Appellant is a national of Pakistan.  Her fear of return  to  that
    country is based on the fact that she has married in the UK,  that  her
    family in Pakistan is strict and  would  force  her  into  an  arranged
    marriage in Pakistan against her will  and  notwithstanding  her  legal
    marriage to another man in the UK.

3.    The Respondent does  not  take  issue  with  the  credibility  of  the
    Appellant's claim but says that she  can  return  to  another  area  of
    Pakistan  to  avoid  her  family.   The  Judge  considered  that   this
    conclusion  conflicted  with  the  Respondent's  acceptance  that   the
    Appellant is entitled to remain in the UK on the basis  of  her  family
    and private life because he thought it likely that this  was  based  on
    there being insurmountable obstacles to continuation of family life  in
    Pakistan.  The Judge also concluded that the Appellant's  family  would
    be likely to have the influence to find her if she returned to Pakistan
    and that internal relocation is not an answer to the claim.

4.    Although the Respondent does take  issue  with  the  Judge's  findings
    about internal relocation, the  main  thrust  of  the  grounds  is  the
    conduct of the hearing before the Judge.  I will deal with that in more
    detail below.  The Respondent asserts in his ground  one  that  he  has
    been disadvantaged by the Judge's conduct  and  that  the  hearing  was
    procedurally unfair.  Ground two raises  mistakes  of  fact  which  the
    Judge is said to have committed.

5.    Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Lambert
    on 28 November 2018 in the following terms so far as relevant:

         "...

         [3]      Ground 1 takes issue with the  Judge's  refusal  to  allow
         cross examination or submissions  by  the  Home  Office  Presenting
         Officer who had arrived late at the hearing  centre  to  find  that
         although notification of the late arrival had  been  provided,  the
         appeal had commenced.  The ROP confirms that  the  Judge  had  been
         notified that the Appellant representative would be late  and  that
         the hearing had been put back to 10.25 however the judge then noted
         that there was 'no HOPO no message'.  There  is  a  note  at  10.47
         stating that the 'PO arrives' and that he had  'thought  he  had  a
         prep day'.  At that point the note  s  record  that  the  Appellant
         representative submissions had not yet begun.

         [4]      The Respondent message as  to  being  late  may  not  have
         reached the Judge, but there is no record of any  enquiries  having
         been made of the HOPOU by the Judge's clerk and there is  certainly
         an arguable procedural error amounting to an error of  law  in  the
         contentions made as to how the hearing was conducted  once  the  PO
         had arrived.  The judge in fact recorded at  paragraph  16  of  the
         decision that there been no representative for the Respondent.

         [5]      The further ground that the  appeal  being  allowed  under
         'paragraphs 336 and 339M/339F of HC395  makes  no  sense,  is  also
         arguable.

         [6]      There are therefore arguable errors of  law  disclosed  by
         the application."

6.    The matter comes  before  me  to  assess  whether  the  Decision  does
    disclose an error of law and to re-make the Decision or  remit  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal for re-hearing.

Submissions and Discussion

Ground one

7.    I begin with the Judge's conduct of the hearing before  him.   I  have
    had regard to what the Record of Proceedings shows as set  out  in  the
    grant of permission.

8.    Ms Jones handed to me a file note written by Mr Daniel Allen  who  was
    the Presenting Officer at Feltham who attended the appeal hearing.   As
    Judge Lambert notes in her grant of permission, the  Judge's  assertion
    at [16] of the Decision  that  there  was  no  representative  for  the
    Respondent (as also reiterated in the heading) is factually inaccurate.
     It is clear from the Record of Proceedings that Mr Allen arrived after
    the start of the hearing, either before or during  submissions  by  the
    Appellant and after the Appellant had  given  evidence.   In  fact,  it
    appears that the Appellant's  representative  may  have  been  part-way
    through submissions.

9.    Although Mr  Solomon  who  was  also  the  Appellant's  representative
    before the First-tier Tribunal submitted that  there  is  some  factual
    dispute between the parties as to what occurred at the  hearing,  I  do
    not discern such dispute from the documents I was  shown.   Mr  Solomon
    did not provide a witness statement as would be the normal course where
    there is a complaint about the conduct of the  hearing,  but  I  accept
    that this is a slightly unusual case as the complaint  comes  from  the
    Respondent and not the Appellant.  I have therefore taken into  account
    what is said in the Appellant's Rule 24 notice about what  occurred.  I
    also  clarified  with  Mr  Solomon  during  his  oral  submissions   my
    understanding about what had happened which is as follows.

10.   There is no dispute that Mr Allen was not in attendance at  the  start
    of the hearing.  Neither the Judge nor Mr Solomon takes issue  with  Mr
    Allen's reasons for not being on time.  There  is  said  to  have  been
    confusion about the roster and Mr Allen did  not  therefore  appreciate
    that he was due to be in court; he thought he had  a  preparation  day.
    It is said that when he  discovered  that  he  was  due  in  court,  he
    informed the Tribunal that he would be attending late.  Whether or  not
    that occurred, I accept that the Record of Proceedings  does  not  show
    that the Judge was informed of this.

11.   However, the Record of Proceedings does show that  Mr  Allen  arrived,
    as Judge Lambert states (and Mr Solomon accepts),  at  1047  hours  and
    therefore about twenty minutes after the start which had been postponed
    due to lateness of the Appellant's representative.

12.   Mr Solomon says that his submissions began at  about  1040  hours  and
    therefore he had only just begun his submissions.  Mr Solomon's account
    of what happened after Mr Allen's arrival is as follows:

         "[1b] ... The judge indicated he would continue hearing the  appeal
         as if there was no appearance by the respondent.  Mr Allen did  not
         object to this course.  He did not apply to the  judge  to  re-open
         the evidence in order to cross-examine the witnesses or request  to
         make oral submissions.  He was content to proceed as  indicated  by
         the judge and the hearing ended at 11.10.  No complaint was made at
         the  time  of  the  hearing   or   before   promulgation   of   the
         determination.  Therefore, the judge cannot  justly  be  criticised
         for proceeding as he did; ..."

13.   Mr Allen's account is slightly ambiguous, but I consider  reconcilable
    with what is said by Mr Solomon.   Mr Allen says this:

         "... On arriving, before 11am, the IJ  had  already  commenced  the
         hearing and was part way through hearing submissions from  the  A's
         rep.  IJ informed me there had been no cross-examination of  the  A
         by him.  The  IJ  did  challenge  the  A's  rep  on  occasion  when
         submissions made on risk on return.  IJ informed PO  he  would  not
         hear submissions from the HO."

14.   I do not read either this or the Respondent's grounds as amounting  to
    an assertion that any application was made by the Respondent to re-open
    evidence, to adjourn or make submissions.  Given the Respondent's  lack
    of challenge to the credibility of the Appellant's account, there could
    be no unfairness if the Judge had refused to allow further evidence  to
    be taken.   Nor would late attendance by the Presenting Officer be good
    reason why time should  be  given  for  him  to  prepare.    I  do  not
    understand Mr Allen's evidence to be  that  any  such  application  was
    made.   However, I reject Mr Solomon's submission that it was incumbent
    on Mr Allen to apply to be heard.    The  hearing  was  still  ongoing.
    Mr Allen was in attendance as representative of  one  of  the  parties.
    He was entitled to expect to be heard.   There was no reason for him to
    apply for that privilege.

15.   I am also concerned by what is said by  Mr  Solomon  and  consistently
    with the final sentence of Mr Allen's evidence, that the Judge did  not
    hear from Mr Allen before deciding that he would not permit Mr Allen to
    make submissions.  If the Judge intended to exclude the  representative
    of a party from making submissions as would be  the  normally  expected
    course, due to the lateness of attendance, I would have expected him to
    invite that representative to make submissions about why he  should  be
    entitled to be heard rather than reaching that decision with no  regard
    to  the  circumstances   or   any   submissions   from   that   party's
    representative. I would also expect what occurred to  be  reflected  in
    the Record of Proceedings and to be covered in the Decision so that the
    Judge's reasoning in excluding submissions could be taken into account.
     The Judge should not have proceeded as if Mr Allen were not  there  at
    all when he evidently was.

16.   I have some sympathy  with  Mr  Solomon's  submission  that  Mr  Allen
    should have complained  about  the  Judge's  conduct  at  the  time  or
    immediately after the hearing.  He may have taken the view that,  since
    the Judge had already made up his mind, little  was  to  be  gained  by
    saying anything and that there  would  be  no  purpose  in  complaining
    immediately after  the  hearing  and  before  the  outcome  was  known.
    However, although that might have enabled the Judge to  reconsider  his
    decision not to hear from Mr Allen, it does not prevent the point being
    taken at a later stage.   It is in  my  experience,  not  uncommon  for
    complaints about conduct not to be raised until an  appeal  is  brought
    against the underlying decision.

17.   What fairness requires depends on the facts of the case.  I take  into
    account in this  case  that  the  Respondent  had  not  challenged  the
    Appellant's credibility. As I have  already  indicated,  therefore,  it
    would not have been unfair  for  the  Judge  to  refuse  to  allow  the
    Respondent to test the evidence, the Appellant having already concluded
    the giving of that evidence.   However, to shut out a party  altogether
    on the basis that his representative  arrived  twenty  minutes  into  a
    hearing has resulted  in  unfairness,  particularly  in  light  of  the
    Judge's failure to hear from Mr Allen before deciding  to  exclude  his
    submissions and the Judge's failure to give reasons for his decision.

Ground Two

18.   I turn then  to  consider  the  consequences  of  the  unfairness  and
    whether it can be said to have made any difference.  As I have  already
    pointed out, the Respondent did not take issue with the credibility  of
    the Appellant's claim.  The fact that the Respondent was not  permitted
    to cross-examine the Appellant or test  her  evidence  could  therefore
    make no difference.  The only issue, as the Judge rightly observed, was
    whether the Appellant could internally relocate within Pakistan.

19.   In reaching the conclusion that the Appellant could not relocate,  the
    Judge has however made two errors which are or might be material to his
    conclusion.   The  first  concerns  the  position  of  the  Appellant's
    brother.   At  [25]  of  the  Decision,  the  Judge  records  that  the
    Appellant's older brother is a major  in  the  Pakistan  Army.   As  is
    recorded in the Respondent's decision at [39], based on the Appellant's
    own answers at interview ([AIR 89-92]), he was  a  major  but  resigned
    about six or seven years previously.  Mr Solomon accepts that  this  is
    factually accurate.

20.    That  error  then  feeds  into  the  Judge's  conclusion  about   the
    likelihood of the Appellant being  traced  on  return  to  Pakistan  as
    follows:

         "[33]    What was clear, was that  if  the  Appellant  returned  to
         Pakistan, she would pass  through  immigration  control  which  had
         biometric facilities.  That would mean  that  her  entry  into  the
         country would be documented and it  was  quite  possible  that  her
         brother with his high ranking position, could find out if  she  re-
         entered the country, if he wanted to."

21.   Mr Solomon suggested that  this  conclusion  remained  sustainable  in
    spite of the error.  He said that the Judge may have intended to say is
    that the Appellant's brother would continue to have contacts  on  which
    he could rely.  I am quite unable to read the paragraph  in  that  way.
    The Judge has clearly misunderstood the evidence about the  Appellant's
    brother and this error has impacted on his  finding  that  the  brother
    would be able to find the Appellant due to his high-ranking position.

22.   I do not accept the Respondent's suggestion that there  is  any  error
    made at [35] of the Decision where the Judge says  that  the  Appellant
    does not have a great deal  of  experience  of  work.   The  Respondent
    points to an entry clearance application which the Appellant made which
    shows that she was working in a tourist agency in Pakistan  before  her
    departure.  However, Ms Jones accepted that this showed that  she  only
    worked there for a matter of months and the Judge was entitled to  view
    that as being little experience.

23.   I agree with Judge Lambert's comment about  the  basis  on  which  the
    appeal is said to have been allowed "under paragraphs 336 and 339M/339F
    of HC 395".  This is an appeal which post-dates the amendments made  to
    the provisions of the 2002 Act by the Immigration Act 2014.   The  only
    appeal is against the refusal of the protection  claim  on  the  ground
    that removal in consequence of that refusal is in breach of the Refugee
    Convention.  There is no longer a ground of appeal that the decision is
    not  in  accordance  with  the  Rules.   However,  although  I  do  not
    understand how the paragraphs of the  Rules  cited  by  the  Judge  are
    relevant to the Decision, nonetheless, any error  makes  no  difference
    because it is clear that the Judge found that the Respondent's decision
    did breach the Refugee Convention because reliance could not be  placed
    on internal relocation as an answer to the claim.

24.   I do however have a further concern about the Decision at [38].   This
    arises from the  Judge's  conclusion  about  the  basis  on  which  the
    Appellant has been permitted to remain based on her family and  private
    life.  What the Judge says is this:

         "[38]    I agreed with Mr  Solomon's  suggestion  in  his  skeleton
         argument that the grant of leave based  on  family  and/or  private
         life in the  UK  was  inconsistent  with  the  assertion  that  the
         Appellant could internally relocate.  It  seemed  to  me  that  the
         grant of leave indicated that  the  Respondent  had  accepted  that
         there  are  insurmountable  obstacles  to  family  life  continuing
         outside  the  UK  and/or  that  there  would  be  very  significant
         obstacles to the Appellant's integration into Pakistan if she  were
         required to leave the UK."

25.   Ms Jones attempted during the hearing before me to clarify  the  basis
    on which  the  Appellant  was  granted  leave  and  accepted  that  the
    electronic system does not show why she was granted leave.  However, as
    she pointed out, the decision letter does not say that this is  because
    it is accepted that there are insurmountable obstacles to  family  life
    continuing in Pakistan.  The letter suggests that the  Appellant  meets
    the eligibility requirements of Appendix FM which she could not do  due
    to her immigration status  unless  paragraph  EX.1  applies.   However,
    there is no detailed consideration of the eligibility requirements  and
    certainly no  concession  by  the  Respondent  that  EX.1  does  apply.
    Equally, it is not clear that the grant is  based  on  the  Appellant's
    private life other than there being an oblique reference  to  paragraph
    276ADE.

26.    The  Judge's  finding  that  this  is  the  basis  of  the  grant  is
    speculation and unsupported by evidence; it might equally be  an  error
    on the caseworker's part or a failure properly to  apply  the  relevant
    provisions. Of course, if the Judge  had  heard  submissions  from  the
    Presenting Officer, he may have been able to clarify  the  position  or
    obtain some concession that Mr  Solomon's  submission  or  the  Judge's
    understanding was correct.  However, there was  no  evidence  that  the
    Respondent had accepted the fact that the Judge  found  he  had.   That
    amounts also to an error of law.

Conclusions

27.   For the above reasons, I am satisfied that the  hearing  before  Judge
    Quinn was procedurally unfair to the Respondent.  I am  also  satisfied
    that the Judge made at least two errors in  his  understanding  of  the
    evidence which are capable of affecting the outcome.    In  any  event,
    since the error which I have found to exist  is  based  on  a  lack  of
    procedural  fairness,  it  would  be  inappropriate  to  compound   the
    unfairness by refusing to set aside  the  Decision  and  permit  a  re-
    hearing of the appeal.

28.   I do not however consider it necessary to remit  the  appeal  for  re-
    hearing on this occasion.  As I make clear above, the issue  which  has
    to be determined is a very narrow one.  There is no  issue  taken  with
    the credibility of the claim.  The  only  issue  for  determination  is
    whether, on the facts put forward by the  Appellant,  she  is  able  to
    internally relocate safely and whether it  would  be  unduly  harsh  to
    expect her to do so.  There may need to be some limited  evidence  from
    the Appellant about what she says will occur and the reasons she cannot
    relocate which the Respondent may wish to examine.  The Tribunal  would
    also be assisted by knowing the basis on which the grant  of  leave  to
    remain based on family or private life has been made as that  may  have
    some relevance to this issue.   However,  none  of  that  prevents  the
    decision being re-made in this Tribunal.  The issues for  determination
    do not involve an assessment  of  the  Appellant's  credibility  or  an
    extensive fact-finding exercise.  Accordingly, I have given  directions
    below for the re-hearing.

DECISION

I am satisfied that the Decision involves the making of a material error  on
a point of law. The Decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Quinn  promulgated
on 14 November 2018 is set aside.  I  give  directions  below  for  the  re-
hearing of the appeal

DIRECTIONS

      1. Within 14 days from the date when this decision is promulgated, the
         Respondent shall file with the Tribunal and serve on the  Appellant
         written submissions setting out the basis on which leave to  remain
         has been granted on family and private life grounds or, if that  is
         not evident from the file, that this is the position.

      2. The appeal will be relisted for hearing on the first available date
         after 28 days from the date when this decision is promulgated: time
         estimate 1 � hours.


Signed           [pic] Dated: 8 February 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Smith

