

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
PA/11257/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |      Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 31 July 2017                       |      On 24 August 2017              |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between

                                     T B
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:       Mr A. Bandegani, Counsel instructed by Duncan
Lewis Solicitors
For the Respondent:      Mr E. Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
Anonymity was granted at an earlier stage of  the  proceedings  because  the
case involves protection and  child  welfare  issues.  I  find  that  it  is
appropriate to continue the order. Unless and  until  a  tribunal  or  court
directs otherwise, the appellant is granted anonymity. No  report  of  these
proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify him or any member  of  his
family. This direction applies both to the appellant and to the  respondent.



                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    The appellant appealed against  the  respondent's  decision  dated  07
    October 2016 to refuse a protection and human rights claim.

2.    First-tier Tribunal Judge Cameron ("the judge") dismissed  the  appeal
    in a decision promulgated on 03 March 2017. At the date of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal hearing the appellant was a minor.

3.    The judge accepted that the appellant's brother was involved in  local
    government in his home area of Takhar  province  and  received  threats
    from the Taliban against him and his family  because  of  his  position
    [55]. The judge did not accept the appellant's account of a  particular
    incident at his school [60], but accepted that the appellant  would  be
    at risk in his home area as a result of his brother's position and that
    sufficient protection was not available [61].

4.    The judge went on to consider the deteriorating security situation  in
    Afghanistan  as  noted  by  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  R  (HN  &   SA)
    (Afghanistan) v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 123 [63]. He also  considered  the
    most recent country guidance decision in AK (Article 15(c)) Afghanistan
    CG [2012]  UKUT  00163  and  observed  that  the  Home  Office  Country
    Information and Guidance report dated July 2016 noted  an  increase  in
    civilian casualties since the country guidance decision [65]. The judge
    considered the up to date background evidence but concluded that it did
    not show that the current situation  in  Afghanistan  was  sufficiently
    serious to give rise to a risk  solely  on  account  of  indiscriminate
    violence in Kabul [66].

5.    The judge considered the appellant's age and the fact  that  he  could
    not return to his home area [72]. He noted that the  appellant  was  in
    regular contact with  his  family  in  Afghanistan.  He  accepted  that
    "conditions in Kabul are not ideal" but concluded that he would be able
    to return to Kabul where he could "rely on assistance from  his  family
    in  particular  his  brother  who  clearly  has  connections  with  the
    government" [75]. He concluded that even though the appellant was  only
    17 years old he would be able to relocate to Kabul "particularly  given
    the assistance he would be able to receive from his brother"  [77]  and
    where he "would have the support of his family" [78]. In light of those
    findings the judge concluded that relocation to Kabul was a  reasonable
    option.

6.    The appellant appealed against the First-tier  Tribunal  decision  and
    argued that the judge erred in his assessment of  internal  relocation.
    He failed to take into account the fact  that  the  appellant's  family
    remain in his home area and that he would be returned to  Kabul  as  an
    unattended minor of Uzbek ethnicity. The  judge  failed  to  take  into
    account the UNHCR Eligibility Guidelines (April 2016), which  suggested
    that internal relocation to Kabul was only reasonable if a  person  had
    access to accommodation, essential services and opportunities to earn a
    living and the individual has access to a traditional  family  network.
    At the hearing, it was argued that the judge's finding that his  family
    would  be  able  to  support  him  was  unsupported  by  evidence.  The
    appellant's  brother  and  other  members  of  his  family  were  being
    persecuted by the Taliban and the  judge  accepted  that,  despite  his
    brother's  position,  there  was  insufficient   protection.   In   the
    alternative, no clear findings were made  as  to  how  the  appellant's
    brother was expected to provide adequate support and  assistance  to  a
    young person in Kabul from their home area.

7.    The respondent argues that the judge's findings  on  the  availability
    of internal relocation were open to him on the evidence. It was open to
    the judge to conclude that his  brother  could  support  the  appellant
    financially in Kabul. The decision did not suggest that the appellant's
    parents should relocate to Kabul, but it was an option "if they  wished
    to do so" (rule 24 response). At the hearing, it was  argued  that  the
    judge was entitled to rely on AK (Afghanistan) and that  the  Secretary
    of State's policy was not to remove a young person until they  were  18
    years old. The appellant had shown some maturity  in  travelling  "half
    way around the world" to the UK.

Decision and reasons

Error of Law

8.    After having considered the grounds of appeal,  the  written  response
    and oral arguments at the  hearing  I  concluded  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal decision involved the making of an error of law and set  aside
    that part of the decision  relating  to  internal  relocation  for  the
    following reasons:

       i) The First-tier Tribunal failed to make any clear findings  as  to
          what  support  the  family  were  expected  to  provide  to   the
          appellant, whether it was solely  financial  support  or  whether
          they were expected to relocate  to  Kabul  in  order  to  provide
          support.


      ii) If the family remained in the home area, which was the  situation
          at the date of the hearing, no reasons were given to explain  how
          the appellant's brother was going to provide support  given  that
          it was accepted that they were living in a difficult situation in
          the home area at risk of persecution.

     iii) Although the First-tier Tribunal noted that the appellant was  17
          years old, no meaningful consideration was given to the impact of
          his age in assessing whether relocation to Kabul would be  unduly
          harsh. In the absence of clear findings as to whether his  family
          was also expected to relocate, the appellant  would  be  returned
          alone. The respondent's policy is not to return an  unaccompanied
          minor without adequate reception arrangements. At the date of the
          hearing  there  was  no  evidence  to  suggest  that   any   such
          arrangements were available  for  the  appellant  in  Kabul.  The
          Tribunal failed to consider whether, as a  child,  the  appellant
          might be at  heightened  individual  risk  even  if  the  general
          security situation did not reach the Article 15(c) threshold: see
          AA (Unattended children) Afghanistan CG [2012] UKUT 00016.




Remaking the decision

9.    At the date of the Upper Tribunal hearing the appellant  was  still  a
    minor but was about to turn 18 years old the week after the hearing.  I
    bear in mind that even if the appellant is now 18 years old age is  not
    a 'bright line' issue. In KA (Afghanistan) v SSHD [2012] EWCA Civ  1014
    the Court of Appeal observed that "persecution  is  not  respectful  of
    birthdays  -  apparent  or  assumed  age   is   more   important   than
    chronological age". The appellant is liable to removal but is  still  a
    young person with the same vulnerabilities.

10.   The fact that the appellant  travelled  overland  to  the  UK  is  not
    necessarily an indicator of his maturity when arrangements were made by
    adult family members for him to be brought to the UK by an agent. As an
    unaccompanied minor the appellant is a looked  after  child  under  the
    care of the local authority and there is nothing  in  the  evidence  to
    suggest that he has formed an independent life.

11.   The appellant is in contact with family  members  in  Afghanistan.  At
    the date of the hearing the appellant's parents and siblings remain  in
    his  home  area.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  judge  accepted  that  the
    appellant and his family members  were  at  risk  in  their  home  area
    because of his brother's position in local  government.  In  interview,
    the appellant said that his parents were old and had to stay locked  in
    the house with a  security  guard  outside  [qu.129-130].  In  a  later
    statement dated 27 January 2017 the appellant said that his brother  is
    forced to take security measures and travels to  meetings  in  disguise
    because of the threats made against him [pg.20-21 AB].

12.   Although the First-tier Tribunal judge declined  to  make  a  specific
    finding relating to  his  brother's  position,  he  accepted  that  his
    brother was a member of the local government "and therefore  does  have
    some power" [74]. The appellant has been consistent in saying that  his
    brother is the governor of a district in Takhar province. On  the  face
    of this evidence it seems likely that his brother has some influence in
    what is likely to be a small rural district  in  northern  Afghanistan.
    However, it is not asserted that he is the governor of the province  or
    that he holds a position that is likely to have national influence.  To
    the appellant his brother might seem 'high ranking', but on the face of
    it he is only likely to have influence in  a  small  local  area.  Even
    then, the judge accepted that his position was undermined by the  local
    security situation to the extent that  sufficient  protection  was  not
    available.

13.   The family continue to be at risk in Takhar province, but  it  is  not
    known why  they  have  not  sought  to  relocate  to  another  area  of
    Afghanistan. There is no  evidence  to  suggest  that  the  appellant's
    family has any connection with Kabul. They are of Uzbek ethnicity.  The
    family home is in Takhar province  and  his  brother  can  support  the
    family through employment as a district governor. I  find  that  it  is
    reasonable to infer that it is likely that his family remain in  Takhar
    province as a matter of necessity, despite the risk,  because  this  is
    the area in which they have accommodation and the means to support  the
    family financially. The  evidence  shows  that  they  are,  in  effect,
    imprisoned in their own home for their own security. Given that  it  is
    accepted that they are at risk in their home area any attempt to travel
    from their home to Kabul could give rise to risk of serious  harm.  For
    this reason, it would be unreasonable to expect them to do so. There is
    no evidence to suggest that it is likely that they would be willing  or
    able to relocate to Kabul if the appellant were  returned  there.  Even
    though the appellant is in contact with his family members, no evidence
    has been produced to suggest that he could be returned to Kabul because
    adequate reception arrangements can be made there with his family.

14.   At the date of the hearing I conclude that the appellant is likely  to
    be returned to Kabul as an unattended child. In  AA  (Afghanistan)  the
    Tribunal recognised that there might be additional risks to children in
    Afghanistan, but made a distinction between the level of risk posed  to
    children who were living in a family and those who are unattended.  The
    Tribunal concluded that the background evidence showed that  unattached
    children might be exposed to risk of serious harm  from  indiscriminate
    violence, forced recruitment, sexual violence, trafficking and  a  lack
    of  adequate  arrangements  for  child  protection,  depending  on  the
    individual circumstances of  the  case.  The  Tribunal  came  to  these
    conclusions on the evidence relating to the security situation in  2011
    and it is accepted that the security situation has  deteriorated  since
    2012.

15.   The Home Office "Country  Information  and  Guidance  on  Afghanistan"
    relating to the security and  humanitarian  situation  (09  July  2016)
    acknowledges that there has been an increase in civilian casualties  in
    Afghanistan since the decision in  AK  (Afghanistan)  [3.1.2].  The  US
    State Department reported  a  deterioration  of  the  overall  security
    situation in the second half of 2015 [6.1.2].  In  March  2016  the  UN
    Secretary-General reported that there  was  an  "increasingly  volatile
    security situation" in Afghanistan [6.1.3]. In May 2016 the UN Security
    Council's Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict found that there
    had been a significant increase in child casualties. In April 2016  the
    UN Secretary-  General  noted  that  children  were  disproportionately
    affected by the intensifying conflict in Afghanistan [6.3.1].  In  2015
    the UN Secretary-General reported that the verified number of  children
    abducted more than tripled compared with 2014 [6.5.2]. The report  goes
    on to provide information about the number of  security  incidents  and
    suicide attacks reported in Kabul in 2015 and 2016 [7.5].

16.   Regarding the humanitarian situation, UN  OCHA  reported  in  November
    2015 that increasing numbers of IDPs live in  informal  settlements  in
    major  urban  centres.  Displaced  persons  were  more  likely  to   be
    illiterate, to have lower rates of school  enrolment,  lower  household
    incomes and to be food insecure [8.1.3]. Kabul  has  seen  the  biggest
    population increase and has reportedly received close to 40 percent  of
    all new conflict-induced IDPs in Afghanistan since 2002. Some estimates
    put  70  percent  of  the  population  of  Kabul  living  in   informal
    settlements. About 80 percent of those living in  informal  settlements
    in Kabul are reported  to  be  severely  or  moderately  food  insecure
    [8.1.4]. Although  there  were  reports  of  fairly  large  numbers  of
    voluntary  and  non-voluntary  returns  to  Afghanistan  in  2015   the
    returnees mostly came from surrounding countries. Some were reported to
    have been motivated to return by 'push factors' arising from events  in
    Pakistan, while others cited an improvement in the  security  situation
    [9.1.2 - 9.1.3]. The guidance also makes reference to a Refugee Support
    Network (RSN) report dated April 2016, which monitored the return of 25
    returnees from the UK, many of whom were reported to have  problems  in
    findings work, continuing in education and had mental  health  problems
    [9.1.4].

17.    The  UNHCR  Eligibility  Guidelines  (April  2016)   make   a   clear
    distinction between their assessment of internal flight  for  those  at
    risk of persecution and in relation to their broader mandate  criteria.
    Regarding internal relocation for individuals at  risk  of  persecution
    the UNHCR states the following [pg.85]:

          "Where the proposed area of relocation is an urban area where the
          applicant  has  no  access  to  preidentified  accommodation  and
          livelihood options, and where he  or  she  cannot  reasonably  be
          expected to be able to fall back on meaningful support  networks,
          the applicant would likely find him- or herself  in  a  situation
          comparable  to  that  of  other  urban  IDPs.   To   assess   the
          reasonableness of such an outcome, adjudicators need to take into
          account the  scale  of  internal  displacement  in  the  area  of
          prospective relocation, and the living conditions of IDPs in that
          location. Relevant considerations in this regard include the fact
          that IDPs are considered to be among the most  vulnerable  groups
          in Afghanistan, many of whom are beyond the reach of humanitarian
          organizations; as well as available  information  to  the  effect
          that urban IDPs are more vulnerable than the non-displaced  urban
          poor, as they are particularly affected by unemployment;  limited
          access to water and sanitation; and food insecurity. The  limited
          availability of adequate housing must also be taken into account,
          including in particular for IDPs, with  land  allocation  schemes
          reportedly often ill-managed and marred with corruption (see also
          Section II.E).

          The particular circumstances of children as  well  as  the  legal
          obligations of States under the Convention on the Rights  of  the
          Child - in particular the obligations to ensure  that  the  bests
          interests of  the  child  are  a  primary  consideration  in  all
          decision-making affecting children and to give due weight to  the
          views of the child in light of his or her age and maturity - need
          to be taken into account in assessing the  reasonableness  of  an
          IFA/IRA  involving  children.  Adjudicators  need  to  give   due
          consideration  to  the  fact  that  what  is  considered   merely
          inconvenient for adults  may  constitute  undue  hardship  for  a
          child. These considerations  take  on  additional  importance  in
          relation to unaccompanied and separated children." [pg.85]

18.   The UNHCR Guidelines also state that ethnic  divisions  remain  strong
    and refers to the "Peoples under Threat Index" compiled by the Minority
    Rights Group International, which lists Afghanistan as the fourth  most
    dangerous country  in  the  world  for  ethnic  minorities  because  of
    targeted attacks on individuals because of their ethnicity.  The  index
    specifically references to Uzbeks, amongst others, as ethnic minorities
    at risk [pg.74]. In considering the availability of internal relocation
    the UNHCR Guidelines also state [pg.84]:

          "Applicants may be able to fall back on the support of members of
          their extended family or members of their  larger  ethnic  group.
          However, the existence of such traditional support  networks  can
          be assumed to weigh in favour of the reasonableness of a proposed
          IFA/IRA only when the members of the applicant's extended  family
          or wider ethnic group are assessed to  be  willing  and  able  to
          provide genuine support to the applicant in practice, taking into
          account  Afghanistan's   low   humanitarian   and   developmental
          indicators and the wider  economic  constraints  affecting  large
          segments of the population. Moreover, the presence of members  of
          the same ethnic background as the applicant in the proposed  area
          of relocation cannot by itself be  taken  as  evidence  that  the
          applicant would be able to benefit from meaningful  support  from
          such communities in the absence of specific  pre-existing  social
          relations connecting the applicant to individual members  of  the
          ethnic community in question. The extent to which applicants  are
          able  to  rely  on  family  networks  in  the  proposed  area  of
          relocation also has to be considered in  light  of  the  reported
          stigma and discrimination against those who return to Afghanistan
          after spending time abroad."

19.   I have assessed whether internal relocation is a reasonable option  or
    would be unduly harsh within the meaning outlined in AE and FE  v  SSHD
    [2003] INLR 475, Januzi v SSHD [2006] 2 WLR 397 and SSHD v  AH  (Sudan)
    [2007] UKHL 49. I take into account the fact that the appellant  is  in
    contact with family members in Afghanistan, but for the  reasons  given
    above, I conclude that at the date of the hearing he would be  returned
    to Kabul as an unattended child. The appellant has no family  or  other
    connections in Kabul. The appellant was dependent on his brother before
    he left Afghanistan, but he was living in the family home where support
    could be provided at little additional cost. Although his brother might
    be able to provide some financial assistance, it is unclear whether  he
    has the means to pay for the full cost of accommodation and support  in
    Kabul. The evidence shows that, as a child, the appellant is likely  to
    be disproportionately affected by the  ongoing  conflict  and  security
    situation. There is evidence to show continuing security  incidents  in
    Kabul where the Taliban and  other  insurgents  are  still  capable  of
    launching attacks. The appellant comes from a minority ethnic group and
    there is no evidence to suggest that support could be provided by other
    members  of  the  group  in  Kabul.  The  overall  picture  is   of   a
    deteriorating security situation since the  Tribunal  decisions  in  AK
    (Afghanistan) and AA (Afghanistan). The fact of the appellant attaining
    his majority is not a 'bright line' issue that  would  suddenly  render
    him less vulnerable. I am satisfied that an overall assessment  of  the
    appellant's individual circumstances shows that internal relocation  to
    Kabul is likely to be unduly harsh.

20.   For the reasons given above, I find that the  appellant  has  a  well-
    founded fear of persecution for reasons of attributed political opinion
    and or his membership of a particular social group (family). I conclude
    that removal  of  the  appellant  would  breach  the  United  Kingdom's
    obligations under the Refugee Convention and would  be  unlawful  under
    section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998.


Decision

The First-tier Tribunal decision involved the making of an error of law

The decision is remade and the appeal ALLOWED

Signed   [pic]   Date 24 August 2017
Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan
