

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
PA/11618/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS
|                                    |                                    |
|Heard at Field House                |Decision and Reasons Promulgated    |
|on: 20 October 2017                 |on: 25 October 2017                 |
|                                    |                                    |
|                                    |                                    |


                                   Before


                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHANA


                                   Between

                                     SI
                                             (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant


                                     and


                   THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:          Ms A Basharat, of Counsel
For the Respondent:         Mr S Walker, Senior Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


1. The appellant, a national of Bangladesh, appeals to  the  Upper  Tribunal
   against the decision of the respondent dated 6 October 2016 refusing  her
   claim for asylum and humanitarian protection in the United Kingdom. First-
   tier Tribunal Judge Monson dismissed the appellant's appeal in a decision
   promulgated on 5 April 2017.


2. Permission to  appeal  was  granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  PJM
   Hollingworth in a decision dated  16  August  2017  stating  that  it  is
   arguable that the Judge's reasoning has been vitiated by his reference to
   the Bihari community in Bangladesh given that  the  appellant  has  never
   referred to her husband as a Bihari because he is a citizen  of  Pakistan
   and that the Judge wrongly applied the conclusion set out in relation  to
   the Bihari community to the appellant's husband. As a consequence, it  is
   arguable that the proportionality assessment pursuant to  Article  8  has
   been affected.


3. The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  in  his  decision  made  the  following
   findings, which I summarise. The appellant was  granted  a  student  visa
   valid from 1 April 2009 to 28 February  2013.  She  was  granted  further
   leave to remain in the United Kingdom in her last leave being valid until
   27 June 2015.


4. The appellant married on 14 May 2014 and  applied  for  leave  to  remain
   under Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights as she was  in
   her last stages of pregnancy. The  appellant's  husband  originates  from
   Lahore in Pakistan. He has been a student in Pakistan and has also worked
   part-time as a typist for a local newspaper in Pakistan.


5. The appellant's reason for why she  feels  returning  to  Bangladesh  was
   that Bangladeshis hate Pakistanis. She believed that her husband might be
   killed or her family, who did not  accept  the  appellant,  would  ignore
   them. Her daughter would not be able  to  enter  Bangladesh  because  her
   father is a Pakistani. Even if she could relocate away from her family to
   Chittagong or somewhere else, her husband would not be able  to  go  with
   her. Sheikh Hassina has said that there is no  place  for  Pakistanis  on
   Bangladeshi soil.


6. The Judge found that  the  appellant's  evidence  is  wholly  lacking  in
   credibility. The thrust of her original claim was  that  the  family  had
   refused to have any contact with her after learning that she had  married
   a Pakistani national without prior consultation with  them.  It  was  not
   part of her original claim that a mother, sister or  other  relatives  in
   Bangladesh had threatened to do her harm on her return to Bangladesh with
   or without her husband. It was only in the  witness  statement  which  he
   adopted as her evidence at the hearing that the appellant  first  claimed
   that she had received a specific threat from  her  family.  During  cross
   examination, the appellant did not repeat the claim she made in a witness
   statement. On the contrary, the plain implication  of  her  evidence  was
   that no such threat had been made.  Indeed,  it  emerged  from  her  oral
   evidence that contact  with  the  family  in  Bangladesh  had  been  very
   limited. While she had previously claimed that her sister or sisters  had
   expressed extreme disapproval of a  marriage,  in  cross-examination  she
   only referred to one sister with whom her last contact  had  been  before
   the marriage. Therefore, this sister could not have had  the  opportunity
   to  tell  the  appellant  that  she  disapproved  of  the  marriage.  The
   appellant's mother's reaction is consistent with her  being  upset  about
   not being consulted about the appellant's marriage and does not show that
   her family had any objection because of the nationality of her husband.


7. The appellant delayed claiming asylum and her reason was that  she  hoped
   the family would come around to accepting the marriage.  There  is  every
   reason to  believe  that  they  will  do  so,  once  they  have  had  the
   opportunity to meet the appellant's husband. Whatever the outcome,  there
   are not substantial grounds for believing that if the  appellant  returns
   to Bangladesh with her husband and their daughter, her family will become
   agents of persecution.


8. Regarding this second strand of the appellant's asylum claim, there is  a
   historic antagonism  in  Bangladesh  towards  the  Urdu  speaking  Bihari
   community. This is because during the 1971 liberation war, some  factions
   within the Bihari's  supported  West  Pakistan.  Nevertheless,  the  same
   report notes, despite having to battle continued social stigma,  in  2008
   about a 150,000 Bihari's, who were minors at the time of  the  liberation
   war of 1971, or who were born after  this  war,  were  given  citizenship
   rights. About 94% of  the  Bihari's  are  illiterate,  according  to  the
   Refugee and Migratory Movements Research Unit, while the national average
   is 46%. Although the appellant's first language is Urdu and Hindi, he  is
   literate and well educated. So, there are  not  substantial  grounds  for
   believing that he would be identified in Bangladesh as belonging  to  the
   socially stigmatised Bihari community. The Bihari's  are  not  liable  to
   persecution per se despite  their  negative  association  with  Pakistan,
   there are substantial grounds for believing that the appellant  would  be
   liable to persecution in Bangladesh merely on account  of  his  Pakistani
   nationality.


9. Background evidence notes that foreign policy analysts pointed  out  that
   ties between the two nations have not been under  so  much  stress  since
   1974, when Bangladesh became a member  of  the  Organisation  of  Islamic
   Cooperation.  Although  the  prosecution,  conviction  and  execution  of
   Bangladeshi nationals for  complicity  in  crimes  against  humanity  and
   genocide in connection with the 1971 war of liberation continues to be  a
   source of strained relations between Pakistan  and  Bangladesh,  Pakistan
   has once again acknowledged its complicity in the  mass  atrocity  crimes
   committed during the Bangladeshi liberation war in 1971. Therefore, there
   are  not  substantial  grounds  for  believing  that  these  tensions  at
   intergovernmental and diplomatic level have translated into  an  enhanced
   risk for Pakistani nationals in Bangladesh. There are also no reports  of
   Biharis being persecuted  on  that  account  in  this  recent  period  of
   strained relations between Bangladesh and Pakistan.


10. The appellant has not discharged the burden of proving that  either  she
   or her husband have a well-founded fear of persecution in  Bangladesh  on
   account of her husband's Pakistani nationality. By the same token,  there
   are not substantial grounds for believing that on return  to  Bangladesh,
   either the appellant or her husband would face a  real  risk  of  serious
   harm at the hands of non-state agents such as to cross the  threshold  of
   Article 3 of the European Convention on Human Rights.  In  light  of  the
   primary  findings  of  fact,  the  appellant  does  not  qualify  in  the
   alternative for humanitarian protection in accordance with paragraph 339C
   of the immigration rules.


11. It is accepted that the appellant does not have a  viable  private  life
   claim under paragraph 276 ADE of the immigration rules or a viable family
   life claim under appendix FM.


12. With regard to Article 8,  outside  the  immigration  rules,  the  Judge
   accepted that questions one and two of the Razgar test must  be  answered
   in the favour of the respondent. On the  issue  of  proportionality,  the
   Judge took into account the public interest considerations arising  under
   section 117B of the 2002 Act.


13. The appellant must be reasonably competent in the  English  language  as
   she has studied here as a student. She is better able  to  integrate  and
   that account, but Article 8 does not confer upon a couple  the  right  to
   insist upon continuation of married life in the host state,  particularly
   where both of them entered the host state on the implied undertaking that
   they would leave at once  their  respective  studies  had  finished.  The
   appellant is not financially independent. Little weight can  be  attached
   to a private life which is built up whilst the person's  status  here  is
   precarious. Her husband must be able to speak  English  to  a  reasonable
   level of competence and so he  should  be  able  to  find  employment  in
   Bangladesh. Also, he can reasonably be expected to learn  to  communicate
   in Bengali in due course.


14. There are no compelling circumstances  in  the  appellant's  case  which
   would justify her been granted Article 8 relief outside  the  immigration
   rules. The decision appealed against strikes a fair balance  between,  on
   the one hand, the appellant's rights  and  interests  and  those  of  her
   husband and daughter, and, on the other  hand,  the  wider  interests  of
   society. The decision is  proportionate  to  the  legitimate  public  end
   sought to be achieved, namely the protection of this  country's  economic
   well-being  and  the  maintenance  of  firm  and  effective   immigration
   controls.


15. The Judge dismissed the appellant's appeal on all grounds.

Findings on whether there is an error of law

16. I have given anxious scrutiny to the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal
   Judge 's Monson's decision and have taken into  account  the  grounds  of
   appeal and the submissions of the parties at the error  of  law  hearing.
   The main  complaint  made  against  the  Judge  is  that  he  erroneously
   understood that the appellant's husband was  from  the  Bihari  community
   when in fact he is a Pakistani national and has never  claimed  to  be  a
   Bihari. It is argued that the Judges analysis on those bases was  flawed.
   It  was  also  argued  that  this  error  of  fact  also   affected   the
   proportionality assessment by the Judge  respect  of  Article  8  of  the
   European Convention on Human Rights.

17.  There  has  been  a  clear  error  by  the  Judge  in  considering  the
   circumstances of the Bihari  community  in  respect  of  the  appellant's
   husband. The appellant's husband is  a  Pakistani  national.   It  became
   obvious at the error of law hearing that  the  appellant  in  her  asylum
   interview referred to the Bihari community  but  did  not  say  that  her
   husband was a Bihari and had always maintained that  he  is  a  Pakistani
   national. Unfortunately, the Judge mistook this reference and  considered
   her claim on the basis that her husband was from  the  Bihari  community.
   The appellant's claim was that her husband was a Pakistani  national  and
   she relied on the background  evidence  stating  that  there  is  tension
   between Pakistanis and Bangladeshis and that Pakistanis are  not  welcome
   to live in Bangladesh due to their historic  enmity  emanating  from  the
   1971  war  of  liberation  when  some  factions  within  the  Biharis  in
   Bangladesh supported West Pakistan.

18. The Judge clearly fell into error by analysing the  risk  posed  to  the
   Bihari  communities  in  Bangladesh  which  was  not  relevant   to   the
   appellant's appeal because her husband  was  a  Pakistani  national.  The
   question now remains  whether  this  error  is  material  and  whether  a
   different decision would result if the error had not been made.

19. It is completely evident on the reading of  the  entire  decision,  that
   the Judge was aware that the appellant was  a  Pakistani  national.  This
   reference to the  appellant's  husband  being  a  Pakistani  national  is
   littered throughout the  decision.  The  Judge  found  that  taking  into
   account the background  evidence  "Pakistani  nationals"  will  not  face
   persecution in Bangladesh for any reason. When  the  Judge  analysed  the
   risk to the Bihari community, which was  entirely  irrelevant,  he  found
   that there were not be at risk even to Bihari's living in Bangladesh. The
   appellant's husband is not a Bihari but a Pakistani national.  Therefore,
   the Judge applied a higher standard of risk to the  appellant  and  still
   found that the appellant could not succeed. No prejudice  was  caused  to
   the appellant by the Judge analysing risk  to  the  Bihari  community  in
   Bangladesh which was irrelevant and immaterial to the appellant's appeal.
   It is evident from the decision that Judge was aware that  the  appellant
   was a Pakistani national and considered the appellant's appeal  on  those
   bases. I find that it is not a material error of law.


20. The Judge found that the  appellant's  evidence  is  wholly  lacking  in
   credibility and gave cogent reasons for  why  she  did  not  believe  the
   appellant that she was at risk from her family. The Judge stated that the
   thrust of the appellant's original claim for asylum was that  her  family
   had refused to have any contact with her  after  learning  that  she  had
   married a Pakistani national without prior consultation  with  them.  The
   Judge found that this was not part of her original claim that her mother,
   sister or other relatives in Bangladesh had threatened to do her harm  on
   her return to Bangladesh with or without her  husband.  The  judge  noted
   that the first time that the appellant raised this fear of her family was
   in her witness statement before the hearing. The Judge stated that during
   cross examination, the appellant did not repeat the claim she had made in
   her witness statement. On the contrary,  the  plain  implication  of  her
   evidence was that no such threat had been made by her family.


21.  The  Judge  found  her  evidence  was  inconsistent  because  she   had
   previously claimed that her  sister  or  sisters  had  expressed  extreme
   disapproval of her marriage. However, he noted that in cross-examination,
   the appellant only referred to one sister with whom her last contact  had
   been before her marriage. Therefore, he noted that this sister could  not
   have had the opportunity to tell the appellant that  she  disapproved  of
   the marriage. The Judge  found  that  appellant's  mother's  reaction  is
   consistent with her being upset  about  not  being  consulted  about  the
   appellant's marriage and found that this does not show  that  her  family
   had any objection because of the nationality of her husband.


22. The Judge also found  that  the  appellant's  explanation  for  why  she
   delayed in claiming asylum was that  she  hoped  her  family  would  come
   around to accepting her marriage. The Judge was  entitled  to  find  that
   there is every reason to believe that her family would  accept  him  when
   they meet him. This hope that her  family  would  eventually  accept  her
   husband demonstrated to the Judge that it is inconsistent with her  claim
   that the appellant's family will harm her, her  husband  and  child,  let
   alone that her family will become agents of persecution.


23. The Judge was entitled to come to the conclusions that  he  did  on  the
   appellant's evidence and found that the appellant's claim that her family
   will harm her is an afterthought by the appellant given that she did  not
   allude to this in her asylum interview. There is no  perversity  in  this
   conclusion on the evidence before him.

24. I therefore find that although there is an error in the decision of  the
   First-tier Tribunal Judge, it is not a material error and no  differently
   constituted Tribunal would come to a different conclusion on the evidence
   in this appeal. The Judge considered the background  evidence  and  found
   that the appellant, as a Pakistani national who  is  educated,  would  be
   able to live in Bangladesh without fear of harm or persecution and find a
   job and continue with his life with his wife and child and that country.

25. The Judges analysis of Article 8 is without arguable  error.  The  Judge
   gave appropriate weight to the public  interest  as  he  was  statutorily
   bound to do under section 117B of the 2002 Act. He was entitled  to  find
   that the appellant's status in this country has always  been  precarious,
   as has her husband's. They both came to this country as students and knew
   that they would have to return once their studies  were  completed.  They
   could not have had any legitimate expectation that they could  remain  in
   this country permanently if they could not meet the requirements  of  the
   immigration rules for further leave to remain.

26. The Judge appropriately found that this couple could  not  dictate  that
   they wanted to continue their married life in this country. The Judge was
   entitled to find that there are  no  exceptional  circumstances  in  this
   appeal where the appellant should be  granted  leave  to  remain  in  the
   United Kingdom under Article 8 when she could not satisfy the immigration
   rules. There is no perversity in this finding.

27.  I  find  that  the  Judge  was  entitled  and  required  to  reach  his
   conclusions based on his consideration and evaluation  of  the  evidence,
   including the background evidence even if he erroneously and irrelevantly
   considered the risk to the Bihari community in Bangladesh which he  found
   was none. It is clear that the Judge was aware that the  appellant  would
   return to Bangladesh as a Pakistani national and found that he would  not
   be at risk which is an appropriate finding given the background evidence.

28. Notwithstanding  his  considering  an  irrelevant  matter,  it  has  not
   affected the entirety of his decision.  I find that the Judge's reasoning
   and the conclusions that he reached in respect of this appellant's  claim
   is understandable, and not perverse.

29. In R (Iran) v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  [2005]  EWCA
   Civ 982 Brooke LJ commented on that analysis as follows:

       15. It will be noticed that the Master of the Rolls used  the  words
       "vital" and "critical" as synonyms of the word "material"  which  we
       have used above. The  whole  of  his  judgment  warrants  attention,
       because it reveals the anxiety of an appellate court not to overturn
       a judgment at first instance unless it really cannot understand  the
       original judge's thought processes when he/she was  making  material
       findings.
30. I find that I have no difficulty in understanding the reasoning  in  the
   Judge's decision for why he reached his conclusions which  was  based  on
   the fact that the appellant was a national of Pakistan. I find  that  the
   grounds of appeal and  no  more  than  a  disagreement  with  the  Judges
   findings of fact and the conclusions that he drew from such findings.

31. I find that no material error of law has been established in  First-tier
   Tribunal Judge Monson's decision. I find that the judge was  entitled  to
   conclude that the appellant is not entitled to be recognised as a refugee
   or to be granted humanitarian protection in this country.  I  uphold  his
   decision.


DECISION

Appeal dismissed

Signed                                                                    by
   Dated this 25th day of October 2017
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
..........................................
Ms S Chana








