
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11345/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On : 5 March 2021                    |On 17 March 2021                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                                     BA
                         (Anonymity Direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Anzani, instructed by City Heights Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This has been a remote hearing to which there has  been  no  objection
      from the parties. The form of remote hearing was skype for business. A
      face to face hearing was not held because it was not practicable,  and
      all issues could be determined in a remote hearing.

   2. The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh, born on 24 November 1988. He
      has been given permission to appeal against the decision of First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Aldridge dismissing his appeal against the respondent's
      decision to refuse his asylum and human rights claim.

   3. The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on 4 March 2010 with leave
      to enter as a Tier 4 student until 31 October  2011.  His  application
      for further leave to remain as a Tier 1 (post study work) migrant  was
      refused and his appeal against that decision was dismissed on 11  July
      2012. He became appeal rights exhausted on 9 January 2013. On 3  March
      2016, the appellant applied for leave to remain on the  basis  of  his
      family and private life in the UK, but his application was refused and
      certified as clearly unfounded under section 94  of  the  Nationality,
      Immigration and Asylum Act  2002.  The  appellant  then  made  further
      submissions which were rejected under paragraph 353 of the immigration
      rules,  but  the  respondent  subsequently  agreed  to  consider   the
      submissions as a fresh asylum and human rights claim.

   4. The basis of the appellant's claim was that he was a  BNP  (Bangladesh
      Nationalist Party) party activist in the student wing  of  the  party,
      the  Bangladesh  Jatiyotabadi  Chhatradal  (JCD),  and  acted  as  the
      publicity secretary for his local  party.  He  and  his  family  faced
      numerous threats because of his political involvement and in  2010  an
      FIR, in a false case, was lodged against him by the  police  who  were
      influenced by the Awami League, the ruling party  of  Bangladesh.  The
      threats and intimidation had in particular come from an MP  with  whom
      he had had personal difficulties when at college.

   5. The respondent, in refusing the appellant's claim on 6 November  2019,
      noted discrepancies in his evidence and did  not  accept  any  of  his
      account and found the documents upon which he relied to be unreliable.
      The respondent did not accept that the appellant feared the MP and did
      not accept that a false charge had been brought against  him.  It  was
      considered that he was at no risk on return to Bangladesh and that his
      removal from the UK would not breach his human rights.

   6. The appellant's appeal against that decision was heard  by  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Aldridge on 19 August 2020. An application was made  at
      the beginning of the hearing for the  appellant  to  be  excused  from
      giving live evidence, without any adverse inferences being drawn,  due
      to his mental health issues which affected his  memory.  Reliance  was
      placed upon a psychological report from Dr Sreenan. The judge declined
      to give an indication that he would not draw an adverse inference  and
      the appellant then elected to give oral evidence. The judge also heard
      from the appellant's partner with whom it  was  claimed  that  he  had
      lived for 10 years and who had indefinite leave to remain in  the  UK,
      having come here in 2005 as a student, as well as from another witness
      who lived at the same property.

   7.  The  judge  identified  inconsistencies  and  discrepancies  in   the
      appellant's evidence and  accordingly  rejected  his  account  of  his
      involvement with the BNP and of  receiving  threats  and  he  did  not
      accept the reliability of the supporting  documentation.  He  did  not
      accept that the appellant was at any risk on return to Bangladesh. The
      judge accepted the expert evidence of Dr Sreenan and accepted that the
      appellant had mental health issues, but did not accept that he  was  a
      suicide risk and considered that he would be able to access  treatment
      in Bangladesh. As for the appellant's Article 8 family life claim, the
      judge did not accept that he had a genuine and subsisting relationship
      with his claimed partner but considered in any event that  there  were
      no insurmountable obstacles to the relationship  being  maintained  in
      Bangladesh. The judge considered that there were no  very  significant
      obstacles to integration in Bangladesh and that  the  appellant  could
      not meet the family or private  life  provisions  of  the  immigration
      rules.  He  concluded  that   the   appellant's   removal   would   be
      proportionate and would not breach his Article 8 human rights  and  he
      accordingly dismissed the appeal on all grounds.

   8. Permission was sought by the appellant to appeal to the Upper Tribunal
      on three grounds: that the judge had failed to treat the appellant  as
      a vulnerable witness in accordance with the relevant guidance and that
      the decision was therefore vitiated by  procedural  impropriety;  that
      the judge's assessment of Articles 3 and  8  on  medical  grounds  was
      flawed; and that the judge's assessment of the appellant's family life
      with his partner was flawed and failed to take account of the evidence
      of JA in his witness statement.

   9. Permission was granted in the First-tier Tribunal on 23 October  2020.
      The matter then came before me for a hearing,  by  way  of  skype  for
      business.

Hearing and submissions

  10. With regard to the  first  ground,  Ms  Anzani  submitted  that  Judge
      Aldridge had erred in law in his decision by failing to refer to,  and
      follow, the Joint Presidential Guidance Note No 2  of  2010  requiring
      him to state whether the appellant was a vulnerable  witness.  He  had
      not stated whether he accepted that the appellant was vulnerable  and,
      if so,  what  considerations  followed  from  that  in  terms  of  the
      inconsistencies  and  discrepancies  identified   as   part   of   his
      credibility  assessment.  With  regard  to  the  second  ground,   the
      challenge to the judge's assessment  of  the  medical  evidence  under
      Articles 3 and 8, Ms Anzani submitted that  the  sole  basis  for  the
      judge's finding that the risk of suicide was not sufficiently high  to
      meet the relevant threshold was that there was  treatment  for  mental
      health problems in Bangladesh, namely the 200 bed  facility  in  Dhaka
      referred to in the Home Office  CPIN  report,  but  that  finding  was
      unreasonable and irrational given the evidence of the  limitations  of
      mental health treatment in  Bangladesh  and  the  stigma  attached  to
      mental health problems. She submitted that the  judge's  finding  that
      the appellant could make a full recovery in Bangladesh was speculative
      and failed to take account  of  Dr  Sreenan's  identification  of  the
      protective factor of his partner in the UK. As for the  third  ground,
      Ms Anzani submitted that the judge failed to take a  full  account  of
      the evidence of JA when considering the appellant's family  life  with
      his partner.

  11. Mr Melvin, in response, submitted that it was not incumbent  upon  the
      judge to  include  a  paragraph  confirming  that  the  appellant  was
      vulnerable, when he had otherwise made it clear that he had considered
      the matter and, in any event, it had not been shown  how  the  judge's
      credibility  assessment  was  affected  by  the  omission  of  such  a
      paragraph. He asked me to note as relevant the fact that it  had  been
      confirmed at the previous case  management  review  hearing  that  the
      appellant would be giving evidence at  the  appeal  hearing  and  that
      Article 3 was not being pursued  on  medical  grounds.  There  was  no
      witness statement from counsel  at  the  First-tier  Tribunal  hearing
      suggesting that the  appellant  had  been  prejudiced  by  the  cross-
      examination or that he was unable to give his  evidence.  As  for  the
      medical  evidence,  the  judge  had  considered  that  and  had   made
      appropriate findings. The grounds failed to identify what was  lacking
      in the way the judge assessed the evidence.  The  appellant  had  made
      many previous claims in the UK and only produced medical evidence when
      advised to seek a psychological report. There was otherwise little  in
      the way of evidence showing that he was in  receipt  of  treatment  or
      taking medication and the judge was entitled to conclude as he did. As
      for the third ground, the  judge  made  a  proper  assessment  of  the
      appellant's family life. The statement of JA was not material  to  his
      findings. The judge's decision should be upheld.

  12. In response, Ms Anzani submitted that Mr Melvin  was  wrong  and  that
      there was a requirement in the Presidential Guidance for  a  judge  to
      record whether the appellant was a vulnerable witness.

Discussion and conclusions

  13. In the first ground of challenge referring to the judge's duties owing
      to the appellant's vulnerability, reliance is placed upon the judgment
      of the Senior President of Tribunals in AM (Afghanistan)  v  Secretary
      of State for the Home  Department  [2017]  EWCA  Civ  1123,  where  he
      considered the Joint Presidential Guidance Note No 2 of  2010.  I  set
      out the relevant part of the judgment as follows:
   1. "To assist parties and tribunals a Practice Direction 'First-tier  and
      Upper Tribunal Child, Vulnerable Adult and Sensitive  Witnesses',  was
      issued  by  the  Senior  President,  Sir  Robert  Carnwath,  with  the
      agreement of the Lord Chancellor on  30  October  2008.  In  addition,
      joint Presidential Guidance Note No 2 of 2010 was issued by  the  then
      President of UTIAC, Blake J and the acting President of the FtT (IAC),
      Judge Arfon-Jones. The directions and guidance contained in  them  are
      to be followed and for the  convenience  of  practitioners,  they  are
      annexed to this judgment. Failure to follow them will most likely be a
      material error of law. They are to be  found  in  the  Annex  to  this
      judgment.
   1. The PD and the Guidance Note [Guidance] provide detailed  guidance  on
      the approach to be adopted by the  tribunal  to  an  incapacitated  or
      vulnerable person. I agree with the Lord Chancellor's submission  that
      there are five key features:
      a. the early identification of issues of vulnerability is  encouraged,
      if at all possible, before any substantive hearing through the use  of
      a CMRH or pre-hearing review (Guidance [4] and [5]);
      b. a person who is incapacitated  or  vulnerable  will  only  need  to
      attend  as  a  witness  to  give  oral  evidence  where  the  tribunal
      determines that "the evidence is necessary to enable the fair  hearing
      of the case and their welfare would not be prejudiced by doing so" (PD
      [2] and Guidance [8] and [9]);
      c.  where  an  incapacitated  or  vulnerable  person  does  give  oral
      evidence, detailed provision is to be made to ensure their welfare  is
      protected before and during the hearing (PD [6] and [7]  and  Guidance
      [10]);
      d. it is necessary  to  give  special  consideration  to  all  of  the
      personal circumstances of an incapacitated  or  vulnerable  person  in
      assessing their evidence (Guidance [10.2] to [15]); and
      e. relevant additional sources  of  guidance  are  identified  in  the
      Guidance including from international bodies (Guidance Annex A [22] to
      [27]).
   1. In addition, the Guidance at [4] and [5] makes it clear  that  one  of
      the purposes of the early identification of issues of vulnerability is
      to minimise exposure to harm of vulnerable individuals.  The  Guidance
      at [5.1]  warns  representatives  that  they  may  fail  to  recognise
      vulnerability and they might consider it appropriate to  suggest  that
      an appropriate adult attends with the vulnerable witness to  give  him
      or  her  assistance.  That  said,  the  primary   responsibility   for
      identifying   vulnerabilities   must   rest   with   the   appellant's
      representatives who are better placed than the  Secretary  of  State's
      representatives  to  have  access  to  private  medical  and  personal
      information. Appellant's representatives should  draw  the  tribunal's
      attention to the PD and Guidance and should make submissions about the
      appropriate directions and measures to be considered e.g.  whether  an
      appellant should give oral evidence or the special measures  that  are
      required to protect his  welfare  or  make  effective  his  access  to
      justice. The SRA practice note of 2 July 2015  entitled  'Meeting  the
      needs of vulnerable clients' sets out how solicitors  should  identify
      and  communicate  with  vulnerable  clients.  It  also  sets  out  the
      professional duty on a  solicitor  to  satisfy  him/herself  that  the
      client either does or does not have capacity. I shall come back to the
      guidance to be followed in the most difficult cases where a  guardian,
      intermediary or facilitator may be required.
   1. Given the emphasis on the determination of credibility on the facts of
      this appeal, there is particular force in  the  Guidance  at  [13]  to
      [15]:
      "13. The weight to be placed upon factors of vulnerability may differ
      depending on the matter under appeal, the burden and standard of proof
      and whether the individual is a witness or an appellant.
      14.  Consider the evidence, allowing for possible different degrees of
      understanding by witnesses and appellant compared to those  [who]  are
      not vulnerable, in the context of evidence from others associated with
      the appellant and the background evidence  before  you.   Where  there
      were clear discrepancies in the oral evidence, consider the extent  to
      which the age, vulnerability or sensitivity  of  the  witness  was  an
      element of that discrepancy or lack of clarity.
      15.  The decision should record whether the Tribunal has concluded the
      appellant (or a witness) is a  child,  vulnerable  or  sensitive,  the
      effect the Tribunal considered the  identified  vulnerability  had  in
      assessing the evidence before it and this  whether  the  Tribunal  was
      satisfied whether the appellant had established his or her case to the
      relevant standard of proof.  In asylum appeals, weight should be given
      to objective indications of risk rather than necessarily to a state of
      mind."
   1. In JL (medical reports -  credibility)  (China) (supra),  which  was
      binding on the FtT, the UT considered that, where the FtT accepted  an
      appellant as vulnerable, it should apply the Guidance Note.  I  agree.
      The UT found the judge erred in failing to do so:
      "26. A second error we discern consists in the  judge's  treatment  of
      the appellant's vulnerability (the appellant's ground 3).  It is clear
      from  her  determination  that  despite  disbelieving  much   of   the
      appellant's  evidence  including  the  account   she   gave   of   her
      psychological problems (the judge placed particular  emphasis  on  the
      appellant's ability to perform well in  her  studies)  the  judge  was
      prepared to accept she was a vulnerable person.  To be  specific,  she
      appeared to accept that the appellant had been the victim of  physical
      abuse at the hands of her former  boyfriend  in  the  UK  [104];  and,
      although rejecting the reasons given, accepted that "[i]t may well  be
      the appellant has certain mental health issues".  Given that the judge
      described the respondent's  reasons  (as  set  out  in  the  preceding
      paragraph)  as  "cogent"  and   that   they   included   reliance   on
      inconsistencies, it was of particular importance to see what findings,
      if any, the judge made about the possible relevance to  these  of  the
      appellant being a vulnerable person.  In  the  case  of  a  vulnerable
      person, it is incumbent on a Tribunal  judge  to  apply  the  guidance
      given in the Joint  Presidential  Guidance  Note  No  2  2010,  Child,
      Vulnerable adult and sensitive appellant guidance...[the UT  then  set
      our paras 14 and 15 referred to above].
      27. Applying this  guidance  would  have  entailed  the  judge  asking
      herself whether any of the inconsistencies in the appellant's  account
      (as given in her asylum interview) identified by the respondent in the
      reasons for refusal - and described by the judge as being  "cogent"  -
      could be explained by her being a vulnerable person.  This  the  judge
      did not do."

  14.  Ms Anzani relied in particular upon [15] of the Presidential Guidance
      as I have highlighted in the judgment above  and  submitted  that  the
      judge materially erred in law by failing to refer to the guidance  and
      by failing to make a specific finding on whether the appellant  was  a
      vulnerable witness.

  15. It is indeed the case that there  is  no  specific  paragraph  in  the
      judge's decision  explicitly  confirming  that  the  appellant  was  a
      vulnerable witness. However, I do not accept  that  anything  material
      arises from this, in this case, given that it is abundantly clear that
      the judge treated the appellant as a vulnerable person  and  had  full
      and careful regard to the contents of the psychological report  of  Dr
      Sreenan and the other medical evidence  in  the   appeal  bundle,  and
      considered the impact of that evidence in assessing the credibility of
      the appellant's claim.

  16. At [35], the judge recorded an application made  before  him  for  the
      appellant to be excused from giving live evidence owing to his  mental
      health issues, and for there to be no adverse inference taken  against
      him as a  result.  The  judge  noted  that  there  had  been  no  such
      indication at the previous case management review hearing (held on  27
      May 2020), where it had been confirmed that  the  appellant  would  be
      giving oral evidence, and he accordingly, and reasonably,  refused  to
      commit to drawing no adverse  inference  on  that  basis.  The  judge,
      nevertheless, offered the appellant an opportunity to seek further and
      specific medical evidence and offered to adjourn the hearing for  that
      to be obtained, but the appellant declined the invitation and chose to
      continue with the hearing and give live evidence. The  judge  recorded
      at [35]  the  arrangements  put  in  place  for  the  appellant  as  a
      vulnerable witness, which included  directions  for  the  respondent's
      cross-examination  and  adequate  breaks  for  the  appellant.  It  is
      therefore abundantly clear that the judge followed the  tenor  of  the
      Presidential Guidance in his treatment of the appellant.

  17. As for his approach to the appellant's evidence, the judge made  clear
      at [57] and [59] that he  had  taken  the  appellant's  mental  health
      issues and his ability  to  give  oral  testimony  into  account  when
      assessing the credibility of  his  evidence  and  he  referred  to  Dr
      Sreenan's expert opinion in that regard. The judge  went  on  to  note
      inconsistencies and discrepancies in the overall  evidence,  including
      contradictory evidence from the witnesses and inconsistencies  in  the
      documentation. It is plain that there were significant aspects of  the
      evidence aside from the appellant's own recollection of  events  which
      undermined the credibility of his claim and from which the  judge  was
      fully and properly entitled to draw adverse conclusions,  but  in  any
      event the judge clearly assessed the evidence  as  a  whole  with  the
      appropriate regard to the medical evidence.

  18. Accordingly, I find there to be no merit in  the  first  ground  which
      seeks, but fails, to show that there was any procedural impropriety in
      the judge's assessment of the appellant's evidence. I agree  with  the
      observation in Mr Melvin's  written  submissions,  that  there  is  no
      indication that the appellant was treated  with  anything  other  than
      respect given his mental health issues and that the judge clearly  had
      the appellant's mental health issues in mind when deciding the appeal.
      There is nothing inconsistent, or materially  inconsistent,  with  the
      Presidential Guidance and the judgment in AM in the judge's decision.

  19. As for the second ground, and contrary to the assertion made  therein,
      it is clearly not the case that the judge's  sole  basis  for  finding
      that the appellant would not be at risk of suicide on  being  returned
      to Bangladesh was the availability of mental health treatment in  that
      country. It is clear from the judge's findings at [75], and his use of
      the word  "also",  that  the  mental  health  treatment  available  in
      Bangladesh  was  an  additional  factor  for   concluding   that   the
      appellant's return would not meet the required threshold of  risk.  At
      [71] to [73] the judge confirmed that he had had  regard  to  all  the
      medical evidence before him and he directed himself  appropriately  on
      the approach to such evidence in line with  relevant  authorities.  At
      [74] to [76] he went on to give his reasons for  concluding  that  the
      threshold for an Article 3 claim was not met and at [99] to  [104]  he
      made similar findings in the context of Article 8.

  20. Although the judge's findings and conclusions, in particular  at  [74]
      to [76], could perhaps have been better expressed, it is  clear  that,
      whilst accepting that Dr Sreenan was properly qualified  to  make  the
      assessment that he did, he found there to be limits to the  weight  he
      was able to accord to the medical reports,  given  that  Dr  Sreenan's
      opinion was  largely  based  upon  the  information  provided  by  the
      appellant.  The  judge  also  noted  Dr  Sreenan's  opinion  that  the
      appellant did not  meet  the  diagnostic  criteria  for  the  disorder
      previously diagnosed and he noted that his symptoms of mental  illness
      had developed recently,  after  making  his  asylum  claim  and  being
      interviewed. Indeed, it is relevant to note from Dr Sreenan's  reports
      that he considered the appellant's  mental  health  problems  to  have
      started in September 2019 and to have been triggered by intense stress
      from pressures at work and in moving house  (paragraph  2.3.1  of  the
      second report).

  21. The appellant's grounds assert that the judge failed  to  consider  Dr
      Sreenan's concerns about the loss of the protective factor provided by
      his partner if he was returned to Bangladesh and the impact of that on
      his mental health and the risk of suicide. However, the judge  clearly
      did consider protective factors at [75] and [76] and at [85],  and  in
      any event  had  concerns  as  to  whether  there  was  a  genuine  and
      subsisting  relationship.  It  seems  to  me  that,  contrary  to  the
      assertions made in the grounds, the judge's assessment of the risk  of
      suicide and the impact on the appellant of removal to Bangladesh was a
      detailed and careful one which took full account of all  the  evidence
      and included cogently reasoned findings.

  22. With regard to the last ground, I am entirely  in  agreement  with  Mr
      Melvin, that the  evidence  of  JA  did  not  add  materially  to  the
      appellant's claim in regard to his relationship with his  partner,  in
      particular as JA was not present at the hearing and was not  available
      for cross-examination on his evidence. The judge clearly had regard to
      JA's statement, as he mentioned at [77], as  well  as  all  the  other
      evidence relating to the Article 8 family life claim, and he  was  not
      required to  make  specific  findings  on  each  and  every  piece  of
      evidence. The judge provided full and proper reasons for reaching  the
      conclusions that he did about the  appellant's  relationship  and  was
      entitled to reject the claim on the basis that he did.

  23. For all of these reasons I find that the grounds disclose no errors of
      law in the judge's decision. The judge's decision is  a  detailed  and
      comprehensive one taking into account all of the evidence, approaching
      the evidence appropriately in the context of the medical  opinion  and
      reports, and providing cogent reasons for the conclusions  reached  on
      all grounds.

DECISION

  24. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not  involve
      an error on a point of law. I do  not  set  aside  the  decision.  The
      decision to dismiss the appeal stands.

         Anonymity

   The anonymity direction made by the First-tier Tribunal is maintained.


Signed:  S Kebede
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede                           Dated:  8 March 2021
