
                                    [pic]


In the Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11170/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 10 May 2019                       |On 7 August 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANBURY

                                   Between

                                  Jamal [N]
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Gemma King of counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr T Lindsay, a Home Office presenting officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS
Introduction

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan who  was  born  on  3rd  July
    1985.

The Appellant's Immigration History

 2. The appellant entered the UK on in July 2008 having been  fingerprinted
    in Greece en route for the UK. He did not finally claim asylum until 10
    February 2016.

The hearing

 3. The appellant claims that the  decision  of  judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Veloso (the judge) in the First-tier Tribunal (FTT) contains a
    material error of law in that the judge is said to have  erred  in  his
    assessment of Dr Munro's report.

 4. On his behalf, it was submitted that the appellant would  now  have  to
    return to Afghanistan with a number of mental and physical problems. It
    appears that the judge disagreed with Dr Munro's  conclusions,  but  Ms
    King questioned the judge's qualifications for doing so. Dr  Munro  was
    clinically qualified and experienced to make  the  conclusions  and  to
    reach  the  conclusions  he  had  reached.  Dr  Munro's  expertise   in
    diagnosing PTSD were set out at pages 111 and 112 of the appeal bundle.
    There are a number of criticisms of the judge's decision to reject that
    evidence. The rejection of the PTSD finding was said to  have  had  two
    major impacts:

    1)   The evidence of the PTSD was of importance  when  looking  at  the
    credibility of the appellant's account. The appellant claimed  to  have
    suffered an attack in Afghanistan;

    2)   I was referred to the leading case of  A.S.  (Kabul)  [2018]  UKUT
    118. The appellant may well be a  "vulnerable  individual",  which  may
    affect the judge's assessment of his safety on return to Afghanistan.

 5. It was noteworthy that the respondent had  not  criticised  Dr  Munro's
    report but had rejected the appellant's account.

 6. The first ground of appeal was therefore to say that the FTT  had  been
    wrong to attach little weight to Dr Munro's report because he was a GP.

 7. Ms King then outlined the second ground, which clearly overlapped  with
    the first. It was to suggest that the  GP's  report  should  have  been
    considered as part of the evidence on the day of the hearing and  given
    proper weight. There was no objection by the respondent to this report,
    indeed, it was referred  to  at  page  11,  paragraph  38  (3)  of  the
    decision. It was accepted that the evidence was  sparse  and  that  the
    judge was critical of  the  appellant's  explanation  for  an  apparent
    failure to report his mental health problems to his  GP.  Nevertheless,
    the judge had not adequately considered the appellant's explanation for
    this, which seems to have been that he lost touch with his GP  when  he
    moved house.

 8. Mrs King submitted that the judge had been critical of the  appellant's
    explanation and did not in consider this explanation at all, or at  all
    adequately. His reasoning was very sparse, it was submitted. This  "fed
    into" a failure to accept the appellant's evidence, indicating that  it
    was "untrue" and "incredible".

 9. Next I was referred to paragraph 22 of the grounds/paragraph 24 of  the
    decision. Paragraph 22 of the grounds  criticised  the  judge  for  his
    finding of "inconsistencies" in relation to a description of the "Mafia
    or Taliban". It was submitted that the appellant's evidence should  not
    be rejected as there were only fairly minor  inconsistencies.  However,
    these inconsistencies made up approximately one third  of  the  judge's
    reasons for rejecting that appeal. Therefore, Mrs  King  submitted  she
    had established material error of law and it would be necessary to  re-
    make a decision having heard up-to-date evidence.

10. Mr Lindsay, on the other hand, submitted that no error of law had  been
    shown. The weight that Dr Munro's report was given was a matter for the
    judge. He had examined the appellant in Twickenham in 2019 - many years
    after the alleged events giving rise to the PTSD. He  did  not  give  a
    particularly thorough description of the examination,  which  may  have
    been quite short. In fairness, however, the  respondent  accepted  that
    the report appeared to be thorough.

11. An additional problem with the report prepared by Dr Munro was that  it
    is not possible to ascertain how long he examined the appellant for. At
    paragraph 53 of the report Dr Munro states words  to  the  effect  that
    there was "nothing to make me doubt his information". It was  submitted
    that was not the same as a clear diagnosis and opinion that he suffered
    from PTSD and had experienced the events the appellant described.

12. It is accepted that Dr Munro had submitted his CV and that the case was
    not on "all fours" with RJ (Cameroon). However, all GPs expect to  meet
    a minimum standard, but a retired GP was not necessarily as up to  date
    with research and guidance as a still practising GP.

13. The judge was therefore entitled to reject  the  medical  evidence,  Mr
    Lindsay said.

14. The judge was also said to have been wrong to  reject  the  appellant's
    evidence that his removal from the UK would have an adverse  impact  on
    his health, given he had ongoing intermittent pain. The medial evidence
    suggested that the appellant was unable to work due to pain, but it was
    submitted this did not affect his safety on return. In so  far  as  the
    evidence suggested that the  appellant  was  unable  to  work,  it  was
    acknowledged that he had intermittent pain making work more difficult.

15. It was then outlined that the appellant was apparently in ongoing pain.
    Although he was managing adequately, it would not render his return  to
    Afghanistan straightforward.

16. Mr Lindsay said the ground 3 (failing to consider all the evidence) was
    also not made out. This was  essentially  a  rationality  argument,  he
    said, and the judge had not reached  an  irrational  decision.  It  was
    accepted that the judge was the arbiter of fact  and  credibility,  but
    had she properly considered all the evidence and no irrationality could
    be found in this case.

17. Ms King briefly replied to say that the points made by  the  respondent
    were not the "obvious points". Dr Murray had set out his  reasons.  The
    judge was plainly unqualified to make  the  decision  he  had  reached,
    based on that report before him and he ought  to  have  found  for  the
    appellant.

18. At the end of the hearing I reserved my decision as  to  whether  there
    was material error  of  law  but  indicated  that  I  had  reached  the
    preliminary view that the judge had been wrong to reject out of hand Dr
    Munro's evidence, in so far as that was what occurred. It seems  to  be
    accepted by both parties that, in any event, I should find  that  there
    had been a material error of law in the decision, which  could  be  re-
    made but updating evidence would be needed  due  to  the  time  of  the
    latter since appearing in the FTT.

Discussion

19. The correct approach to medical evidence is correctly summarised in Mac
    Donald's Immigration Law at 20.112. Medical evidence must be considered
    as part of the case and only rejected where there  are  cogent  reasons
    for doing so. A judge is entitled to consider the weight to be given to
    the evidence and  this  includes  looking  at  the  qualifications  and
    experience of the medical  practitioner.  A  judge  should  not  reject
    evidence just because it is given by a GP rather than a consultant, but
    it may be appropriate to attach particular weight to  evidence  from  a
    noted practitioner in his field or to give  greater  weight  to  strong
    medical evidence than weak.

Conclusions

20. The appellant travelled through several safe countries before  arriving
    in the UK, it would seem, in 2008.  There  were  a  number  of  adverse
    credibility findings against him, including the fact that  his  initial
    claim for asylum was treated as "withdrawn" by  the  respondent  for  a
    failure to comply with certain requirements of  him.  There  were  also
    numerous flaws in his account; his fear of persecution being of a  very
    general kind stemming from his father's  Hezb-i-Islami  activities  and
    fear  of  the  Taliban  and  other  "gangsters"  in  Afghanistan.   The
    respondent noted the absence of any Convention reason in  her  refusal.
    The appellant, apparently, claims to have been targeted by  an  unknown
    group  in  Afghanistan.  The   serious   harm   threshold   under   the
    Qualification Directive had not been met either, the respondent  found.
    Accordingly, the appellant did not qualify under paragraph 339F of  the
    Immigration Rules for humanitarian protection.

21. The judge was required to look carefully at  the  medical  evidence  in
    considering  credibility  of  the  appellant's  account.  But,   I   am
    satisfied, having carefully re-read  his  decision,  that  he  did  not
    dismiss it out of hand and indeed  did  consider  it  as  part  of  his
    consideration  of  the  evidence.  In  particular,  I  would  refer  to
    paragraph 31 in the decision where  the  judge  refers  to  Dr  Munro's
    "extensive qualifications years  of  experience".   As  a  GP,  he  was
    described as being the "first port of call for any patient with  mental
    health problems" but it was fair for the  judge  to  comment  that  his
    level of experience was less  than  would  have  been  the  case  of  a
    clinical psychiatrist authorised under section 12 of the Mental  Health
    Act 1983 or even a clinical psychologist with adequate experience.  For
    the reasons given in the penultimate sentence of paragraph  31  of  the
    decision, it was also potentially relevant that Dr Munro had retired.

22. In any event,  as  I  indicated  at  the  hearing,  if  the  judge  was
    excessively  cautious  about  accepting  Dr  Munro's  evidence,  which,
    broadly, I have concluded he was not, I am in any event  satisfied  the
    judge had regard to the overall credibility of the  appellant's  claim.
    He considered all  the  adverse  factors  there  were  and  came  to  a
    conclusion he was entitled to come to. In so far as he attached "little
    weight" to Dr Munro's report, the judge was not simply doing so because
    he was a GP but because the appellant was in "overall good health"  and
    this meant it was sufficiently safe to return him to Kabul.

23. I am satisfied that characterisation of the medical evidence  from  the
    judge as a "GP", whose evidence was therefore less weighty than a  more
    senior professional, did not lead the judge to make any material  error
    of law. The judge fully considered the credibility issues in  the  case
    as well as the appellant's vulnerability. These were carefully assessed
    against the criteria for  assessing  refugee/human  rights  claims  and
    found to be wanting. In addition, although the appellant  had  been  in
    the UK for many years, he did not have a viable claim under  article  8
    ECHR, being an unmarried male with no children.

24. Therefore, the decision was a sustainable one.

Notice of Decision

The appeal against the decision FTT dismissed.

The decision of the FTT  to  dismiss  the  appellant's  appeal  against  the
respondent's decision to dismiss his claims under  the  Refugee  Convention,
the claim for humanitarian protection and under the ECHR stand.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 29 July 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date 29 July 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury
