
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11624/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 27th February 2019, typed, corrected,      |On 14th March 2019            |
|Signed and sent to Promulgation on 6th        |                              |
|March 2019.                                   |                              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley

                                   Between

                                 alhamim [g]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms G Brown instructed by Elder Rahimi Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms N Willocks-Briscoe, a Senior Home Office
Presenting Officer


                     REASONS FOR FINDING AN ERROR OF LAW


1.   The appellant is a national of Sudan who was born on 24th  April  1981.
    He made application to the respondent for recognition as a refugee. The
    respondent  concluded  that  he  was  not  entitled  to   international
    protection and the appellant appealed the decision of the Secretary  of
    State, dated 10th September 2018, to the First-tier  Tribunal.   First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Wylie heard the appellant's appeal at Hatton  Cross
    on 31st October 2018.

2.   The appellant's appeal is based  on  his  claimed  fear  of  return  to
    Sudan.  He claims to have left Sudan for Egypt in 2009 and  from  there
    he flew to Turkey on 5th May, 2009.  On 25th December 2009 he travelled
    to Greece where he remained for nineteen  months.   He  then  travelled
    back to Turkey on 1st July 2011 and stayed there until  February  2015.
    He then went to Greece where  he  stayed  until  June  2015  and  then,
    travelling through various European countries, he arrived in the United
    Kingdom by train from Calais on 29th July 2015 and  claimed  asylum  on
    the same day.

3.   The appellant's asylum claim was rejected on 26th November 2015 and  an
    appeal  to  the  Tribunal  was  dismissed  on  23rd  June  2016.    The
    application to appeal this decision was rejected on 21st July 2016  and
    he then became appeal rights exhausted.

4.    He  lodged  further  submissions  on  30th  November  2017,  but   the
    respondent refused to consider these as a fresh claim.   The  appellant
    sought judicial review of this decision and  the  judicial  review  was
    withdrawn after the respondent agreed to reconsider the  November  30th
    submissions as a fresh claim.  The respondent  subsequently  considered
    fresh evidence and made a decision on 10th September 2018 and as I have
    indicated it was against that decision that the appellant appealed.

5.   The appellant maintains  that  if  returned  to  Sudan  he  would  face
    mistreatment because of his ethnicity as a non-Arab  Darfuri  of  Berti
    tribal origin.  The  respondent  accepts  that  a  person  of  non-Arab
    Darfuri ethnicity is likely to suffer serious harm  or  persecution  in
    Sudan.

4.   The judge had before her a  report  from  a  distinguished  expert,  Mr
    Peter Verney; it was dated 26th November 2017.   At  paragraph  301  of
    that report, Mr Verney concluded that it was  "very  likely"  that  the
    appellant is from the Berti tribe as he claims.

5.   The judge began to consider her findings  of  fact  from  paragraph  35
    onwards of the determination.  She noted that the appellant  relied  on
    the report of Mr Verney  and  at  paragraph  34,  that  the  respondent
    accepted that Mr Verney was suitably qualified to comment  on  military
    and the security situation in Sudan.  The  judge  makes  various  other
    findings.  She draws attention to  the  fact  there  is  a  discrepancy
    between what Mr Verney said and what the appellant  said  at  paragraph
    57, but the judge does not give any consideration  to  the  possibility
    that the mistake may have been on the part of Mr Verney, rather than on
    the part of the appellant.  The judge's finding at paragraphs 58 and 59
    do not impact at all on the conclusions of Mr Verney.   Similarly,  the
    finding at paragraphs 60, 61, 62 and 63 do not impact  on  Mr  Verney's
    findings.  At paragraph 65 of the determination the judge said this, "I
    give weight to the report of  Mr  Verney.   However,  it  is  only  his
    opinion that this appellant is Berti, and I must take into account  the
    other evidence which has been provided as well as  the  credibility  of
    the appellant."

7.   The findings that follow do not in  my  view  really  impact  upon  the
    conclusions of Mr Verney.  Unfortunately, it  is  not  clear  from  the
    determination what weight she gives to the expert's opinion and how her
    credibility findings undermine that opinion, if in fact that  was  what
    she thought.  Today Ms Willocks-Briscoe accepted that there  were  some
    difficulties with the determination.

8.   I have concluded that the determination cannot stand; I set  it  aside.
    Both representatives agree that none of the judge's findings can  stand
    in the circumstances and so the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  tasked  with
    making clear, logical and properly reasoned findings of  fact,  afresh.
    The appeal will be heard by  an  Immigration  Judge  other  than  Judge
    Wylie, Designated Judge J F W Phillips and First  Tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Lebasci.

9.   This appeal has been anonymised by the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge,  I
    see no basis for any anonymity order and I discharge the order made  by
    Judge Wylie.


Richard Chalkley

A Judge of the Upper Tribunal.

