
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number PA/11012/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard by Skype for Business          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 14 April 2021                     |On 22 April 2021                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                           TWANA ABDULKADER JALAL
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr S Martin, of Jain, Neil & Ruddy, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a Kurdish citizen of Iraq.  FtT  Judge  Cox  dismissed
    his appeal by a decision promulgated on 31 December 2019.

 2. The appellant sought permission to appeal on 3 grounds:

    (1)    absence of a finding on risk that a young man  from  a  disputed
    area might be perceived as an associate or collaborator of ISIS;

    (2)    failure to apply country guidance  stated  in  AAH  [2018]  UKUT
    00212, and subsequently in SMO [2019] UKUT 00400; and

    (3)    finding no risk from Hashd Al  Shaabi,  contrary  to  "objective
    evidence".

 3. On 27 January 2020 the FtT granted permission, on the view  that  while
    the matter in ground 1 was not at  the  forefront  of  the  appellant's
    case, omission to consider it might arguably be material.

 4. A response by the SSHD, of 7 May 2020, focuses on AAH at paragraph 120,
    to the effect that returnees should be able  to  show  that  they  have
    recently arrived from the UK, dispelling any suggestion of having  come
    straight from ISIS territory.

 5. A response for the appellant, of 19 May 2020, says that the FtT did not
    address the point relied upon by the SSHD, and that the  SSHD  has  not
    addressed the rest of the grounds.

 6. Mr Martin relied upon the grounds and  response  above.   He  submitted
    that the FtT erred materially, and  that  applying  SMO,  the  findings
    which were reached were sufficient for  the  outcome  to  be  reversed.
    Alternatively, he sought a remit for a fresh hearing.

 7. Mr Martin took as his starting point that  the  appellant  is  a  young
    Sunni Kurd, undocumented, from Mosul, an area where the situation if no
    longer "contested" was at least not finally resolved.  He  argued  that
    the FtT failed to make findings on the reality of his  family  contacts
    and ability to re-document himself, and was required to  have  done  so
    with much more precision.  Absent such  findings,  he  founded  on  the
    complexities of  the  background  evidence  and  of  the  risk  factors
    identified in SMO, to demonstrate that  the  appellant  could  only  be
    returned  to  Baghdad,  could  not  live  there,   could   not   obtain
    documentation, could not travel by land or air to the IKR,  and  if  he
    did arrive there could not find accommodation, employment, or otherwise
    establish himself.

 8. On ground 3, Mr Martin said that the FtT failed to deal with background
    evidence which shows that the power of Hashd Al Shaabi in Mosul is such
    that the appellant could not return there.

 9. Ms Everett accepted that the judge failed to deal  with  the  point  in
    ground 1.  She relied on the response to the effect that  the  omission
    was immaterial, there being no reason for the appellant to be unable to
    show that he had arrived from the UK, not  from  ISIS  territory.   She
    also accepted that the judge had not applied SMO (which, as  Mr  Martin
    had pointed  out,  was  reported  on  the  day  the  judge  signed  his
    decision).  Her reply to the rest of the appellant's case was  that  it
    turned on whether the judge should have made any  further  findings  on
    family contacts and the possibilities of  re-documentation.   She  said
    that on findings (by successive judges)  that  the  appellant  was  not
    truthful and reliable on those matters, the FtT could go no further, so
    there was no error in holding that the appellant  had  not  established
    his case.

10. I reserved my decision.

11. The FtT overlooked the  case  in  terms  of  ground  1.   However,  the
    appellant left his home area almost 7 years ago.   It  is  fanciful  to
    suppose that he might now be perceived to  come  from  ISIS  controlled
    territory as an ISIS associate or collaborator.  On return from the UK,
    either voluntarily (as is to be presumed) or involuntarily, there is no
    reason for the appellant to have any difficulty in  demonstrating  that
    fact.   The  omission  identified  by  ground  1  is  not  capable   of
    contributing to another outcome.

12. It is a fine question whether the FtT  might  have  fallen  into  legal
    error by not applying country guidance published on the  same  date  as
    its decision was signed; but nothing turns on any  distinction  between
    older and newer guidance.

13. The onus was on the appellant to establish the primary facts  on  which
    his case depended.  He failed to do so.  There is no onus on a tribunal
    to  speculate  on  the  reality  of  an  appellant's  family  contacts,
    possession of documents,  or  ability  to  obtain  fresh  documents  if
    necessary.

14. There was no basis for finding that the appellant is in any  difficulty
    over documentation other than his own recalcitrance.

15. Ms Everett's succinct submission is a complete answer to the  principal
    submissions for the appellant.

16. The absence of reference to evidence about the power of Hashd Al Shaabi
    in Mosul is irrelevant.  The  appellant  need  not  return  there.   He
    failed to establish a case by which it might be unduly harsh to  expect
    him to go elsewhere.

17. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

18. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.

        Hugh Macleman

      14 April 2021
      UT Judge Macleman





                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS


1.    A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must  make
a written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any such application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:


2.    Where the person who appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).


3.    Where the person making the application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


4.    Where the person who appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal  is  outside
the United Kingdom at the  time  that  the  application  for  permission  to
appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if  the
notice of decision is sent electronically).


5.    A "working  day"  means  any  day  except  a  Saturday  or  a  Sunday,
Christmas Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.


6.    The date when  the  decision  is  "sent'  is  that  appearing  on  the
covering letter or covering email.

