
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
PA/11364/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields              |Decision and Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 26 January 2018                  |On 02 February 2018               |
|                                    |                                  |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE


                                   Between

                                    [S Q]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant: Ms L Brackaj, Iris Law Firm
For the Respondent: Mr M Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and  evidence  I
do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  the  decision  of  First-tier
Tribunal Judge O'Hanlon  promulgated  on  28/02/2017,  which  dismissed  the
Appellant's appeal on all grounds.

Background


3. The Appellant was born on 01/01/1989  and  is  a  national  of  Iran.  On
07/10/2016 the Secretary of State refused the Appellant's protection claim.


The Judge's Decision

4. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge O'Hanlon ("the Judge") dismissed the appeal against  the  Respondent's
decision. Grounds of appeal were lodged and  on  13/09/2017  Upper  Tribunal
Judge Hanson gave permission to appeal stating

           On 28 February 2017 First-tier Tribunal Judge O'Hanlon dismissed
           the appellant's appeal on protection and human  rights  grounds.
           Permission to appeal has been refused by another  Judge  of  the
           First-tier Tribunal and renewed to the Upper Tribunal.


           The appellant asserts the Judge erred in finding it relevant the
           appellant had not returned to  Iran  after  his  initial  asylum
           claim failed and failed to place reliance upon the evidence from
           the church and to apply relevant country guidance case law.


           The Judge considered the evidence provided which is noted in the
           decision under challenge including at [22 -23] submissions made.
           The Judge did not find the appellant to be  a  credible  witness
           for the reasons set out at [26]. The appellant previously made a
           claim for asylum based on political beliefs which was  found  to
           lack credibility. The Judge refers to the appellant's failure to
           leave the United Kingdom but also from [31] to two witnesses who
           attended to give oral evidence and letters of support from other
           church members who gave evidence to the effect the appellant was
           a genuine convert to Christianity. The Judge finds at [32]  that
           although the witnesses were supportive of  the  appellant  their
           evidence was not sufficient to overcome the concerns  about  the
           appellant's overall credibility for  the  reasons  referred  to,
           resulting in finding the appellant has not shown he is a genuine
           Christian convert. The issue the grounds raise  is  whether  the
           reasoning  given  by  the  Judge  relating  to  a  past  adverse
           credibility finding and the lack of compliance with  immigration
           protocol through a period of residence  are  sufficient  reasons
           for why evidence concerning what has occurred since the previous
           determination was rejected, warranting the weight been  attached
           to it that the Judge did.


           Out of an abundance of caution permission to appeal  is  granted
           on all grounds.

The Hearing

5. (a) Ms Brakaj, for the appellant moved the grounds of  appeal.  She  told
me that the Judge's  assessment  of  credibility  is  flawed  and  that  his
analysis of the appellant's witness's evidence  was  inadequate.  Ms  Brakaj
took me to [27] of the  decision,  &  told  me  that  the  Judge's  starting
position is that the appellant's  credibility  is  damaged  because  of  the
finding of a separate tribunal in 2008. She told me that although the  Judge
relied on Devaseelan [2002] UKIAT 00702, the Judge did  not  make  allowance
for the subject matter of this appeal - which  is  consideration  of  a  sur
place claim. She took me to [29] where the judge relies on  the  appellant's
"... level of non-compliance with the immigration protocol..." And  told  me
that the Judge's findings there are not relevant to the  central  issues  in
the appellant's case. She told me that from [27] to [30]  the  Judge  placed
undue weight on  peripheral  factors  and  wrongly  used  those  factors  as
matters which undermined the new (sur place) claim for asylum.

(b) Ms Brakaj told me that at [31] and  [32]  the  Judge  misinterprets  the
evidence of the  appellant's  witnesses.  The  appellant's  bundle  contains
letters  of  support  as  well  as  statements  from  the  appellant's   two
witnesses. The Judge does not deal with  the  letters  of  support,  and  is
dismissive of the evidence of the two witnesses - suggesting that they  have
accepted the appellant's claim at face value - yet the letters  and  witness
statements say that enquiry has been carried out,  and  witnesses  have  not
simply accepted the appellant's declarations at  face  value.  She  told  me
that there is inadequate analysis of the supporting evidence.

(c) Ms Brakaj urged me to allow the appeal, and to set the decision aside.

6. Mr Diwnycz for the respondent referred me to Danian v SSHD (2002) IMM  AR
96. He told me that the decision contains an  inherent  error  and  that  he
cannot defend the decision. He asked me to remit this  case  to  the  first-
tier to be determined of new.


Analysis

7. The Judge's findings of fact lie between [26] and [33] of  the  decision.
The Judge starts [26] by saying that he does not find the  appellant  to  be
credible. The reasons that he gives are that the appellant was found  to  be
an untruthful witness in 2008; that the appellant has, on  occasion,  failed
to adhere to reporting conditions; that the appellant had not  left  the  UK
when his appeal rights were exhausted in June 2008.

8. In Danian v SSHD (2002) IMM AR 96 the Court of Appeal said that there  is
no express limitation in the Convention in relation  to  persons  acting  in
bad faith, despite Counsel's attempt in Danian to have one implied.  In  the
court's opinion the answer to the 'riddle' lay in the judgement of Millet  J
in Mbanza (1996) Imm AR 136. Millet J said "The solution  does  not  lie  in
propounding some broad principle of abuse of the  system....but  in  bearing
in mind the cardinal principle that it is for the applicant to  satisfy  the
SSHD that he has a  well  founded  fear  of  persecution  for  a  Convention
reason.  Whether he can do so  will  largely  turn  on  credibility  and  an
applicant who has put forward a fraudulent and baseless claim for asylum  is
unlikely to have much credibility left."  The court  referred  to  a  letter
from the UNHCR which stated  that  regard  should  be  had  to  whether  the
person's actions had actually come to the notice of the authorities  in  his
home country and how they would view  such  actions.   It  does  not  matter
whether an appellant has cynically sought to enhance  his  asylum  prospects
by creating the very risk he then seeks to rely on, although  bad  faith  is
relevant when evaluating the merits/credibility of the claim,  as  explained
in Danian.  However, as Bingham J also said in Danian - the actual fear  has
to be shown to be genuine and not  one  that  was  manufactured  by  conduct
designed to give plausibility.

9. In YB (Eritrea) v SSHD [2008] EWCA Civ 360 the Court of Appeal sounded  a
note of caution in relation to the argument that, if an appellant was  found
to have been opportunistic in his sur place activities, his credibility  was
in consequence low.  Credibility about what, said the Court of  Appeal.   If
he had already been believed ex hypothesi about his sur place activity,  his
motives might be disbelieved, but the consequent risk  on  return  from  his
activity sur place was essentially an objective question.

10. What is absent from the Judge's findings of fact is an analysis  of  the
appellant's  claim  to  have  converted  from  Islam  to  Christianity.  The
appellant produced a certificate dated March 2016  to  confirm  that  he  is
completed an  11-week  Christian  study  course.  He  produced  a  baptismal
certificate. He produced a video  of  his  baptism  together  with  numerous
letters of support from friends, church  members  and  church  leaders.  The
appellant lead evidence from members of his church. There is  no  meaningful
analysis of that evidence in the decision.

11. At [31] and [32] the Judge records that he heard from two witnesses  and
that there were several letters of support before him.  He  said  that  both
witnesses took the appellant at  face  value.  The  letter  from  Rev  Bunce
declares that he is aware of  the  possibility  of  asylum  seekers  seeking
conversion to Christianity to bolster their claim, and that that is not  the
situation in the appellant's case. The letter from Mr  Blackburn  speaks  of
many meetings and  conversations  with  the  appellant  and  says  that  the
appellant has demonstrated Christian virtues and attitudes. The  Judge  does
not explain why he rejects the evidence of the appellant's two witnesses.

12. In MA v UT 2014  CSIH  111  it  was  said  that  a  proper  approach  to
credibility required an assessment  of  the  evidence  and  of  the  general
claim.  In  asylum  claims,  relevant  factors  were,  first  the   internal
consistency of the claim; secondly the inherent plausibility of  the  claim;
and thirdly the consistency of the claim with external factors of  the  sort
typically found in country guidance.

13. The general approach to be followed  has  been  set  out  by  the  Upper
Tribunal in KB & AH (credibility-structured approach) Pakistan  [2017]  UKUT
00491 (IAC)

      (i) The 'Credibility Indicators' identified in the Home Office  Asylum
      Policy Instruction, Assessing credibility and refugee  status  Version
      9.0,  6  January  2015   (which  can  be  summarised   as   comprising
      sufficiency of detail; internal consistency; external consistency; and
      plausibility), provide a helpful framework within which to  conduct  a
      credibility assessment. They facilitate a more structured approach apt
      to help judges avoid the temptation to look at the evidence in a  one-
      dimensional way or to focus in an  ad  hoc  way  solely  on  whichever
      indicator or factor appears foremost or opportune;


      (ii) However, any reference to a structured approach  in  relation  to
      the subject matter of credibility assessment must carry  a  number  of
      important (interrelated) caveats, among which are the following:


         -  the  aforementioned  indicators  are  merely  indicators,   not
           necessary conditions;
         - they are not an exhaustive list;
         - assessment of credibility being a highly fact-sensitive  affair,
           their main role is to help make sure, where relevant,  that  the
           evidence is considered in a number of well-recognised respects;
         - making use of these indicators  is  not  a  substitute  for  the
           requirement to consider the evidence  as  a  whole  or  'in  the
           round';
         - it remains that credibility assessment is only part of  evidence
           assessment and, as Lord Dyson  reminded  decision-makers  in  MA
           (Somalia) v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  [2010]
           UKSC 49 at [33], 'the significance of lies will vary  from  case
           to case';
         - in the UK context, use of such a structured approach  must  take
           place within the  framework  of  EU  law  governing  credibility
           assessment,  Article  4  of  the  Qualification   Directive   in
           particular; and,
         - also in  the  context  of  UK  law,  decision-makers  (including
           judges) by s. 8 of the  Asylum  and  Immigration  (Treatment  of
           Claimants, etc.) Act 2004 are statutorily  obliged  to  consider
           certain types of behaviour as damaging to credibility.


      (iii) consideration of credibility in the light of such indicators, if
      approached subject to the  aforementioned  caveats,  is  a  valid  and
      useful exercise, based squarely on existing learning.

14.  I have to find that the decision is tainted by material errors  of  law
because of inadequacy in reasoning and fact-finding.    In MK (duty to  give
reasons) Pakistan [2013] UKUT 00641 (IAC), it  was  held  that  (i)  It  was
axiomatic  that  a  determination  disclosed  clearly  the  reasons  for   a
tribunal's  decision.  (ii)  If  a  tribunal  found  oral  evidence  to   be
implausible, incredible or unreliable or a document to be  worth  no  weight
whatsoever, it was necessary to say so in the  determination  and  for  such
findings to be supported by reasons. A bare statement  that  a  witness  was
not believed or that a document was  afforded  no  weight  was  unlikely  to
satisfy the requirement to give reasons.

15. As the decision is tainted by material  error  of  law  I  must  set  it
aside. I am asked to remit this case to the First -tier. I consider  whether
or not I can substitute my own decision,  but  find  that  I  cannot  do  so
because of the extent of the fact-finding exercise necessary.





Remittal to First-Tier Tribunal

16. Under Part 3 paragraph 7.2(b) of the Upper Tribunal  Practice  Statement
of the 25th of September 2012 the case may be  remitted  to  the  First-tier
Tribunal if the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that:

   (a) the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before the First-
   tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other  opportunity  for  that  party's
   case to be put to and considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or


   (b) the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding which is  necessary
   in order for the decision in the appeal  to  be  re-made  is  such  that,
   having regard to the overriding objective in rule 2, it is appropriate to
   remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

17. In this case I have determined that the case should be remitted  because
a new fact-finding exercise is required.  None of the findings of  fact  are
to stand and a complete re-hearing is necessary.

18. I remit this case to the First-tier Tribunal sitting at Bradford  to  be
heard before any First-tier Judge other than Judge O'Hanlon.

Decision

19. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is tainted  by  material  errors
of law.

20. I set aside the Judge's decision promulgated on 28  February  2017.  The
appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be determined of new.


Signed                Paul Doyle
  Date 31 January 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle






