
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11116/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 6 June 2019                       |On 19 June 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHAERF


                                   Between

                                     AN
                       (anonymity direction continued)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Jaja of Counsel instructed by Knightbridge,
solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood of the Specialist Appeals Team


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008
Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


                            DECISION AND REASONS
The Appellant

   1. The Appellant claims to be a Zimbabwean born in 1987 but  entered  the
      United Kingdom on a South African passport giving a year of  birth  of
      1989 and which he claims he had fraudulently obtained. The  Respondent
      (the SSHD) considers him to be South African. He has two  brothers  in
      the United Kingdom.

   2. On 29 December 2008 he arrived on a South African passport and claimed
      subsidiary  protection  because  on  return  to  Zimbabwe  he   feared
      persecution  on  account  of  political   opinion   and   his   sexual
      orientation.

   3. The Appellant's older  brother  also  claimed  to  be  Zimbabwean  and
      arrived in the United Kingdom  in  2007  with  entry  clearance  as  a
      Working Holiday Maker endorsed on a South African  passport  which  he
      also claimed to have been fraudulently obtained. Immediately prior  to
      expiry of his leave,  he  claimed  subsidiary  protection  because  he
      feared persecution on account of his political opinion  on  return  to
      Zimbabwe. His claim was refused, his appeal dismissed and  his  appeal
      rights were exhausted on 20 July 2007. Further representations in 2013
      and 2015 were refused, the latter with a right  of  appeal  which  was
      exercised.

   4. By a decision promulgated on 24 October 2016 Judge of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal JJ Maxwell  allowed  the  appeal  of  the  Appellant's  elder
      brother against the SSHD's decision but  only  on  the  basis  of  his
      private and family life on account of his  marriage  to  a  Zimbabwean
      woman who had been recognised as a refugee and their  British  citizen
      child born in 2016. In  the  course  of  his  decision  Judge  Maxwell
      concluded the Appellant's elder brother was  a  national  of  Zimbabwe
      because there was evidence before him  that  the  South  African  High
      Commission had refused to renew the elder brother's  passport  and  he
      had obtained temporary travel documents for 6 months from  3  December
      2013 from the Zimbabwean embassy.

   5.  The  Appellant's  other  brother's  claim  is  referred  to  in   the
      determination of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Omotosho  dismissing
      the Appellant's first appeal in 2009. It  appears  he  claimed  to  be
      Zimbabwean and to have arrived on a South African passport. His asylum
      appeal had been dismissed before Judge Omotosho heard the 2009  appeal
      of the Appellant. Ms Jaja stated that this  brother  had  made  either
      further representations or  a  further  application  to  the  SSHD  in
      respect of which a  response  or  decision  was  awaited.  No  further
      details were given to the Tribunal.

The Home Office Decision

   6. On 18 June 2009 the SSHD refused the Appellant's claim  and  on  found
      the Appellant to be a South African and by a determination promulgated
      on 8 September  2009  Judge  Omotosho  dismissed  his  appeal.  By  25
      September 2009 the Appellant's rights of appeal had been exhausted.

   7. Three sets of further representations were  refused  by  the  SSHD  in
      2013, 2015 and  2017.  The  Appellant  obtained  permission  to  bring
      proceedings for  judicial  review  of  the  2017  refusal  of  further
      representations which led to the fresh decision  referred  to  in  the
      next paragraph.

   8.  By a decision of 14 August 2018  the  SSHD  refused  the  Appellant's
      protection claim. The SSHD considered the Appellant to be a citizen of
      South Africa and the background evidence about gay men in South Africa
      did not show the Appellant would be at real risk on  return  to  South
      Africa. There was no evidence the  Appellant  had  a  partner  or  any
      dependents in the  United  Kingdom  or  that  there  were  exceptional
      circumstances such that he should be granted discretionary leave.

 Proceedings in the First-tier Tribunal

   9. By a decision promulgated on 4 February 2019 Judge of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal Shore found the Appellant to be South African  and  dismissed
      his appeal on all grounds.

  10. By a decision of 12 March 2019 a  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
      refused the Appellant permission to appeal.

Proceedings in the Upper Tribunal

  11. The Appellant renewed his application to the Upper Tribunal and on  13
      May 2019 Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun granted permission  to  appeal  on
      the grounds that the Judge's findings on the  Appellant's  nationality
      were unsafe and that his nationality finding infected his findings  on
      the Appellant's sexual orientation.

  12. The Appellant with his two brothers  and  a  family  friend  attended.
      Other than to confirm his current address, he  took  no  part  in  the
      proceedings.

 Submissions for the Appellant

  13. Ms Jaja referred  to  the  presence  of  the  Appellant  and  his  two
      brothers, all of whom had entered the United Kingdom on South  African
      passports and  claimed  to  be  Zimbabwean  nationals.  The  SSHD  had
      rejected the claimed Zimbabwean nationality of each of  the  Appellant
      and his two  brothers  and,  notwithstanding  the  decision  of  Judge
      Maxwell in the case of the elder brother in which he found him to be a
      Zimbabwean  national,  continued  to  reject  the  claimed  Zimbabwean
      nationality of  the  Appellant  and  his  other  brother  who  had  an
      outstanding claim awaiting the SSHD's  decision.  That  the  SSHD  had
      treated the three brothers as a group was evident from page 5  of  the
      SSHD's decisions of 12 May 2015 and 6  April  2017  and  the  original
      decision of 18 June 2009 at pages 101,  107  and  121  of  the  SSHD's
      bundle (RB). Because the SSHD had treated the three brothers  together
      Judge Maxwell's finding that  the  elder  brother  is  Zimbabwean  was
      central the Appellant's case. Judge Shore had failed to have regard to
      Judge Maxwell's decision at RB p.69.

  14. Judge Maxwell had given sound reasons for finding  the  elder  brother
      not to be South African at paragraphs 44, 47 and 48 of  his  decision.
      The SSHD had concluded the Appellant was South African  for  the  same
      reasons which Judge Maxwell had  rejected  in  respect  of  his  elder
      brother. Judge Shore had erred in law by failing to make any reference
      to Judge Maxwell's findings. I  note  that  Judge  Shore  directly  or
      indirectly referred to Judge Maxwell's decision at paragraphs  7,  55-
      56, 93, 100, 113 and 116 of his decision, he also referred extensively
      to the Appellant's elder brother who gave evidence at  the  First-tier
      Tribunal hearing. Paragraph 56 sets out at some length the findings of
      Judge Maxwell.

  15. At paragraphs 19, 32 and 118 Judge Shore had made reference to  travel
      documents issued to the Appellant by the Zimbabwean  authorities.  The
      Appellant had given evidence how he obtained  these  travel  documents
      and that dual nationality is not permitted under Zimbabwean  law.  The
      Judge had not addressed the point  that  the  Zimbabwean  embassy  had
      accepted  the  authenticity  of  the  Appellant's   Zimbabwean   birth
      certificate before issuing these travel documents. He  had  relied  on
      Judge Omotosho's rejection of the Zimbabwean birth  certificate  whose
      authenticity had not been challenged  by  the  SSHD  and  he  had  not
      addressed the claim that Zimbabwean law prohibited  dual  nationality.
      The reasons for  Judge  Shore's  rejection  of  the  Zimbabwean  birth
      certificate were simply because the Appellant  had  produced  a  South
      African passport. Finally, he had not given a reason why he had  found
      the Appellant to be South African when  his  elder  brother  had  been
      found to be Zimbabwean.

  16. The decision of Judge Shore should be set aside.

 Submissions for the SSHD

  17. Ms Isherwood submitted  there  was  no  material  error  of  law.  The
      submissions for the  Appellant  had  not  grappled  with  the  Judge's
      decision but had simply sought to re-argue his case. The decision  was
      detailed,  paragraph  32  noted  the  careful  and   thorough   cross-
      examination which  dealt  with  both  the  nationality  and  sexuality
      aspects of the appeal. The Appellant's account how he had acquired and
      used a South African passport had been dealt with at paragraphs  33-39
      of the decision. Additionally, the Judge had at paragraph 54 noted the
      Appellant, like his elder brother, arrived in the United Kingdom using
      a South African passport with entry clearance endorsed on it.

  18.  The Judge had identified  at  paragraph  48  inconsistencies  in  the
      Appellant's  several  accounts  of  his  arrest  in  Zimbabwe  and  at
      paragraph 78 as to the date of the death of one of his  brothers.  His
      elder brother had approached the South African High Commission  for  a
      passport and been refused. The Appellant had not claimed to have  made
      any similar application to the South African authorities. At paragraph
      73 he had recorded the SSHD's submissions why there  were  differences
      between the cases of the Appellant and his elder brother.

  19. At paragraph 101  the  Judge  had  taken  into  account  the  previous
      decisions and most importantly found it necessary at the  commencement
      of the part of his decision dealing with his findings of fact to refer
      to the jurisprudence in TK (Burundi) v SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ. 40  about
      the need for a party to produce evidence to support a claim where such
      evidence is readily available or failing which to explain the  absence
      of such evidence. He had noted the extensive adverse finding  made  by
      Judge Omotosho against the Appellant in respect of his account of fear
      of persecution in Zimbabwe  for  reasons  of  political  opinion.  The
      Appellant had not pursued the political opinion claim  for  subsidiary
      protection at the hearing before him which was clear evidence  of  the
      soundness of Judge Omotosho's 2009 adverse findings against him on the
      political opinion aspect of his claim. He had not sought to adduce any
      fresh evidence in support of this aspect of his claim.

  20. Judge Shore had been acutely aware of the appropriate approach in  the
      light  of  the  jurisprudence  of  Devaseelan  *[2002]  UKIAT   00702,
      demonstrated by paragraphs 108-120.

  21. The Appellant's elder brother had  been  to  the  South  African  high
      commission, the Appellant had not.

  22. The Judge had separately addressed the Appellant's claim based on  his
      sexual orientation at paragraphs 121-130 and at the  end  of  132.  At
      paragraph 130 he had considered the  obstacles  to  re-integration  on
      return to either South Africa or Zimbabwe. The decision  contained  no
      material error of law and should stand.

 Response for the Appellant

  23. Ms Jaja repeated her submission that  the  Judge  had  not  adequately
      dealt with the decision of  Judge  Maxwell.  The  Appellant  had  been
      unable to apply to the  South  African  High  Commission  because  his
      passport had been held by the SSHD. He could only go to the Zimbabwean
      embassy which he had done. The SSHD had  treated  all  three  brothers
      together and Judge Maxwell had made a decision on the elder  brother's
      nationality.

  24. The Judge's treatment of the Appellant's claim based on his  sexuality
      was inadequate and at  paragraph  130  clearly  wrong  in  respect  of
      Zimbabwe in the light of the background evidence.

  25. The Judge had placed too  much  reliance  on  the  findings  of  Judge
      Omotosho on the Appellant's Zimbabwean birth certificate. At the  time
      she made her decision, the  Appellant  had  not  obtained  any  travel
      documents from the Zimbabwean embassy. The decision contained material
      errors of law and should be set aside.

Findings and Consideration

  26. The Appellant has been engaged in pursuing applications  to  the  SSHD
      and litigation in the Immigration and Asylum Chambers since  2008.  In
      2009 Judge Omotosho made extensive adverse credibility  findings.  His
      lawyers will have been aware of the jurisprudence  in  Devaseelan  and
      that in the light of the  adverse  2009  determination  the  Appellant
      faced a substantial hurdle if his claim was to succeed. It is  notable
      that the  Judge  commences  his  findings  with  a  reference  to  the
      jurisprudence in TK  (Burundi).  The  Appellant  did  not  pursue  his
      subsidiary protection claim based on political opinion in  respect  of
      which Judge Omotosho had made adverse credibility findings. The  Judge
      noted other inconsistencies and made additional adverse findings.

  27. In this light, it is inadequate for the Appellant simply  to  rely  on
      the findings on the nationality of his elder brother contained in  the
      decision  of  Judge  Maxwell.  Ultimately,  the  Appellant's   brother
      succeeded because  he  was  married  to  a  Zimbabwean  who  had  been
      recognised as a refugee and together they had a British citizen child.
      The brother's nationality cannot fairly be  described  as  a  relevant
      factor in the core  reasoning  by  which  Judge  Maxwell  reached  his
      conclusion.

  28. I accept that like his elder brother the Appellant successfully sought
      travel documentation from the Zimbabwean embassy and that  unlike  his
      brother he did not have his South African passport but  there  was  no
      evidence that he had  approached  the  SSHD  for  the  return  of  his
      passport or requested the SSHD to obtain a renewed passport  or  other
      travel documentation from the South African High Commission. Given the
      hurdle of the 2009 adverse credibility  findings,  the  Appellant  may
      well have had little option but to pursue such a course of action.

  29. I have noted the Zimbabwean birth certificates for the  Appellant  and
      his elder brother in the Appellant's bundle. A  birth  certificate  is
      not proof of nationality unless the law of the land provides that  the
      fact of birth within its jurisdiction confers nationality.  There  was
      no evidence that this was the case in Zimbabwe at  any  time  relevant
      for the Appellant. There was  no  explanation  for  the  absence,  for
      instance, of birth certificates for the Appellant's parents  or  their
      marriage certificate. Long residence of the  family  in  Rhodesia  and
      then Zimbabwe  might  have  added  to  the  Appellant's  claim  to  be
      Zimbabwean.

  30. The sustained and adequately  reasoned  adverse  credibility  findings
      against the Appellant inevitably cast doubt on the credibility of  his
      claim  to  have  fraudulently  acquired  a  South  African   passport,
      particularly in the light of the matters referred to at paragraphs 33-
      38 of the Judge's decision. Again, in this light,  the  media  reports
      about the fraudulent issue of authentic South African passports  alone
      were insufficient to make the  case  for  the  Appellant  particularly
      since two of them referred to the  recipients  been  mainly  Pakistani
      adults and the account of how these passports were acquired in a third
      one is different from the  account  given  by  the  Appellant  how  he
      acquired his South African passport.

  31. Independently of the issue of the Appellant's nationality,  the  Judge
      made further adverse credibility findings  about  events  in  Zimbabwe
      which have not been challenged. The only ground for appeal relying  on
      the Appellant's  claimed  sexual  orientation  is  that  "the  Judge's
      findings on  the  issue  of  nationality  must  logically  infect  the
      findings made with regard to the claimed  sexual  orientation  of  the
      Appellant".

  32. There was no explanation why one's nationality has relevance to  one's
      sexual orientation. At paragraphs 125-126 the Judge  gave  sustainable
      reasons to reject the  evidence  of  the  Appellant's  claimed  sexual
      orientation. There was no express challenge to any of  the  particular
      adverse credibility findings on sexual orientation made by the  Judge.
      Consequently, any findings about the situation of gay  men  in  either
      South Africa or Zimbabwe become otiose.

  33. The Judge gave ample and sustainable reasons for his conclusions and I
      do not find his treatment of the claim discloses any material error of
      law.  The appeal is therefore dismissed because the  decision  of  the
      First-tier Tribunal contains no material error of law.

Anonymity

 34. No submissions were made about the anonymity direction made  by  Judge
    Shore and in the circumstances, I direct that it should continue.

SUMMARY OF DECISION

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  did  not  contain  a  material
    error of law and it shall stand.  The consequence  is  the  Appellant's
    appeal is dismissed.


    Anonymity direction continued.


Signed/Official Crest  Date 14. vi. 2019

Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

