
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11712/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Civil Justice    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Centre                               |                                     |
|On 15 May 2019                       |On 11 June 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between

                                  Ms C G O
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Mahmood, Counsel, instructed by MH Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant is a national of Nigeria born on 4 June 1988.  She arrived in
the UK on 20 March 2011 in possession of a Tier 4 (General) Student visa.
She subsequently sought to extend that leave but this was refused and she
was served with an IS.151A as an overstayer on 23 March 2015.

The Appellant made an asylum application on 4 May 2017.  The basis of that
application was that she feared return to Nigeria because she had married a
man who was from the outcast Osu clan.  The Appellant is from the freeborn
Diala clan and marriage between the two is socially unacceptable.  As a
consequence of her marriage, her uncle threatened to kill her.  A child of
the marriage was born on 16 April 2013.  That relationship subsequently
broke down.  The Appellant had another relationship and a child of that
relationship was born on 28 December 2014.  The Appellant was no longer in
contact with either of her children's fathers.  The Appellant's application
was refused in a decision dated 27 October 2017.

She appealed against that decision and her appeal came before Judge Bristow
at the First-tier Tribunal on 23 July 2018.  In a Decision and Reasons
promulgated on 10 August 2010 the judge dismissed the appeal for a number
of reasons, finding at [41] that he was not satisfied the Appellant had
proved to the lower standard her fear of her uncle and that she would not
be at risk of persecution on return.

An application for permission to appeal was made, out of time, on the basis
that the Appellant's solicitors did not give her a copy of the decision and
she then had to seek legal advice as to making an application.  The grounds
of appeal asserted that:

      1) the judge had placed undue emphasis on the Appellant's answer in
         her screening interview at 41(c);

      2) at [41] the judge ignores the fact the Appellant's uncle could not
         find her in Nigeria because he did not know her whereabouts;

      3) at [44] in failing to understand the Appellant's departure from
         social norms as the reason for her fear of persecution;

      4) at [45] in finding that the Appellant has not proved her husband is
         Osu when this was not disputed by the Respondent nor was the
         Appellant challenged about this evidence in cross-examination and

      5) in ignoring the corroborative value of the expert report.

Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Keane in a
decision dated 14 September 2018, who also extended time so as to admit the
application in time, finding:

"The grounds disclosed an arguable error of law but for which the outcome
of the appeal might have been different.  At paragraph 41(b) and (c) when
assessing the Appellant's credibility the judge accorded weight to apparent
discrepancies when remarks made by the Appellant at a screening interview
were compared with evidence which came into being subsequently.  Broadly,
the judge was concerned first as to the number of incidents in which the
Appellant's uncle threatened her and second as to her reasons why she could
not return to Nigeria.  It was arguably understandable that the Appellant
should her contentions in subsequent sources of evidence and it could not
fairly be said against her that she failed to mention at the screening
interview a matter of substantial importance.  The application for
permission is granted."

A Rule 24 response was submitted by the Respondent on 15 October 2018 which
opposed the appeal, contending there was no rationality or perversity in
the manner in which the judge considered the credibility of the Appellant's
evolving evidence from screening interview via substantive interview to
oral evidence at appeal: see [38] and [41](a) to (f).  The judge was
entitled to weigh the evidence as he did, for the cogent reason given, and
the judge clearly considered the Appellant's account correctly in light of
the background evidence set out by the expert, Professor Aguilar, at [42]
to [44] and was entitled to conclude that the plausibility and credibility
of her claim was further undermined.

     Hearing

At the hearing before the Upper Tribunal, Mr Mahmood on behalf of the
Appellant sought to rely essentially on the points raised in relation to
[41] of the judge's decision.  He submitted that the screening interview
was the starting point of the Appellant's reasons as to why she wished to
claim asylum.  At 4.1 of the screening interview she set out the reasons
why she was unable to return to Nigeria, where she stated:

"I am having family issues there.  My uncle who is like a father to me told
me I should not bring my children to the home because I am not married and
the children are a shame on the family.  He did this to two of my cousins.
There is a lot of war going on, Boko Haram and Biafra war.  I fear that I
am going.  The children will be taken away forcefully.  I don't have anyone
to support me and no-one wants me."

Mr Mahmood submitted the Appellant later explained in more detail why she
was unable to return.  However, the judge at [41](b) found that the
Appellant had exaggerated her evidence as she did not state in her
screening interview that her uncle threatened to kill her.  Mr Mahmood
submitted the judge had attached too much weight to this discrepancy when
determining the fundamental issue of the Appellant's credibility and this
was a material error of law.

Mr Mahmood did, however, accept when the point was put to him that the
judge had been correct to identify a discrepancy at 41(c) in relation to
the fact that in her screening interview dated 4 May 2017, the Appellant
referred to children, whereas on her own account she last spoke to her
uncle in 2012 and her second child was not born until 2014.  In relation to
the expert report, Mr Mahmood submitted this was from an eminent scholar
and reliance should be placed upon the report.

In his submissions, Mr Mills asserted correctly that the primary authority
on the approach to screening interviews is JA (Afghanistan) [2014] EWCA Civ
450.  Mr Mills submitted that the Appellant in that case was a 14 year old
boy and the Court of Appeal found it had been unfair, given his age and the
circumstances of his arrival, to treat what he had stated in his screening
interview as damaging to his claim.  He submitted that the guidance is that
screening interviews have to be considered in their proper context and the
circumstances in which they took place.  He submitted that this Appellant
cannot claim there was anything about her screening interview which
prevented her from giving a proper account, given that it took place six
years after her arrival in the UK and not when she was tired and hungry
from a journey, having just arrived, nor were there any mental health
issues raised.

Moreover, the judge found at 41(c): "I note Mr Fraczyk's submission that I
should treat the screening interview with caution."  He submitted there was
no error of law and the grounds of appeal in this respect was a mere
disagreement.  There was clearly a distinction between setting out one's
claim and later expanding upon it.  This was not the issue here.  There was
a direct circumstance at [41](c) as to what the Appellant had said about
her uncle.  According to her subsequent account she has not spoken to her
uncle for seven years and this was prior to her second child being born.
This was a clear discrepancy and the judge was perfectly entitled to place
weight on it and take it into account.  It was central and not peripheral
to the credibility of her claim.

The Appellant stated the whole issue arose because she had married outside
the clan to someone considered to be an outcast.  Given this was the core
event, it was reasonable to expect her to mention it but instead she refers
in her screening interview only to family issues, children being born out
of wedlock, and not to the clan issue.  Mr Mills submitted that overall the
judge had given perfectly adequate and rational reasons for finding the
Appellant's claim not to be credible.

Mr Mills further submitted that whilst it is the case that Professor
Aguilar is a reputable expert and that his report is corroborative of the
Appellant's claim this was acknowledged by the judge at [42].  He submitted
that the judge considered the Appellant's credibility in the round, taking
account of all the issues, and even based on the expert's opinion was
unable to find her account to be credible.  Therefore, there was no
material error of law and the grounds amounted to no more than a simple
disagreement with the judge's findings of fact, to which he was entitled to
come.

In response, Mr Mahmood denied that the ground in relation to the screening
interview was simply a disagreement, but rather it went to the fundamental
issue of the Appellant's credibility.  He submitted that the Appellant was
entitled to set out her case in detail at a later stage.  Even though there
may have been a discrepancy, when one looks overall at the circumstances of
the claim the judge has accorded weight to the discrepancies when
considering credibility.  In respect of the expert report, Mr Mahmood
submitted this is detailed and scholarly.  It sets out the expert's
understanding as to the factual matrix of the circumstances and the social
stigma of cross-clan marriages, and the judge had failed to give
appropriate weight to the expert report in respect of marriage outside the
clan.

I reserved my decision, which I now give with my reasons.

     Findings and reasons

The judge found as follows:

"41. I have considered all of the evidence very carefully in the round.  I
am not satisfied that the Appellant has proved to the lower standard her
fear of her uncle for the following reasons:

(a)  in answer to question 31 in the SEF form the Appellant stated that her
fear began when she was pregnant with her first son.  This would have been
in 2012 and 2013.  In her statement of 30 November 2017 the Appellant
stated she was threatened in Nigeria.  She states she was scared and in
utter panic and that this is when she had to leave Nigeria.  Her account as
to when her fear began is inconsistent;

(b)  in my judgment the Appellant has sought to exaggerate her evidence to
make it fit with the Respondent's criticisms of it.  In her screening
interview there is no mention that her uncle threatened to kill her.  In
her Statement of Evidence Form the threat to kill occurred during the 2012
telephone call.  The Appellant did not seek to expand on that answer in her
letter to the Respondent dated 11 September 2017.  By the time of her
statement dated 30 November 2017 the Appellant had added a further two
incidents in Nigeria when her uncle threatened to kill her;

(c)  in the screening interview the Appellant was asked why she cannot
return to her home country.  She replied 'I am having family issues there.
My uncle who is like a father to me told me that I should not bring my
children to the home because I am not married and the children are a
shame'.  I note Mr Fraczyk's submission that I should treat the screening
interview with caution but, in my judgment, the Appellant advanced a
different reason she feared her uncle in the screening interview to the one
advanced in later accounts.  There is no mention of his disapproval of the
prohibited marriage or anything to do with clans.  Moreover, the Appellant
stated her uncle referred to children.  On her account she last spoke to
him in 2012 when she was pregnant with On.  Oz was not born until 2014.
There is no way her uncle would have referred to children;

(d)  I also do not find it credible that if her uncle did threaten her in
Nigeria that he did not act on that threat at the time if that is what he
intended to do.  His anger would have been raw and he would have had ample
time to do so;

(e)  in her statement of 30 November 2017 the Appellant asserts that her
uncle threatened to kill her whilst she was in Nigeria.  He threatened to
kill her if she carried on the relationship and after he found out about
the marriage.  That is something the Appellant would have known when she
entered the UK in 2011.  She did not claim asylum until May 2017, over six
years later;

(f)  the Appellant did not claim asylum until after being notified of an
immigration decision on 31 October 2012 and after being served with an
IS.151A as an overstayer on 23 March 2015.  Section 8(5) of the 2004 Act
does not require me to find that the Appellant's failure to make her asylum
claim before being notified of an immigration decision has damaged her
credibility.  It requires me to take account of such failure as damaging
her credibility.  In my judgment it is fair for me to take her behaviour
into account.  This is because of the length of time elapsed before she
made her claim and because I do not find her explanation for the delay -
that she did not know of the asylum process and was prompted by the health
visitor - to be adequate.  If her fear was genuine she would have sought
ways to stabilise her status in the UK earlier and before the immigration
decisions.  I do find that the Appellant's credibility has been damaged by
her failure to claim asylum before being notified of an immigration
decision."

 I find that the Judge provided cogent and detailed reasons for his
findings and that he was entitled to take account of the discrepancy in the
Appellant's answer at 4.1. of the screening interview as compared to her
later account, in particular, that her uncle threatened to kill her. The
Appellant's last contact by telephone with her uncle was in 2012 whereas
the screening interview was conducted on 4 May 2017 thus this was not a
case where the Appellant's case evolved after her screening interview.
Further, the Appellant made reference at 4.1. three times to her "children"
when at the time of her last contact with her uncle she had only one child.
I find that the Judge was entitled to find that this impacted negatively on
the Appellant's credibility.

I turn now to the judge's findings in respect of expert report of Professor
Mario L Aguilar dated 6 December 2017.  The judge's conclusions are at [42]
to [44]:

"42. I have had regard to the report of Professor Aguilar.  I note his
conclusion that the description of her uncle's reaction is consistent with
the reaction expected if a marriage was contracted between a Diala clan
member and an Osu clan member.  I am not satisfied that this salvages the
Appellant's credibility such that she can prove her account to the lower
standard.

43.  Professor Aguilar is clear that an individual from the Diala clan
contracting a marriage with a member of the Osu clan would face death or
serious harm whether through being accused of being a witch and poisoning
or otherwise.  This fortifies my conclusion in (d) above that the
Appellant's uncle would have carried out his threat in Nigeria, in the time
available to him, before the Appellant left.  Moreover, I cannot find any
reference in the evidence to the Appellant being accused of being a witch.
Professor Aguilar suggests that those accused of subverting the social
order and at risk of being killed would be accused of being a witch.

44.  Finally, Professor Aguilar's opinion is that it would be impossible
for a Diala clan member and an Osu clan member to marry.  He describes the
harsh social stigma and consequences that would attach to such a marriage.
In my judgment, that makes it much less likely that the Appellant would
embark on a relationship with an Osu clan member let alone go on to marry
him once her uncle had expressed his disapproval."

The grounds of appeal assert that the Judge ignored the corroborative value
of the expert report, however, it is apparent from the Judge's findings set
out above that this is not the case. No answer has been provided to the
Judge's finding at [41](d) that if the Appellant's uncle had threatened her
as a consequence of his marriage, why he did not carry out this threat
whilst the Appellant was in Nigeria, which he found in light of the
expert's view that "it would be impossible for a Diala clan member and an
Osu clan member to marry" brought him to the conclusion that the Appellant
had not proved her husband was an Osu clan member and the Appellant's claim
was not credible: [45]. The Judge considered the expert's report and was
entitled to find that whilst corroborative, it also served to undermine the
credibility of the Appellant's account, particularly in light of the fact
it is clear from the refusal decision at [35] that the Respondent found the
Appellant's credibility to be damaged by her failure to provide specific
information about her husband's tribe

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Rebecca Chapman                         Date 10 June 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman
                          Approval for Promulgation


|Name of Deputy Judge issuing       |Ms R K Chapman                        |
|approval:                          |                                      |
|Appellant's Name:                  |Ms Chiamaka Gloria Osondu             |
|Case Number:                       |PA/11712/2017                         |

Oral decision (please indicate)


I approve the attached Decision and Reasons for promulgation

Name:    DUTJ Rebecca Chapman

Date:    10.6.19


Amendments that require further action by Promulgation section:

Change of address:

           Rep:                         Appellant:
|                                |                                |
|                                |                                |
|                                |                                |
|                                |                                |
|                                |                                |

Other Information:
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |


