
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11920/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard remotely at Field House        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 21 January 2021 via Skype for     |On 2 March 2021                      |
|Business                             |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STEPHEN SMITH


                                   Between

                                     RP
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R. Spurling, Counsel, instructed by Sriharans
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms J. Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                          DECISION AND REASONS (V)

This has been a remote hearing which has been consented to  /  not  objected
to by the parties.  The form of remote hearing was  V  (video).  A  face  to
face hearing was not held because it was  not  practicable  and  all  issues
could be determined in a remote hearing.


The documents that I was referred to are in the original  bundles  from  the
hearing before the  First-tier  Tribunal,  the  contents  of  which  I  have
recorded.


The order made is described at the end of these reasons.


The parties said this about the process: they were content the  hearing  had
been conducted fairly in its remote form.


 1. The appellant is a citizen of India born in 1962. He appeals against  a
    decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Ruddick promulgated on 21 January
    2020 dismissing his appeal against a decision of the  respondent  dated
    14 November 2019 to refuse his fresh claim for asylum.

 2. The hearing took place remotely, in order to take  precautions  against
    the spread of Covid-19.  Mr Spurling provided  written  submissions  to
    accompany his grounds of appeal, and a skeleton argument.   I  am  most
    grateful to both advocates for their assistance and clear submissions.

Factual background

 3. The appellant entered the United Kingdom clandestinely on 11 March 2012
    and claimed asylum on 14  June  2012.  That  claim  was  refused  on  6
    February 2015, and  an  appeal  against  that  refusal  was  eventually
    dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Hodgkinson  on  18  July  2016.
    There had been an earlier appeal before the First-tier Tribunal,  heard
    by First-tier Tribunal Judge Geraint Jones, QC, but that  decision  was
    set aside by the Upper Tribunal and remitted to be reheard afresh.

 4. The appellant  made  further  submissions  which,  after  a  successful
    application for permission to bring judicial review  proceedings,  were
    accepted as a fresh claim by the respondent.

 5. The appellant claimed asylum on the  basis  of  his  political  opinion
    arising from his membership and profile within  the  Dravidar  Munnetra
    Kazhagam Party ("the DMK").  The party was in power from 1996 to  2001,
    and from 2006 to 2011.  The appellant claimed to have  enjoyed  a  high
    profile within the party, and to have risen to positions of prominence.
     He was a popular local politician.  Between 2001 and  2006,  and  from
    2011, the All  India  Anna  Diravidar  Munnetra  Kazagham  Party  ("the
    AIADMK") was in power.  There were clashes  between  the  two  parties.
    The AIADMK claimed the  appellant  was  responsible  for  some  of  the
    unrest, using his profile to incite violence.  Matters came to  a  head
    on the election day in 2011, following which the AIADMK was returned to
    power.  An AIADMK supporter was murdered, and, upon assuming power  and
    control of the police, the AIADMK sought to frame the appellant for the
    murder.  He claims he was arrested and tortured, but  that  a  friendly
    contact within the police released him upon  hearing  that  the  police
    were planning to  kill  him  in  a  so-called  staged  encounter.   The
    appellant fled to Channai, and later to this country, to claim  asylum.
    He claims that in 2012 following his arrival here,  the  Indian  police
    continued to look for him.  One of his friends was murdered  in  India,
    and others had false charges brought against them.

 6. The judge took Judge Hodgkinson's decision as her starting  point.  She
    set out his relevant findings at length [53],  recording  that  he  had
    rejected the entirety of the appellant's account. The judge said it was
    her role to conduct her own credibility assessment [56].  She  said  at
    [83] that she "might not have made all of the precise findings made  by
    FtTJ Hodgkinson", and listed a number of findings which she  would  not
    have reached. However, she continued,  "I  am  not  hearing  an  appeal
    against FtTJ Hodgkinson's determination, and a simple disagreement with
    some of his reasoning cannot be a 'good reason'  to  depart  from  it",
    drawing on her earlier summary of AL (Albania) v Secretary of State for
    the Home Department [2004] EWCA Civ 80, in which the  Court  of  Appeal
    held at [25] that, "not only is the earlier determination the  starting
    point, it should be followed unless there is a  very  good  reason  not
    to."  See [17].

 7. The judge had credibility concerns  of  her  own.  A  detailed  witness
    statement submitted by the appellant contained little detail  that  was
    personal to him, in particular relating to his role  within  the  party
    [58]. It did not mention the murder of his brother-in-law [59].

 8. From [60] to [63], the judge set out concerns arising from  the  "vague
    and shifting" oral evidence  of  the  appellant.  He  had  provided  an
    unsatisfactory account of why he  had  not  sought  to  obtain  updated
    information from India about the charges he claimed  had  been  brought
    against him in 2012. The friends the appellant claimed  to  have  asked
    for assistance in India were unwilling to help, which was  inconsistent
    with his case that he had been a prominent  local  politician.  It  was
    implausible for the appellant to have sought such information on so few
    occasions, especially given the extensive litigation his  asylum  claim
    had triggered. Had he been the respected community leader he claimed to
    have been, someone would have been willing to help [61].  Statements he
    provided from Members of the Legislative Assembly ("MLA")  were  silent
    as to his claimed high profile role within the DMK, and the appellant's
    explanation that it was his son, who remains in India, who procured the
    statements on his behalf did not convince the judge that  there  was  a
    good reason for this omission. Again, his answers  to  these  questions
    were "vague" [63].  The absence  in  the  DMK  MLA  statements  of  any
    references to his claimed high profile damaged his credibility [68].

 9. A statement from the police officer said to have assisted the appellant
    to escape police detention attracted little weight. This  was  because,
    first, he had not made the statement at the  time  of  the  appellant's
    earlier appeal and, secondly, it was "inconsistent"  that  the  officer
    had not been arrested or disciplined at the time. The judge said it was
    "fundamentally implausible" that the police in India  would  take  five
    years to bring  disciplinary  proceedings  against  the  officer,  even
    allowing  for  the  bureaucratic  nature  of  internal  Indian   police
    investigations. See [70] to [74].

10. A medical report provided by the appellant analysing  scarring  on  his
    body attracted little weight. It was extremely brief, and had failed to
    comply  with  the  Istanbul  Protocol  concerning  scarring,  and   the
    requirements of the practice direction concerning the  necessity  of  a
    statement of truth.

11. The judge accepted part of the appellant's wife written evidence  that,
    in June 2015, Indian government officials had visited the head  of  her
    village, and her home  directly,  in  connection  with  the  appellant,
    stating that they knew he had claimed asylum in this country. The judge
    described that as a "shocking violation" of the  Secretary  of  State's
    duty of  confidentiality  towards  asylum  seekers,  finding  that  the
    process  adopted  by  the  respondent  to  re-document  the   appellant
    following his refused asylum claim must have  revealed  to  the  Indian
    authorities that he was an asylum seeker [85]. However, the  background
    materials demonstrated that there was no risk to failed asylum  seekers
    upon their return to India, and the appellant would not be at  risk  on
    that basis [91]. The  same  written  evidence  had  been  before  Judge
    Hodgkinson  in  the  2016  appeal  and  he  rejected  it   as   lacking
    credibility. The judge had noted at  [53.viii]  that  Judge  Hodgkinson
    gave no reasons for rejecting its reliability.

12. The global conclusions of the judge were that there was no good  reason
    to depart from Judge Hodgkinson's findings concerning  the  appellant's
    profile in India, and his findings that he had not been  tortured,  nor
    framed for murder. She added that, "I also follow his finding that  the
    appellant has not shown that he is of adverse  interest  to  anyone  on
    return to India on account of his political activities..." At [92], the
    judge found  that  the  appellant  had  not  shown  that  there  was  a
    reasonable likelihood that he would be prosecuted or subject to serious
    harm upon his return. She dismissed the appeal on asylum grounds.

Permission to appeal

13. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal  Judge  Lindsley  on
    all grounds.

14. Under Ground 1, the appellant  contends  that  the  judge  provided  an
    "insufficient basis" for finding the appellant lacked credibility.  His
    actions upon his arrival in this country were  neither  implausible  or
    inconsistent, and the judge had  mischaracterised  his  oral  evidence.
    Rather than simply saying his friends had been unwilling to assist him,
    Mr Spurling contended that the appellant's evidence had been that  they
    were unable to do so. There was no requirement  for  corroboration  and
    asylum claims, and by expecting such  corroboration,  the  judge  acted
    unlawfully. She failed to take sufficient account of the fact  the  DMK
    MLA statements had been procured by the  appellant's  son,  so  it  was
    hardly surprising the appellant had  been  vague  in  relation  to  the
    approach his son had taken, in India, to obtaining statements.

15. Pursuant to  Ground  2,  the  judge  is  said  to  have  erred  in  her
    application of the principle in Devaseelan (Second  Appeals  -  ECHR  -
    Extra-Territorial Effect) Sri Lanka * [2002] UKIAT 00702,  by  treating
    the findings of Judge Hodgkinson as a "judicial  straitjacket",  rather
    than merely as a starting point. The judge expressly acknowledged  that
    Judge Hodgkinson had reached findings she would not have  reached,  yet
    impermissibly treated them as binding upon, failing properly to analyse
    the entirety of the evidence she had, in the round.

16. Ground 3 contends that the judge failed to consider the evidence of the
    appellant's wife. In contrast to Judge Hodgkinson, who gave no  reasons
    for rejecting the account given by  the  appellant's  wife,  the  judge
    accepted part of her evidence as reliable, but was  silent  as  to  the
    import  of  the  remainder  of  her  evidence,  which   supported   the
    appellant's core narrative.

17. Ground 4 avers that the judge erred in  her  treatment  of  a  scarring
    report by Dr Al-Wakeel which, properly analysed,  was  consistent  with
    the requirements of the Istanbul Protocol.

Submissions

18. Mr Spurling expanded upon his written submissions, summarised above.

19. For the respondent, Ms  Isherwood  submitted  that  the  judge  reached
    findings that were open to her on  the  evidence,  and  that,  properly
    understood, the appellant's grounds of appeal were merely disagreements
    with legitimate findings of fact reached by the judge.

Preliminary observations: findings of fact

20. By way of a preliminary observation, it is necessary to recall that  an
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal lies only  on  an  error  of  law,  not  a
    disagreement of fact.  Certain findings of fact are  capable  of  being
    infected by an error of law,  as  notably  summarised  in  R  (Iran)  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2005] EWCA Civ 982 at  [9].
    There are many judgments of  the  higher  courts  which  underline  the
    distinction between errors of fact and law.  I can do  no  better  than
    rely on the oft-quoted judgment of Lewison LJ in Fage UK Ltd. v Chobani
    UK Ltd. [2014] EWCA Civ 5 at [114]:

           "114.  Appellate courts have been repeatedly warned,  by  recent
           cases at the highest level, not to interfere  with  findings  of
           fact by trial judges, unless compelled to do so...  The  reasons
           for this approach are many. They include

                 i.  The expertise of a trial judge is in  determining  what
                 facts are relevant to the legal issues to be  decided,  and
                 what those facts are if they are disputed.

                 ii.  The trial is not a dress rehearsal. It  is  the  first
                 and last night of the show.

                 iii.  Duplication of the trial judge's role on appeal is  a
                 disproportionate  use  of  the  limited  resources  of   an
                 appellate court,  and  will  seldom  lead  to  a  different
                 outcome in an individual case.

                 iv.  In making his decisions  the  trial  judge  will  have
                 regard to the whole of the sea  of  evidence  presented  to
                 him,  whereas  an  appellate  court  will  only  be  island
                 hopping.

                 v.  The atmosphere of the courtroom cannot, in  any  event,
                 be  recreated  by   reference   to   documents   (including
                 transcripts of evidence).

                 vi.  Thus even if it were possible to duplicate the role of
                 the trial judge, it cannot in practice be done.

           115.  It is also important  to  have  in  mind  the  role  of  a
           judgment given after trial. The  primary  function  of  a  first
           instance judge is to find facts and identify the  crucial  legal
           points and to advance reasons for deciding them in a  particular
           way. He should give his reasons in sufficient detail to show the
           parties and, if need be, the Court of Appeal the  principles  on
           which he has acted and the reasons that  have  led  him  to  his
           decision. They need not be elaborate. There  is  no  duty  on  a
           judge, in giving  his  reasons,  to  deal  with  every  argument
           presented by counsel in support of his case. His function is  to
           reach conclusions and give reasons to support his view,  not  to
           spell out every matter as if summing up to a jury. Nor  need  he
           deal at any length with matters that are  not  disputed.  It  is
           sufficient if what he says shows  the  basis  on  which  he  has
           acted. These are not controversial observations: see Customs and
           Excise Commissioners v A [2002] EWCA Civ 1039; [2003] 2 WLR 210;
           Bekoe v Broomes [2005] UKPC 39;  Argos  Ltd  v  Office  of  Fair
           Trading [2006] EWCA Civ 1318; [2006] UKCLR 1135"

21. The judgment in Fage UK Ltd. v Chobani UK Ltd is seven years  old,  but
    it continues to represent a useful summary of the law on  the  approach
    to findings of fact, and the deference owed by appellate tribunals  and
    courts to first instance judges.  See the  Supreme  Court  in  Perry  v
    Raleys Solicitors [2019] UKSC 5 at [52], and most recently in the Court
    of Appeal in Lowe v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2021]
    EWCA Civ 62 at [29].

Ground 1

22. Properly understood, the core of  ground  1  amounts  to  a  series  of
    disagreements of fact with the legitimate findings of the judge. It was
    open to the judge to assess whether the conduct  of  the  appellant  in
    this country, including the steps he  had  taken  to  prepare  for  the
    appeal  proceedings,  was  commensurate  with  his  overall  narrative.
    Properly understood, the judge was not seeking  unlawful  corroboration
    of his account. She was simply analysing whether the way  he  conducted
    himself following his arrival here was consistent with his  case.   The
    judge even stressed that it was not the failure  to  obtain  an  update
    about the charges pending against him that concerned  her,  but  rather
    the inconsistency and implausibility of his account of how he sought to
    do so: [62].  Those were concerns that were open to the judge.

23. Similarly, the judge's concerns about the lack of  detail  in  the  MLA
    statements were equally valid.  This appellant's case was  advanced  on
    the basis he was a high profile DMK politician.  That the DMK MLAs  who
    provided statements  did  not  even  refer  to  his  claimed  political
    standing was significant, and the judge was entitled to  have  concerns
    accordingly.  It was not  irrational  for  the  judge  not  to  ascribe
    significance  to  the  fact  the  appellant's  son  had  procured   the
    statements for him when reaching her credibility concerns.   The  judge
    had the benefit of hearing all the evidence in the case, observing more
    than once that the appellant's evidence  was  vague  on  these  crucial
    matters was vague: see [60] and [63]. Barring irrationality,  questions
    of weight are matters for the judge.

Ground 2

24. In relation to ground 2, the judge correctly directed herself as to the
    import and significance of Judge Hodgkinson's earlier decision: [17] to
    [19]. While she was candid about the fact she may not have reached some
    of the findings Judge Hodgkinson reached, she correctly identified that
    she was to take his decision as her starting  point,  and  only  depart
    from it in the case of good reasons to do so.  She did  not  treat  the
    decision  as  a  straight  jacket;  she  reached   differing   findings
    concerning the evidence of  the  appellant's  wife  and  the  visit  of
    government officials,  and  elsewhere  during  her  operative  analysis
    underlined the need for her own credibility assessment  in  the  round:
    see the opening  sentences  to  [53],  and  also  [56]  and  [84].  The
    appellant's complaints are disagreements of  fact  and  weight.  Again,
    barring irrationality  or  any  of  the  other  established  bases  for
    findings of fact to amount to errors of law, the  judge's  approach  to
    the Hodgkinson decision was entirely open to her.

Ground 3

25. In relation to ground 3, the appellant contends that the  judge  failed
    properly to analyse the evidence of the appellant's wife,  or  to  give
    reasons for having not done so, in light of the fact she accepted  part
    of the wife's written evidence. It is important to  recall  that  first
    instance judges are not required expressly to consider every  point  in
    evidence. Nor are they required to  repeat  back  to  the  parties  the
    evidence that has been given, or relied upon, during  the  proceedings.
    The wife's evidence had been before Judge Hodgkinson in  precisely  the
    same form as it had been considered by Judge Ruddick. The  contents  of
    the wife's statement are light, with  minimal  details  concerning  the
    core elements of the appellant's account. Plainly, the  judge  accepted
    the final two paragraphs of her statement, concerning  the  visit  from
    CID officials. It was not necessary for the judge expressly  to  engage
    with the preceding paragraphs, especially given  Judge  Hodgkinson  had
    considered the evidence as  part  of  his  overall  analysis,  and  had
    rejected the  very  same  account  as  that  outlined  in  the  initial
    paragraphs of the wife's statement. The judge also had the  benefit  of
    correspondence from the appellant's from July 2015,  complaining  about
    the breach of confidentiality by the Home Office, in  response  to  the
    visit by CID officials to the appellant's wife in India.   It  was  not
    incumbent upon the judge to give further  reasons  in  her  credibility
    analysis.

Ground 4

26. In relation to ground 4, Mr Spurling contends that the judge was  wrong
    to find that the scarring report  did  not  comply  with  the  Istanbul
    Protocol.  It is not necessary, he submits, for  a  medical  expert  to
    address each scar in  turn.   What  is  required  is  that  an  overall
    assessment concerning all injuries be provided, and that  is  precisely
    what the judge did.  He relies on paragraph 188 of the Protocol:

           "Ultimately, it is the overall evaluation of all lesions and not
           the consistency of each lesion with a particular form of torture
           that is important in assessing the torture story..."

27. However, the preceding  paragraph  states  that  a  physician  "should"
    address each lesion individually.  See paragraph 187:

           "For each lesion and for the overall  pattern  of  lesions,  the
           physician should indicate the degree of consistency  between  it
           and the attribution given by the patient.  The  following  terms
           are generally used: (a) Not consistent..." (Emphasis added)

28. Pursuant to paragraph 188 of the Protocol, it would have been  open  to
    the judge to disregard the expert's failure to address each  individual
    lesion, but, in the exercise of her judicial discretion, she chose  not
    to. That is a question of weight, and the approach taken by  the  judge
    was entirely consistent with the expectation of the Istanbul protocol's
    requirements that an expert "should" address each lesion individually.

29. The judge also had concerns that the expert had failed to discount  the
    possibility of accidental infliction of the  injuries:  see  [77].  The
    expert's failure to do so was inconsistent  with  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 176 of the Protocol:

           "Ultimately, the examiner must offer an opinion as to the origin
           of the lesions: inflicted or self-inflicted, accidental  or  the
           result of a disease process."

30. It was entirely legitimate for the judge to ascribe less weight to  the
    report in light of those  factors.   She  was  also  entitled  to  have
    concerns arising from the expert's  non-compliance  with  the  practice
    direction, by the omission of sufficient reasons  in  the  report.   Mr
    Spurling's submissions are simply disagreements of weight.  There is no
    merit to this ground.

Conclusion

31. For the reasons set out above, the grounds of appeal are essentially  a
    series of disagreements of fact with the legitimate conclusions of  the
    first instance judge. She had the advantage of  considering  the  whole
    sea of evidence, whereas this  tribunal  can  only  engage  in  "island
    hopping".  The reasons given by the judge were clear and sufficient and
    there is no basis for this  tribunal  to  interfere  with  them.   This
    appeal is dismissed.

32. I maintain the anonymity direction made by the First-tier Tribunal.


Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Stephen H Smith                              Date 11 February 2021

Upper Tribunal Judge Stephen Smith




