
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11275/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard remotely via Skype for Business         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 17 March 2021                              |On 25 March 2021              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE



                                   Between

                                     MMR
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent



Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Spurling
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS




 1. The appellant, a Kurdish citizen of Iraq born in 1985, appealed to  the
    First-tier Tribunal against a decision of the Secretary of State  dated
    1 November 2019 refusing him international protection.  The  First-tier
    Tribunal, in a decision promulgated on 18 February 2020, dismissed  his
    appeal. The appellant  now  appeals,  with  permission,  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

 2. The appellant was not represented before the First-tier Tribunal or  on
    his application to the Upper Tribunal for permission to appeal. He  was
    represented by Mr Spurling of Counsel at the  initial  hearing  in  the
    Upper Tribunal. Rather than address in detail the  appellant's  grounds
    of appeal, I shall structure my decision by reference to the  grant  of
    permission  of  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Bruce.  Judge   Bruce   refused
    permission to the appellant to challenge the findings of the First-tier
    Tribunal regarding credibility. At [3], Judge Bruce, referring  to  the
    'issue of documentation and the appellant's ability to get from Baghdad
    to a place of safety', she sets out why she considered it arguable that
    the judge may have fallen into legal error. I shall consider under  the
    follow two headings the four sub-paragraphs of [3] which contain  Judge
    Bruce's grant of permission:

    Was it reasonably likely that the appellant  would  be  unable  to  re-
    document himself?

 3. Save for his ethnicity, nationality and the location of his  home  area
    in Iraq, the  judge  did  not  accept  as  reliable  any  part  of  the
    appellant's evidence. There is no permission for the Upper Tribunal  to
    revisit the findings on credibility. At [33], the  judge  rejected  the
    appellant's claim that he has no family members  within  Iraq  who  can
    assist him. At [36], the judge found that he saw no  reason  'why  [the
    appellant] cannot obtain existing or new identity  documents  within  a
    reasonable time if required.' [my emphasis]. Those findings  follow  on
    from the judge's specific finding [32] that  he  did  not  believe  the
    appellant's account of how he had lost his identity  documents.  It  is
    certainly true that, in addition  to  referring  to  existing  identity
    documents, the judge also discusses the  appellant's  ability  to  're-
    document' himself.  However, a careful reading of  the  decision  makes
    clear that the judge considered that the appellant (i) had not lost his
    identity documents (ii) if he does not possess the  documents  at  this
    time, his family, with whom he is in touch,  will  assist  him  to  re-
    possess them. If that finding is sound, the fact  that  the  judge  may
    have  made  alternative  findings  (regarding  the  processes  of   re-
    documentation) which may be arguably unsound is immaterial.  Given  the
    comprehensive rejection by the judge of the appellant's credibility,  I
    consider that he was entitled to finding that the  appellant  would  be
    able to use documents which he either holds now  or  which  his  family
    will assist his to obtain to enter and move within Iraq. In  the  light
    of  that  finding,  Judge  Bruce's  second  and  fourth  sub-paragraphs
    (whether it was open to the judge  to  find  that  the  Iraqi  Consular
    authorities in the  United  Kingdom  would  assist  the  appellant  and
    whether the civil registry in Khanaqin  continues  to  issue  CSIDs  as
    opposed to INIDs) are not relevant; as  the  appellant  could  use  his
    existing identity documents, it will not be necessary for him to engage
    with the Iraqi Consulate in the United Kingdom or the civil registry in
    Kahnaqin or, indeed, elsewhere in Iraq.

    Did the judge err in law by failing to have regard to the fact that the
    appellant is from Khanaqin where the Upper Tribunal in SMO,  KSP and IM
    (Article 15(c);identity documents) Iraq CG [2019] UKUT  400  [272]  has
    found that there are higher levels of ISIL activity and violence?

 4. The appellant was born in Jabara  but  it  appears  that  his  evidence
    relates to his home and family being in Jalawla and  not  Khanaqin.  Mr
    Spurling (at the risk of giving evidence) told  me  that  Khanaqin  and
    Jalawla are about 30 km apart. He submitted that, because they  are  so
    proximate, it made no difference which of the  two  cities  constituted
    the appellant's home area. That submission may  have  some  force  but,
    equally, I am not satisfied that the judge has erred in his assessment,
    made by reference to country guidance and background material,  of  the
    risks which the appellant and his family would encounter in Jalawla.  I
    accept Mr McVeety's submission that the appellant is a Kurdish male who
    has none of the characteristics which would arguably expose him to risk
    and which are detailed in the headnote and [314] of SMO. As such, he is
    not at real risk on return to Jalawla which, for the reasons  given  at
    [3] above, he will be able to reach safely from Baghdad.

 5. For the reasons I have given I am satisfied that the  judge's  decision
    is not vitiated by legal error. Accordingly, the appeal is dismissed.

    Notice of Decision

    The appeal is dismissed.


Signed                              Date 17 March 2021
Upper Tribunal Judge Lane


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.




