
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11824/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5 November 2019                            |On 7 November 2019            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                    AKWF
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Not present or represented
For the Respondent:    Mr Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant was born in 1974 and is a male citizen of Sri  Lanka.  He
    appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  against  a  decision  of   the
    respondent dated 27 September 2018 refusing to grant him  international
    protection. The First-tier Tribunal, in a decision  promulgated  on  30
    April 2019, dismissed the  appeal.  The  appellant  now  appeals,  with
    permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. At the initial hearing at Field House on 5 November 2019, the appellant
    did not attend. I had a letter from Nag Law dated 4 November 2019 which
    stated that attempts made by the solicitors to  contact  the  appellant
    had been unsuccessful and, as a consequence,  they  had  withdrawn  the
    brief issued to Counsel. There was nothing on the Upper  Tribunal  file
    to indicate that the notice of hearing sent  to  the  appellant's  last
    known address had failed to reach him. That notice of hearing had  been
    posted by first class post to the appellant on 3 October 2019.  In  the
    circumstances, I proceeded with the initial hearing in the  absence  of
    the appellant.

 3. Mr Avery, who appeared for the Secretary of State, did not concede  the
    appeal but he told me that he considered the decision of the First-tier
    Tribunal to be problematic. I agree. Indeed, I find each of the grounds
    of appeal to have substantial merit.

 4. First, the judge accepted that the appellant had been detained in  2002
    and 2017 in Sri Lanka on account of assistance which he  had  given  to
    the LTTE yet at  [42]  she  found  that  there  was  'nothing  in  this
    appellant's personal circumstances which gives me any reason to believe
    his claim.' In the light of her apparently positive findings as regards
    parts of the appellant's account,  that  conclusion  is  puzzling.  The
    judge  may  have  intended  to  say  that  there  was  nothing  in  the
    appellant's personal circumstances which led to believe that  he  would
    be at risk and return to Sri  Lanka  but  that  is  not  what  she  has
    actually said. The statement is troubling for  the  additional  reason,
    referenced in the grounds [15], that the judge has not carried out  any
    adequate examination of risk on return in the  light  of  her  findings
    that the appellant had been arrested on two occasions in the  past  for
    LTTE activities. Moreover, the judge at [34] unhelpfully  states  that,
    'based on the appellant's wife's statement, it  may  be  that  the  Sri
    Lanka police are looking for the appellant but I  find  that  would  be
    because he is wanted for prosecution of  a  criminal  offence  and  not
    because of his past involvement with the LTTE...[my emphasis]' At [38],
    however, the judge finds 'that the authorities have [not] been visiting
    [the appellant's] home looking for him.' The fact-finding is  far  from
    clear. The use of the word 'may' leaves doubt  as  to  what  the  judge
    actually did find as a fact. In any  event,  assuming  that  the  judge
    found that the police were looking for the appellant in connection with
    a criminal offence, that finding is completely  inconsistent  with  the
    subsequent finding that the authorities had not been looking  for  him.
    The appellant is entitled to know why  he  lost  this  appeal  and  the
    judge's confused analysis fails to tell him.

 5. For the reasons I have indicated above, I find that the analysis of the
    judge has been vitiated by legal error. I set aside the decision. There
    will need to be a hearing de novo in the First-tier Tribunal. The  next
    Tribunal should be aware of  the  difficulties  which  the  appellant's
    previous solicitors have had in contacting him and of  his  failure  to
    attend the initial hearing in the Upper Tribunal. However, it is up  to
    the appellant to keep the Tribunal and the respondent notified  of  his
    current address; if the appellant fails to attend the  next  First-tier
    Tribunal hearing, then it is very likely that the Tribunal will  decide
    to proceed in his absence.

    Notice of Decision



    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  is  set  aside.  None  of  the
    findings of fact shall stand. The appeal is returned to the  First-tier
    Tribunal for the Tribunal to remake the  decision  at  or  following  a
    hearing de novo.


Signed                              Date 5 November 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.














