

                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/11576/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|on 13 December 2017                   |on 14 December 2017                  |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                                Christine [M]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:       Mr K Forrest, Advocate, instructed by Livingstone
Brown, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A Govan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The respondent refused the appellant's  protection  claim  for  reasons
    explained in her letter dated 13 October 2016.

 2. First-tier Tribunal Judge Doyle dismissed the  appellant's  appeal  for
    reasons explained in his decision promulgated on 25 May 2017.

 3. The failure of the protection claim is not now disputed.

 4. The appellant and her son are both citizens of Malawi (and, as  far  as
    known, of no other country).

 5. The appellant sought permission to appeal, on these grounds:

      ...

      2.  The FtT Judge ... has not taken into account the best interests of
      the child who is now 7 years old ... He acknowledges the  age  of  the
      child ... but concludes that there is no "reliable evidence that it is
      not reasonable for the child to leave the  UK".  The  significance  of
      sections 117B and D of the 2002 act does not  elide  the  need  for  a
      careful and fact sensitive analysis  of  the  best  interests  of  the
      child. The  analysis  conducted  is  inadequate.  It  focuses  on  the
      negative ... but fails to make any positive  comment  (notwithstanding
      the effect on the child  of  many  aspects  of  the  evidence  in  the
      appellant's bundle) in relation to the child's best interests.

      3.  The FtT Judge also erred in law in failing to note  whether  there
      was any significance to be attached to ... Sheriff  Court  proceedings
      by the child's father and appellant's ex-partner  and  in  failing  to
      consider ... their effect on the current proceedings.

 6. FtT Judge E B Grant refused permission on 14 September 2017:

      ...

      3.  A judge can only make findings on the evidence placed  before  the
      tribunal and as the judge notes there  was  no  reliable  evidence  to
      indicate it was unreasonable for the appellant and her  son  to  leave
      the UK together and return to Malawi, there was no  evidence  to  show
      they face homelessness or destitution on return. The judge  was  aware
      the child was at school and that there would be a period of  upheaval,
      but the child is young and will adapt. It is implicit in the  decision
      that the best interests of the child are to remain with his mother.

 7. The appellant sought permission from the UT, saying:

      We acknowledge paragraph 3 of the [refusal of  permission].   However,
      the appellant adheres to the existing grounds.

 8. On 17 October 2017 UT Judge Canavan granted permission:

      ... It is at least arguable that the judge focussed solely on  whether
      it was practical for the appellant and her child to return  to  Malawi
      and failed to conduct an evaluative assessment  of  the  child's  best
      interests and ties to the UK applying ... ZH (Tanzania) [2011] UKSC 4,
      Zoumbas [2013] UKSC 74 and EV (Philippines) [2014] EWCA Civ  874.   It
      is also arguable that the judge failed to consider the  weight  to  be
      given  to  the  child's  length  of  residence  as  outlined  in   the
      respondent's policy guidance ... discussed ... in MA (Pakistan) [2016]
      EWCA Civ 705.

 9. A rule 24 response from the SHD includes these points:

      3. ... 7 years from  the  age  of  4  years  is  considered  to  be  a
      considerable period of time ... Azimi-Moyad [2013] UKUT 00197.  It was
      open to the judge having regard to the evidence in the round  to  find
      the [child's] best interests were served by remaining with his  mother
      having regard to the real-world facts in this appeal.

      4.  There is nothing in the grounds to identify  the  judge  had  been
      made aware of any Sheriff Court proceedings...

10. (The response no doubt had in mind that the child was born in 2010  and
    his period of residence in the UK included his infant years.)

11. A letter from the appellant's solicitors dated 11 December  2017  draws
    attention to an inventory of productions  which  was  before  the  FtT,
    including copies of the initial writ in the Sheriff  Court  proceedings
    and the child's school records.

12. Mr Forrest submitted thus:

      i) The judge erred in his application of the test in s.  117B(6).   He
         focused on whether it was reasonable to expect the child  to  leave
         the UK.  The test had to include consideration of the child's  best
         interests.

     ii) The judge did not follow the approach explained at paragraphs 46  -
         49 of MA, including the significance of 7 years in the UK, and  the
         need for a careful analysis of the nature and extent  of  links  in
         the UK and in the country of return.

    iii) There was evidence before the FtT about the Court proceedings,  and
         in her statement the appellant  referred  to  contact  arrangements
         between the child and his father having been in  place  informally.
         Although there had been no specific submission, those were  matters
         the judge was bound to consider.  The case might have been  one  of
         those exceptional ones where the judge should  have  adjourned  for
         fuller information, or to await the outcome of the proceedings: cf.
          MA at paragraph 113.

     iv) The decision should be set aside, and the case remitted to the FtT.



13. Mr Govan submitted thus:

      i) The decision, on turning to human rights,  began  at  paragraph  23
         with the fact that the case concerned a "qualifying child" who  had
         been here for 7 years, was born here, has known only the UK and was
         in primary school.

     ii) The Judge took all important factors into account.

    iii)  Consideration  of   what   was   reasonable   correctly   involved
         consideration of any significant  difficulties  facing  mother  and
         child in Malawi.  The judge was right to say there were none.

     iv) The approach in MA was in effect applied.  Absence  of  the  phrase
         "best interests of the child" was not an error of law.

14. It emerged in course of parties' submissions that the child's father is
    also a citizen of Malawi; there was  before  the  FtT  a  copy  of  the
    decision in HU/09151/2016, promulgated on 26 October  2016,  dismissing
    his appeal on human rights grounds, argued on the basis of his marriage
    to a UK citizen and of his relationship with his son; the Sheriff Court
    made an order on 7 September 2017, slightly increasing  the  amount  of
    access which had been in place by agreement; and the child's father, so
    far as known, remains in the UK, but without any right to be here.

15. I reserved my decision.

16. The FtT's decision might ideally have included  a  self-direction  that
    the  child's  best  interests  were  a  primary  but  not   over-riding
    consideration.  However, absence of some such  phrase  is  at  best  an
    error of form rather than of substance.  If it is an error at  all,  it
    is not one which requires the decision to be set aside and remade.

17. The  consideration  of  the  child's  best  interests  was  practically
    incorporated into the question of reasonableness.  Nothing  significant
    was overlooked.

18. The reality of the evidence was that there  was  nothing  to  show  any
    substantial adverse impact on the child's interests if he were to  move
    with his mother to Malawi.

19. The one matter of potential importance which the judge did not  mention
    was the contact proceedings.  The case might have been different if the
    child's father was a UK citizen or had indefinite leave to remain;  but
    it turns out that he has no entitlement to be here, and the expectation
    must be that he will return to Malawi in accordance with the law.  This
    factor would make the appellant's case worse, not better.

20. The appellant's grounds and submissions do not show that the making  of
    the decision of the FtT involved the making of any error on a point  of
    law, such that it ought to be set aside.  Its decision shall stand.

21. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.

            [pic]

            13 December 2017
            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman




