
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11076/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 13 February 2019                  |On 6 March 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

                                    [E P]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Reza, Solicitor, JKR Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms S Cunha, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   In a decision sent on 2 September 2018 Judge Watson of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (FtT) dismissed the appeal of the  appellant,  a  national  of
    Iran, against the decision made by the respondent on 2  September  2018
    refusing his protection claim.  The basis of the appellant's claim  was
    that he had had to flee Iran due to his fear of persecution on  account
    of his religious beliefs.  He claimed to have converted to Christianity
    whilst in Iran and then fled the  country  when  learning  that  fellow
    worshippers at a house church he attended had been arrested.  His house
    had later been raided by the authorities who seized his belongings.  He
    managed to leave the country along with his wife and daughter with  the
    help of an agent.

2.   The judge did not find the appellant's account credible.

3.   The appellant's grounds level several arguments, it being alleged  that
    the judge:

    (1)   misunderstood the appellant's  evidence  about  how  he  came  to
         Christianity;

    (2)   misunderstood how the appellant had obtained passports to  travel
         to the UK;

    (3)  erred in finding the appellant's account of fleeing after watching
         the Etihad raid on the house church not credible;

    (4)  misunderstood the evidence of the appellant's wife and the  timing
         of her own conversion;

    (5)  failed to attach due weight to the evidence of  the  Pastor  whose
         evidence was that the appellant was a genuine Christian; and

    (6)  failed to give due weight to the appellant's evidence that he  had
         undertaken Facebook activities.

4.   I heard succinct submissions from Mr Reza and Ms Cunha.

5.   I am not persuaded by any of the grounds.

6.   Before addressing each  ground  in  turn,  I  would  observe  that  the
    judge's adverse credibility findings were based on  assessment  of  the
    appellant's evidence by  reference  to  a  number  of  well-established
    credibility:   indicators   inconsistencies,   lack   of   detail   and
    implausibilities.

7.   I consider that ground 1  amounts  to  a  mere  disagreement  with  the
    judge's finding as set out at paragraph 25.

         "25. I find that the appellant has not shown to the lower  standard
             of proof that he was attending a house church in Iran, that it
             was raided or that he had any interest in Christianity  before
             he left Iran.  My reasons are as follows:  I  found  that  the
             whole account was not credible.  He  himself  stated  that  he
             would not dare tell anyone about  feeling  disillusioned  with
             Islam (RB D42), yet he claims he meets a person he had not met
             since primary school, meets him around 6 times and  then  this
             person envangelises him and invites him  to  a  house  church.
             Given the danger that this could pose to all  attenders  of  a
             church, I find it not credible  that  a  person  would  invite
             someone after meeting them only a few times and then  run  the
             risk, not only to himself but to all his fellow church members
             of inviting them to a church meeting.  I find the  account  to
             lack credibility.  I also note that in his interview he stated
             that the church was held in two  different  properties  (Q85),
             but in oral evidence he was certain it was held  at  the  same
             location each time.  He also  stated  in  his  interview  that
             there was no set day for the  church  meetings  although  they
             tried to have it on Sundays (Q75).  In oral evidence  he  said
             it was 'regular, every Sunday' and at a regular time, 12.30  -
             2 pm.  It had been cancelled on one occasion.  This was a very
             specific detail  and  the  accounts  are  not  consistent.   I
             further find his account about the ID documents  inconsistent.
             In his screening interview he states that he will try and  get
             the passport and that it is at home.  In his asylum  interview
             (Q91) he states that his wife was at home when it  was  raided
             and the authorities took his ID documents and computer.   This
             is inconsistent in an important detail,  and  I  find  is  not
             consistent with his whole claim of his uncle arranging  within
             3 days to get the whole family out of  the  country  using  an
             agent.  He further claims that he  never  looked  at  the  his
             false passport and he did not know what passport his wife  and
             daughter travelled on; that the agent gave them the  passports
             but would not let them look at them  and  took  them  off  the
             family immediately after going through passport  control.   In
             his screening interview states that the agent took photos  and
             arranged the passports in Turkey so  in  this  account  he  is
             fully aware of the process of getting a false passport  and  I
             find that the accounts are not consistent."

8.   Ground 1 asserts that the judge misunderstood that  the  appellant  did
    not suggest that he opened up to Babak suddenly; it was only after they
    built up mutual trust. However it is clear from paragraph 25  that  the
    judge took into account both the appellant's previous  connection  with
    Babak and the number of times they had  met  before  the  house  church
    invitation.  This finding was within the range of reasonable responses.

9.   Ground 2 suffers  from  the  same  malady;  it  is  just  a  series  of
    disagreements with the judge's findings of fact.  It was entirely  open
    to the judge to find  that  he  appellant  would  have  looked  at  the
    passports and also to find his evidence regarding whether  he  had  his
    passport and ID documents at home to be inconsistent.

10.  Ground 3 is similarly afflicted.   Paragraph  26  provides  a  rational
    assessment of why the judge concluded that the appellant's  account  of
    the raid and his reaction  to  it  was  not  plausible.   Paragraph  26
    states:

         "26. I find his accounts of seeing a house raid  from  a  distance,
             when he had been delayed in attending and then  going  to  his
             uncle's home, without contacting his wife at all not credible.
              He stated that he had a bible in his home but took  no  steps
             to return home or retrieve it.  There was no reason to  expect
             that the authorities would have immediate  knowledge  that  he
             was expected at the church as the arrests had only just  taken
             place.  His response that he just went to a safe place, I find
             not credible in the circumstances that he describes."

11.  Ground 4 takes aim at paragraph 28:

         "28. I find the contradictory evidence  as  to  the  faith  of  the
             appellant's wife also damages the  credibility  of  the  whole
             claim.  To arrive and at the screening  interview  state  that
             she is a Christian, to tell the pastor that she  is  a  muslim
             and then to claim in oral evidence that she is a Christian  as
             her husband has evangelised her shows a  significant  lack  of
             consistency.   I  do  not   accept   that   the   pastor   has
             misunderstood her  as  stating  only  that  she  was  'born  a
             muslim'.  The email and his oral evidence are clear  that  she
             introduced herself as a muslim.

12.  This ground overlooks that the judge had earlier considered the  wife's
    attempt  to  explain   her   inconsistencies   and   had   found   them
    unsatisfactory.

         "23. The appellant's wife gave oral evidence.  She  was  questioned
             about her own belief and asked to explain why the  pastor  had
             noted that she said she was a Muslim, when her evidence at the
             hearing was that she had told him she wanted  to  be  baptised
             and considered herself a Christian.  She did not explain  this
             satisfactorily."

13.  In this context, simple counter-assert that  his  wife's  evidence  was
    clearly that she was a Muslim in Iran and only accepted Christianity in
    the UK does not suffice.

14.  To address Ground 5, it is convenient to set out paragraphs 24  and  27
    in full:

         "24. The Pastor attended and gave oral evidence.  He confirmed  the
             information in his email  and  gave  more  details  about  the
             baptism process.  He confirmed that he would give  people  the
             benefit of the doubt and that it was between them and  God  if
             they were not genuine.  The process for baptism was to  attend
             four group sessions which involved listening in a group  which
             took place once a week for four weeks and lasted  90  minutes.
             Each member of the group would share in turn their feelings of
             the faith on one occasion at the beginning of a session.   The
             appellant had talked for around ten minutes at  the  beginning
             of the first session about his faith journey.  Apart from that
             there was no individual knowledge of  a  participant's  belief
             and no questioning of the genuine nature of any  participant's
             claim to be a convert.  In two years the Pastor had baptised 8
             people and the appellant was the only  asylum  seeker  he  had
             baptised.  With regard to the seeming inconsistency of whether
             the wife claimed to be Christian or not, the Pastor said  that
             they did not have clear communication and  he  had  asked  his
             wife to speak to the appellant's wife.  I accept the  evidence
             of the Pastor that he himself believes that the  appellant  is
             genuine in a conversion, but it is clear that the Pastor  does
             not see it as his role to question any statement of a person's
             belief and the  process  for  baptism  does  not  involve  any
             rigorous  assessment  of  a  person's  belief  or  indeed  any
             assessment of their belief at all.  The manifestation  of  the
             appellant's belief that the Pastor is able to confirm is  that
             he attends church and other church  activities  and  has  gone
             through a baptism ceremony.  I accept that  he  appellant  has
             done this.

         27.  With regard to  the  Pastor's  evidence  on  the  process  for
             Baptism, this was different to the appellant's description  in
             his interview (Q115).  The appellant stated that  he  attended
             for just one week before being baptised, being two sessions of
             2  hours.   The  pastor  stated  in  oral  evidence  that  the
             appellant told his story on  the  first  attendance  and  that
             there were sessions of 90 minutes once a week for four  weeks.
             I find that the pastor was not aware of the attendance of  the
             appellant as the accounts vary greatly and that  there  is  no
             assessment of the appellant's claims of conversion.   This  is
             not a criticism of the pastor as  he  himself  states  that  a
             conversion is between a person and God  and  not  for  him  to
             judge.  It does however lessen  the  weight  of  the  pastor's
             evidence on a genuine conversion."

15.  Mr Reza submits that this  assessment  is  flawed  because  the  Pastor
    (Pastor Lopes) was a "Dorodian-compliant" witness and  undoubtedly  the
    best-placed person to comment on the  genuineness  of  the  appellant's
    faith.  He points out that the Pastor's witness statement  did  clearly
    vouch that the appellant's conversion was genuine,  his  e-mail  of  15
    November 2018 stating:

         "Q7: What makes you think he is a genuine and committed Christian?

         His disposition and willingness to serve the Church and his  fellow
         believers.  His attendance  and  his  desire  to  be  part  of  all
         activities and the most important his relationship with the  church
         members and everyone loves him."

16.  Mr Reza submits that by not  accepting  this  evidence  the  judge  has
    effectively imposed a higher standard of proof.  However, I see nothing
    erroneous in the judge's assessment.  It was clearly open to the  judge
    to note a significant discrepancy in the  accounts  the  appellant  and
    Pastor gave of the pre-baptism sessions.  Nor do I understand the judge
    in paragraph 27 to have  overlooked  the  Pastor's  e-mail  assessment.
    Rather  the  judge  sought  to  highlight  the  Pastor's   own   stated
    generalised premise  for  evaluation  of  genuineness  as  set  out  at
    paragraph 24 ("he confirmed that he would give people  the  benefit  of
    the doubt and it was between them and God if they were  not  genuine").
    In particular the judge was clearly concerned that on the Pastor's  own
    evidence there had been "no individual  knowledge  of  a  participant's
    belief and no questioning of the genuine nature  of  any  participant's
    claim to be a convert" (paragraph 24).  Further, to the extent that  it
    was relevant,  the  Pastor's  assessment  as  set  out  in  his  e-mail
    statement was  confined  to  assessment  of  the  appellant's  attitude
    towards service and fellow worshippers; it said nothing about the state
    of his own convictions or knowledge.

17.  As regards Ground 6, it was clearly open to the judge on  the  evidence
    to find that the appellant had not been an active blogger  and  it  was
    entirely consistent with the  background  evidence  for  the  judge  to
    consider on this basis that the authorities would not be interested  in
    persons whose Facebook posts (even if discovered) were not those of  an
    active blogger.

18.  For the above reasons I conclude that the judge did not materially  err
    in law and accordingly her decision to dismiss the  appellant's  appeal
    must stand.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date: 26 February 2019
             [pic]

Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

