
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11129/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester by Skype for Business |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 11 February 2021                       |On 2 March 2021                  |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                     RA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Reza
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh  who  was  born  in  1987.  He
    appealed to the First-tier Tribunal against a decision of the Secretary
    of State refusing his claim for international protection and  on  human
    rights grounds. The First-tier Tribunal, in a decision  promulgated  on
    11 February 2020, dismissed the appeal. The appellant now appeals, with
    permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. There are two grounds of appeal which  contain  a  number  of  separate
    elements all of which  seek  to  challenge  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    findings on credibility. Judge Sheridan granted permission to appeal in
    the Upper Tribunal.

 3. The first ground challenges  the  judge's  finding  at  [61]  that  the
    appellant's credibility was diminished by his failure before a previous
    Tribunal (which had dismissed his asylum appeal in  November  2016)  to
    produce a medical certificate which he claimed supported his account of
    past events. The certificate had been produced at the hearing in  2020.
    The judge noted  that  the  person  who  had  sent  the  appellant  the
    certificate had been in touch with him in 2016. The  ground  of  appeal
    asserts that the appellant 'had provided a plausible reason for its non-
    availability at the time of the earlier hearing.'

 4. The ground is without merit. The fact  that  the  availability  of  the
    certificate  now  may  have  led  to  the  respondent  recognising  the
    appellant's fresh claim under paragraph 353 is  irrelevant.  The  judge
    was entitled to find that the evidence could have been produced in  the
    previous appeal and the appellant's failure to produce it  impacted  on
    his credibility (see Devasseelan [2002] UKIAT 00702*).  The  ground  is
    nothing more than a disagreement with a finding available to the  judge
    on the evidence.

 5. The second ground concerns the weight attached  by  the  judge  to  the
    evidence of four of the appellant's witnesses, three of whom had  filed
    statements but who did not attend the hearing to be cross-examined. The
    fourth, Mr H, did attend the hearing. The  ground  complains  that  the
    judge erred by attaching no significant weight to the evidence  of  the
    witnesses who did not attend. The ground is without  merit.  The  judge
    was fully entitled to consider that  the  probative  value  of  witness
    evidence which had not been tested in court by  cross  examination  was
    limited. He found the evidence of Mr H under cross  examination  to  be
    generally consistent [69]. The grounds complain  that  the  judge  then
    failed to make detailed findings on Mr H's evidence or to  explain  why
    he found that his evidence failed to establish that the appellant is  a
    gay man, as he claims to be. This  challenge  is  also  meritless.  The
    judge makes it clear at [83] that he had considered the totality of the
    evidence before making his findings of fact.  He  expressly  states  at
    [84] that '[the appellant's] witnesses [i.e. including the evidence  of
    Mr H] ... lack credibility to the extent that their evidence  seeks  to
    establish [that the appellant is a gay man].'  It  is  made  abundantly
    clear by the judge, in findings supported by cogent reasons (with which
    the grounds do not take issue), found that none of the evidence adduced
    by the appellant established his claim to  the  necessary  standard  of
    proof. Moreover and  significantly,  this  was  a  second  appeal;  the
    appellant had already  been  found  to  be  untruthful  by  a  previous
    Tribunal, a finding which the judge  correctly  took  as  the  starting
    point of his own analysis. Further, the appellant submission  that  the
    judge acted unfairly in his treatment of  the  witness  Mr  O  is  also
    baseless. At [74], the judge found that Mr O had been  inconsistent  as
    between his written evidence and his oral evidence as to whether he had
    had sex with the appellant. The grounds complain that this  discrepancy
    had not been put to the witness by the judge.  However,  there  was  no
    reason why it should have been;  the  witness's  evidence  was  plainly
    contradictory on its face. There appears to have been no attempt by the
    appellant's representative to address this obvious contradiction during
    re-examination or in submissions; it seems that the appellant (and  the
    witness) were prepared to let the contradiction stand and the judge was
    entitled to find the witness's credibility diminished accordingly.

 6. Finally, the appellant complains that the judge has applied too high  a
    standard  of  proof.  At  [75]  and  [77],  the  judge  uses  the  word
    'determinative' when discussing social media evidence and  whether  the
    application's attendance at a Pride event and activity with the  Apajon
    Group,  whilst  consistent  with  his  claim  to  be   gay,   was   not
    'determinative' of that claim.

 7. The judge has correctly set out the burden and standard of proof at [38-
    39]. Having carefully read the decision  as  a  whole,  I  am  entirely
    satisfied that the judge has not at any point in the decision  departed
    from that standard and applied too high a standard  of  proof.  He  has
    used the word 'determinative' in the sense that the evidence adduced by
    the appellant has  not  discharged  the  burden  of  proving  what  the
    appellant asserts that the evidence does prove, namely that he is a gay
    man. He has not used it in the sense that evidence had failed to  prove
    categorically and beyond any doubt that the appellant is  gay.  I  have
    absolutely no doubt that the judge has concluded that the evidence  was
    not determinative of the appellant's claimed sexuality by reference  to
    the appropriate standard of proof.

 8. In the circumstances, I conclude that the judge did not err in law  for
    the reasons advanced in the grounds of appeal or, indeed,  at  all  and
    that his decision should stand. The appeal is dismissed.



    Notice of Decision

    The appeal is dismissed.


Signed                              Date 11 February 2021

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.
