
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
PA/11581/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at City Centre Tower Birmingham     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 2nd October 2017                       |On 16th October 2017              |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal JUDGE RENTON

                                   Between

                              adnan tariq adnan
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Unrepresented
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Aboni, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant is a male citizen of Iraq born  on  1st  June  1988.   He
    first arrived in the UK on 23rd March 2016 when he applied for  asylum.
    That application was refused for the reasons given in the  Respondent's
    Asylum Decision dated 20th December 2016.  The Appellant appealed,  and
    his appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Heatherington  (the
    Judge) sitting at Birmingham on 30th  November  2016.   He  decided  to
    dismiss the appeal on asylum and humanitarian  protection  grounds  for
    the reasons given  in  his  Decision  dated  5th  December  2016.   The
    Appellant sought leave to appeal that decision and although there  were
    no grounds in support of his application, such permission  was  granted
    on 17th August 2017.

Error of Law

 2. I must first decide if the decision of the Judge contained an error  on
    a point of law so that it should be set aside.

 3. The Appellant applied for asylum on the basis that his father had  been
    a member of the Ba'ath Party who had been involved in  the  killing  of
    Kurdish protestors.  The Appellant said that  he  was  from  Daquk  and
    would be at risk on return to places such as Kirkuk in the IKR.

 4. The Judge dismissed the appeal because he was not  satisfied  that  the
    Appellant had given a truthful account.  The Judge found  the  evidence
    of the Appellant to be implausible and inconsistent.   The  Judge  gave
    examples of the discrepancies.  The Judge also decided  not  to  attach
    any weight to the documents produced by the Appellant as they were  not
    translated.

 5. The Appellant appeared unrepresented  at  the  hearing  before  me  but
    indicated that he did not seek an adjournment and wanted the hearing to
    proceed.  His Ground of Appeal amounted to  only  a  translated  letter
    purporting to be from the Tawheed and  Jihad  Saraya  Revenge  Fighters
    informing the Appellant that he had been  sentenced  to  death  on  his
    return.  The Judge granting leave to appeal did so on the basis  of  an
    arguable error of law in that there had been a procedural  fairness  as
    the Judge had not allowed the documents produced by the Appellant to be
    translated through oral evidence from the court interpreter.   Further,
    the Judge had not made a finding as to  where  in  Iraq  the  Appellant
    might be returned and whether there would  be  a  risk  to  him  there.
    Unsurprisingly, the Appellant did  not  deal  with  these  issues  when
    addressing me.  He said that the document constituting the  grounds  of
    application had been sent to him recently by his father  in  an  email.
    He added that he was from Daquk and would be killed if he  returned  to
    the IKR.

 6. In response, Mrs Aboni referred to the Rule 24 response  and  submitted
    there was no error of law in the decision of the Judge.  There  was  no
    unfairness to the Appellant in the Judge's  approach  to  the  evidence
    including the documentary evidence.  There was no  application  to  the
    Judge to adjourn, and in any event  there  was  no  point  in  such  an
    adjournment as representation was not available to  the  Appellant  and
    the Judge  could  not  take  into  account  documents  which  were  not
    translated.  As the Judge stated in paragraph 9.4 of the  Decision,  he
    considered the  documents  produced  to  him  in  accordance  with  the
    decision in Tanveer Ahmed [2002] UKIAT 00439.   The  Judge  came  to  a
    conclusion open to him concerning the credibility of the Appellant  and
    gave sufficient reasons for that conclusion.

 7. I find no error of law in the decision of  the  Judge.   The  Appellant
    himself gave no grounds as such  for  his  application  and  I  am  not
    required to deal with a piece of evidence in the  form  of  a  document
    received by the Appellant from his father  after  the  hearing  of  his
    appeal.  There was no error of law in the way the Judge dealt with  the
    documents before him which were untranslated.  There is  no  obligation
    upon a Judge to consider documents not translated.  The  Appellant  has
    been unrepresented throughout these proceedings, but it cannot be  said
    that  the  Judge's  decision  to  proceed  with  the  hearing  was   in
    contradiction of the overriding  objective  given  in  Rule  2  of  the
    Tribunal  Procedure  (First-tier  Tribunal)  (Immigration  and   Asylum
    Chamber) Rules 2014.  The Appellant had ample opportunity prior to  the
    hearing to obtain some sort of translation of the documents.

 8. There was no need for the Judge to make a finding as to the origins  of
    the Appellant.  The burden is upon the Appellant to establish his case,
    and if he says he comes from a particular destination,  and  the  Judge
    does not believe him, that is the end of the matter.  There is no legal
    requirement upon the Judge to consider any other destination.

 9. For these reasons I find no error of law in the decision of  the  Judge
    which I therefore do not set aside.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside that decision.

The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order  for  anonymity.   I  was  not
asked to do so, and indeed find no reason to do so.



Signed                              Date:  13th October 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Renton



