
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-SAR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11315/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Centre                               |On 10th November 2020                |
|via Skype for Business               |                                     |
|On 16 October 2020                   |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                     JM
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Tettey
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, who was born in 1997, is a male citizen of  Afghanistan.
    He appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  against  a  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State dated 5 November 2019 refusing his  application  for
    international protection. The First-tier Tribunal (Judge Malik),  in  a
    decision promulgated on  11  March  2020,  dismissed  the  appeal.  The
    appellant now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. This appeal arises out of  a  fresh  claim  brought  by  the  appellant
    following the dismissal of a previous appeal in July 2016. The previous
    Tribunal had found that the appellant's claim to be at  risk  from  the
    Taliban was not credible. Following  the  principles  of  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department v D (Tamil) [2002] UKIAT 00702  *,  Judge
    Malik also found the appellant's account to be incredible and,  in  the
    alternative, found that it would not be unduly harsh for the  appellant
    to exercise the option of internal flight within Afghanistan by  moving
    to Kabul.

 3. The grounds are lengthy and somewhat discursive but,  in  essence,  the
    appellant argues that the judge fell into error by failing to  consider
    adequately the recent expert  report  of  Dr  Jawad  Zadeh  which,  the
    appellant argues, was capable of altering the credibility assessment of
    the previous Tribunal.

 4. Both parties accept that the judge  dealt  somewhat  briefly  with  the
    expert report. At [24], the judge wrote:

         "Given it was found that the appellant's previous  appeal  that  he
         was not at risk from the Taliban, it having been  found  by  First-
         tier Tribunal Judge M Davis that it was not  reasonably  likely  he
         was ever targeted by the Taliban in his home area, there is nothing
         to suggest he would be targeted now on return to Kabul."

    As regards the Dr Zadeh's consideration of the appellant's  account  of
    past events, I find that  this  is  no  more  than  a  new  opinion  on
    particulars  of  claim  which  had   been   rejected   as   incredible.
    Significantly, the grounds of appeal to  not  descend  into  detail  by
    seeking to explain exactly  how  the  expert  report  proves  that  the
    appellant's account should, in the context  of  all  the  evidence,  be
    believed. Instead, the grounds assert more than once Judge Malik failed
    to acknowledge that such a report was capable of reversing  a  previous
    adverse credibility assessment. There is no  reason  to  consider  that
    Judge Malik has failed to understand the ratio D (Tamil)  [2002]  UKIAT
    00702 *. I accept that she has considered all the evidence  adduced  by
    the appellant. It is implicit in her analysis that she found nothing in
    the expert report which might cause her to reverse previous  Tribunal's
    credibility assessment. In  so  far  as  the  expert  report  addresses
    matters of credibility, it was open to  the  judge  to  find  that  the
    report constituted no more than a disagreement with the findings of the
    previous Tribunal. Moreover, the question arises as to why the  matters
    discussed by the expert concerning an  account  which  is  not  changed
    since the beginning of  the  appellant's  claim  for  asylum  were  not
    brought before the previous Tribunal; without such an explanation, then
    D (Tamil) [2002] indicates that such evidence should  be  treated  with
    caution. I find that the First-tier Tribunal has not erred  in  law  in
    its assessment of the report of Dr Zadeh.

 5. Mr McVeety, who appeared in the initial hearing for  the  Secretary  of
    State, submitted that this appeal was always bound to  fail  given  the
    judge's alternative findings in respect of  the  availability  internal
    flight to Kabul. Judge Malik applied AS (safety of  Kabul)  Afghanistan
    CG [2018] UKUT 00118, the relevant  country  guidance  with  which  the
    expert, significantly, had  not  sought  to  disagree.  Indeed,  if  we
    consider the most recent 2020 country guidance of AS (Safety of  Kabul)
    Afghanistan CG [2020] UKUT 00130 (IAC), it remains clear that it  would
    not be unduly harsh  for  the  appellant  to  relocate  to  Kabul.  The
    appellant asserts that he would be at additional risk on account of his
    Hazara ethnicity, because you would  have  no  one  to  help  him  find
    accommodation and because he had been  away  from  Afghanistan,  having
    lived both in the United Kingdom and  previously  in  Pakistan.  As  Mr
    McVeety submitted, the  latest  2020  country  guidance  addresses  the
    question of absence from Afghanistan but rejects it as a factor capable
    of excluding the availability of internal flight:

         "252.     Taking a  holistic  view,  and  considering  all  of  the
         circumstances together, we are satisfied that  generally  it  would
         not be unreasonable for a single healthy man to relocate to  Kabul,
         even if he does not have any family or  network  in  the  city  and
         lacks a Tazkera. However, in all cases an  individualised  case-by-
         case assessment is required, taking into  account  an  individual's
         personal circumstances including factors such as his  age,  health,
         disability,  languages   spoken,   educational   and   professional
         background, length of time outside of Afghanistan,  connections  to
         and experience of Kabul and family situation and relationships"

         253.     We give the following country guidance:

         Risk on return to Kabul from the Taliban

         (i) A person who is of lower-level interest for the  Taliban  (i.e.
         not a senior government or security services official, or a spy) is
         not at real risk of persecution from the Taliban in Kabul."

 6. I am satisfied that the judge has properly  addressed  the  appellant's
    fresh  evidence,  including  the  expert  report,   in   reaching   her
    determination of the appeal. I find that she has applied  the  relevant
    case law, including D (Tamil) [2002] UKIAT 00702 *, accurately. I  find
    that, in light of the most recent guidance concerning  internal  flight
    within Afghanistan, this appeal would be bound to fail even if (which I
    do not accept) Judge Malik should have accepted the appellant's account
    as credible. It follows that, even if the judge had fallen  into  error
    for the reasons advanced in the grounds of appeal, then  it  would  not
    have been appropriate to set aside her decision.

 7. Finally, as regards Article 8 ECHR, I refer to the written  submissions
    of the Secretary of State:

         "20. It is submitted that this is  essentially  an  argument  about
         weight, again it being trite law that weight is a  matter  for  the
         FtTJ hearing the appeal.  It is not suggested  in  the  grounds  of
         appeal that such a finding is perverse.

         21.  It is submitted that 'appropriate' weight  was  given  to  the
         relationship, which is why it engaged family life for the  purposes
         of  the  ECHR,  not  something  that  would  have  been  given   to
         relationship describing as 'boyfriend and girlfriend' who  did  not
         cohabit, which is how the grounds case the relationship from  2016.
         The Appellant's ground also ignores that it was not argued that the
         Appellant could meet family life under Appendix FM [29], presumably
         due to a lack of two years cohabitation.

         22.  Whilst noting  cohabitation,  the  FtTJ  considered  that  the
         relationship had not moved on in terms  of  marriage  and  children
         which was the Appellant's intention as stated before  the  previous
         composition of the FtT (IAC) four years previously and in terms  of
         s117B(4) of the NIAA 2002 that the relationship  was  formed  at  a
         time when the Appellant's immigration status  was  precarious  [34]
         affording the relationship little weight, which it is submitted  is
         why such finding is more than sufficiently reasoned."

    Mr Tettey, who appeared  for  the  appellant,  acknowledged  that  this
    ground of appeal is 'much weaker'. I agree with that view and with  the
    submissions of the respondent. The argument advanced by  the  appellant
    in respect of Article 8 ECHR  is  no  more  than  a  disagreement  with
    findings which were available to the judge on the  evidence  which  was
    before the Tribunal.

 8. Accordingly, the appeal is dismissed.

    Notice of Decision

    This appeal is dismissed.


Signed                                                     Date  30  October
2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Lane



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


