
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11098/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard remotely by Skype for Business |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 15 February 2021                  |On 2 March 2021                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                     N K
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008
Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Appeared in person, but represented by Liyon Legal
Ltd.
For the Respondent:    Ms S Cunha, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant appeals with permission against the decision of First-tier
Tribunal Judge Cohen ("the judge"), promulgated on 7 January 2020, by which
he dismissed the Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's refusal of his
protection and human rights claims.

The core of the Appellant's protection claim was that he was the subject of
court proceedings in Sri Lanka as a result of a suspicion on the part of
the authorities that he had materially assisted the LTTE some years ago
following the end of the civil war in May 2009.  In support of his claim
the Appellant relied on what was said to be reliable court documents and a
letter from a Sri Lankan attorney purporting to verify the existence of the
relevant legal proceedings.  In addition, the Appellant had provided a
medical report said to be supportive of his claimed detention and ill-
treatment by the Sri Lankan authorities.

The judge disbelieved the Appellant in all material respects.  In summary,
he concluded as follows.  First, he did not accept that the Appellant would
have remained in Sri Lanka for over a year after his claimed release from
detention on payment of a bribe.  Second, on the basis that the judge
believed the Appellant to have been detained at a police station, it was
implausible that fingerprints would not have been taken.  Third, he
disbelieved the Appellant's evidence relating to his father's death.
Fourth, he rejected the court documents on the basis that they apparently
contained a police logo.  Fifth, he found it implausible that in the
particular circumstances of this case the Appellant would have been
released from detention even on payment of a bribe.  Sixth, the judge found
it implausible that the Appellant would have been able to leave Sri Lanka
on his own passport notwithstanding his claim to have been wanted by the
authorities at the time.  Seventh, that the Appellant's delay in claiming
asylum in the United Kingdom for a significant period of time damaged his
overall credibility.  Eighth, that the documentary evidence (including the
court documents and the attorney's letter) were unreliable in light of
other adverse credibility findings.  Ninth, that the medical report
attracted little weight, given that the author had stated injuries only to
be "consistent" with the Appellant's claims as to how they were caused.
Tenth, the judge found it implausible that the Appellant had been able to
move around within Sri Lanka after being released without apparently
experiencing problems.

The grounds of appeal essentially challenged each elements of the judge's
findings.  In granting permission to appeal First-tier Tribunal Judge
Landes deemed a number of the grounds to lack any real merit.  However, the
recorded decision (as opposed to the reasons in support thereof) simply
stated that permission had been "granted".  By a Note and Directions notice
dated 15 October 2020, I concluded that the grant of permission by Judge
Landes had in fact been unqualified and that all grounds fell to be
considered by the Upper Tribunal.

An issue arose on the day of the remote hearing.  Mr Paramjorthy, of
Counsel, was due to appear on behalf of the Appellant.  However, the Upper
Tribunal received a message conveyed via Mr Paramjorthy's clerks that a
family emergency had arisen.  Mr Paramjorthy had expressed his desire to
try if at all possible to attend the hearing, but was unable to say when he
might be available.  I conveyed this information to Ms Cunha and to the
Appellant, who attended the hearing himself.  For reasons set out below I
concluded that it was appropriate to proceed with the hearing in the
absence of Mr Paramjorthy.  I explained this to the Appellant and he
confirmed that he understood the position.

Having reflected on the nature of the grounds of appeal as a whole and the
judge's decision, Ms Cunha conceded that material errors of law had been
committed.  Specifically, she accepted that the judge had erred in three
respects: first, in his consideration of the court documents and the
supporting attorney's letter second, in relation to the findings on the
ability of the Appellant to be released by payment of a bribe and to leave
Sri Lanka on his own passport third, in relation to the consideration of
the medical report.

She accepted that the judge's decision should be set aside and the appeal
remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing with no preserved
findings of fact.

Ms Cunha's position was in my view correct, at least in respect of the
first and second errors highlighted.

With reference to paragraphs 32 and 37 of his decision, the judge failed to
have any regard to the undisputed fact that the translator was approved by
the Sri Lankan government.

Further, the translation shows that the Court document itself contains a
report by the police.  Therefore the presence of a police logo within the
document was not inconsistent with legal proceedings having been initiated
in the Magistrates' Court.  On this basis the judge also appears to have
misapprehended the nature of the document.

Whilst the attorney's letter is referred to in passing in paragraph 37, the
judge has failed to deal with it adequately.  The letter states in clear
terms that the author had obtained the documents and actually checked the
court file personally, confirming that a case had been brought against the
Appellant.  The attorney's letter was supported by a copy of his practising
certificate and his Bar Association membership card.  This supporting
evidence was potentially of real significance to the Appellant's case in
that it purported to verify the existence of a case and therefore the
reliability of the court documents.  The evidence required careful
consideration, but did not receive it. This error is, in and of itself,
sufficient to undermine the decision as a whole, given the centrality
alleged court proceedings to the appellant's claim.

I also take the view that the judge erred in respect of his consideration
of the bribery issues, both as they related to release from detention and
the Appellant's ability to leave the country on his own passport.  The
country information on Sri Lanka has for many years now indicated that
corruption is endemic within the country and that individuals who claimed
to have been released on payment of a bribe and/or to have left the country
through payment of money should not have these aspects of their cases
rejected simply on the basis of a general implausibility argument.  This
much was recognised in GJ (post-civil war: returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013]
UKUT 319 (IAC).  The judge did not take relevant matters into account.

Whilst Ms Cunha has conceded that the judge erred in respect of the medical
report, I am much less sure about this.  The author did at one stage
describe certain marks as being "typical" of the claimed ill-treatment, but
he then went on to state that they were simply "consistent" with the
account.  Thus on the face of the report there seems to have been a degree
of uncertainty.  Other aspects of the judge's adverse findings were, if
seen in isolation, open to him (particularly relating to the delay in
claimed asylum in the United Kingdom and his apparent ability to have moved
within Sri Lanka prior to his departure).  However, for the reasons given
above there are material errors of law and the judge's decision must be set
aside.

In terms of disposal I agree with Ms Cunha that remittal is the appropriate
course of action.  This is a case in which the truthfulness of the
Appellant's account and the reliability of documentary evidence play a
crucial part in the assessment of whether he would be at risk on return to
Sri Lanka.

The remitted appeal shall be reheard without any preserved findings of
fact.  It would also be appropriate for the next hearing to be listed after
the new country guidance decision on Sri Lanka has been published by the
Upper Tribunal.



Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

I remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.



Directions to the First-tier Tribunal

      1) This appeal is remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal  (Taylor  House
         hearing centre) for a rehearing with no preserved findings of fact;


      2) The remitted hearing shall not be conducted by First-tier  Tribunal
         Judge M Cohen.




Signed   H Norton-Taylor                     Date: 16 February 2021

Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor
