
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal   Appeal number: PA/11641/2019 (V)

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard Remotely at Manchester CJC              |Decision & Reason Promulgated |
|On 7 January 2021                             |On 21 January 2021            |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PICKUP

                                   Between

                                     PA

                            (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



                          DECISION AND REASONS (V)



For the appellant: Ms L Mensah,  instructed  by  Broudie  Jackson  &  Canter
Solicitors

For the Respondent: Mr A McVeety, Senior Presenting Officer

This  has  been  a  remote  hearing  which  has   been   consented   to by
the parties. The form of remote hearing was video by Skype (V). A face to
face hearing was not held because it was  not  practicable  and  all  issues
could be determined in a remote hearing. At the conclusion of the hearing  I
indicated that I found sufficient error of law to  set  the  decision  aside
but  reserved  my  full  reasons,  which  I  now  give.   The   order   made
is described at the end of these reasons.

1. The appellant, who is an Iranian national of Kurdish ethnicity with  date
   of birth given as 1.7.88, has  appealed  with  permission  to  the  Upper
   Tribunal against the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  promulgated
   3.3.20 (Judge Shergill), dismissing on all grounds his appeal against the
   decision of the Secretary of State, dated 7.11.19, to  refuse  his  claim
   for international protection on Convention grounds of  imputed  political
   opinion.

2. I have carefully considered the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  in
   the light of the submissions, the grounds of application  for  permission
   to appeal to the Upper Tribunal, and the oral  submissions  made  at  the
   remote hearing before me.

3. The First-tier Tribunal entirely disbelieved  the  appellant's  claim  of
   KDP or other political activity, rejecting at [20] of the  decision  that
   he has ever, past or present, been involved with KDP politics, whether as
   a sympathiser or support, or otherwise. At [21] the  judge  rejected  the
   claim that he was ever wanted by the authorities and concluded  that  the
   claim had been entirely  fabricated.  Finding  that  he  had  no  genuine
   political belief, at [22] to [26] of the  decision  the  judge  concluded
   that there was no risk arising from sur place activities,  in  particular
   Facebook postings, and that it was reasonable to expect him to delete the
   contents before returning to Iran and that he would  not  be  obliged  to
   disclose any such postings. In the premises, the  protection  appeal  was
   dismissed. The appellant had not pursued any article  8  ECHR  claim,  so
   this was not addressed in the Tribunal's decision.

4. In summary, the grounds argue that the First-tier Tribunal's  credibility
   findings were flawed. For example,  it  is  submitted  that  the  judge's
   concerns about the appellant's witness statement were not put to  him  or
   his  legal  representatives  for  comment.  It  is   also   argued   that
   insufficient reasoning was provided for  findings  made,  with  reference
   made to specific aspects of the decision. It is asserted that  the  judge
   was selective in quoting background information; the  appellant  unfairly
   questioned for not mentioning the arrest warrant; and the sur place claim
   not properly considered.

5. Permission to appeal was refused by the First-tier Tribunal  on  24.8.20.
   However, when the application was renewed to the  Upper  Tribunal,  Upper
   Tribunal Judge Allen granted  permission  on  all  grounds,  but  did  so
   without providing any reasons, other than to  suggest  that  the  grounds
   identified arguable points of challenge to the decision.

6. The Tribunal has received the respondent's Rule 24 reply, dated  1.10.20.
   In addition, the appellant's representatives have belatedly and in breach
   of the directions issued by the Upper Tribunal, only 3  days  before  the
   hearing, submitted a number of documents, including:  country  background
   information that was not put before the First-tier  Tribunal;  a  further
   witness statement of the appellant; and a letter asserting that the judge
   did not raise any  concerns  about  the  authorship  of  the  appellant's
   witness statement at the appeal hearing. However, at this stage the issue
   is whether there is an error of law in the making of the decision and  in
   the premises I am not prepared to consider material which was not  before
   the First-tier Tribunal.

7. The first of 8 grounds, although listed sequentially with two ground  7s,
   complains  that  at  [9]  of  the  decision  the  judge  found  that  the
   appellant's witness statement had effectively been drafted by his lawyer.
   It is asserted that this concern was not raised with the appellant or his
   representative at the hearing. I am not satisfied  that  the  observation
   made at [9] of the decision was anything other than the judge finding  it
   "curious" that the witness statement of an appellant  who  claims  to  be
   illiterate should  contain  "quasi-submissions",  leading  the  judge  to
   conclude that it had been "heavily  influenced"  by  the  representative.
   Whether that is true or not, and despite the representative's  letter  of
   3.9.20 asserting that  the  witness  statement  is  solely  that  of  the
   appellant, nothing in fact turns on the observation. The essence  of  the
   challenged  paragraph  is  to  note  the  omission  of  detail   of   the
   circumstances of the appellant alleged detention and torture.  Given  the
   indication of my other findings in the appellant's favour, Ms Mensah  did
   not pursue this ground any further. In the premises, I am satisfied  that
   no error of law is disclosed.

8. Ground  2  asserts  that  the  reasoning  of  the  impugned  decision  is
   insufficient. However, some of the points made are either  immaterial  or
   suggest a misreading of the decision. For example, it is  suggested  that
   the judge was critical of the  appellant  for  failing  to  specify  what
   branch of the KDPI he belonged to,  when  there  are  no  'branches'  but
   alternative names for  the  party.  Contrary  to  this  assertion,  I  am
   satisfied that this was merely an observation by the  judge  and  nothing
   whatsoever turns on the issue. I will return to  other  aspects  of  this
   ground, below.

9. The complaint in ground 3 relates to [14]  of  the  decision,  where  the
   judge was not satisfied as to why the appellant failed to mention in  his
   Screening Interview of 28.8.19 his home being raided or an arrest warrant
   being issued. Relying on Q178 of the substantive interview, it is  argued
   that the appellant was unaware of the existence of any arrest warrant, as
   he had left the country; "He could not reasonably have been  expected  to
   mention a document he does not know exists." However, reading his  answer
   to Q177, it is clear that before that interview on 26.10.19, he was aware
   than an arrest warrant had been  issued,  having  been  informed  by  his
   maternal uncle. In fact, at Q171 he stated that when he was in Turkey his
   uncle told him that the authorities had raided the house and were looking
   for him, which is entirely  consistent  with  Q177  where  he  was  asked
   whether there was  an arrest warrant out for him in  Iran,  to  which  he
   replied, "Yes, my maternal uncle told me the authorities were looking for
   me and I will be arrested if I return."  It  follows  that,  on  his  own
   account, the appellant was aware before he arrived in  the  UK  that  the
   authorities had raided his home and that there was an arrest warrant  out
   for him. Neither of those alleged facts were mentioned in  the  Screening
   Interview. In the premises, this ground of appeal cannot succeed. To  her
   credit, in her submissions, Ms Mensah accepted that having given  further
   consideration to this ground, it is not made out.  It  follows  that  the
   judge was entitled to take at  least  some  account  of  the  failure  to
   mention these claims in the Screening Interview.

10. In summary,  the  grounds  in  several  respects  either  overstate  the
   reliance of the judge on matters mentioned as material to  the  decision,
   or read into it criticisms of the appellant that were not in fact made.

11. However, I accept the criticism that in finding the appellant's  account
   of treatment in detention not credible, at [10] of the decision the judge
   unfairly states that the appellant was "simply released having been  told
   not to do that again." At Q83, the appellant had  explained  that,  after
   being detained, he and others were beaten, kicked and hurt, stating  also
   that they were "beaten heavily."

12. Further, my reading of the decision as  a  whole  does  give  cause  for
   concern  that  several  of  the  adverse  credibility  findings  are  not
   adequately reasoned. For example, at [11] and [12] of  the  decision  the
   judge stated that the appellant's accounts did  not  have  the  "ring  of
   truth" about them and that "in his interviews he betrays what I  consider
   to be the truth to his situation, that he can  actually  read."  However,
   there is minimal, if any, supporting reasoning for these conclusions. The
   judge does not explain what in particular in the interview  led  to  this
   conclusion. Another example is that other  elements  of  the  appellant's
   case are sceptically  described  as  "nothing  short  of  a  miracle"  or
   "miraculous" without making clear whether the  judge  means  'incredible'
   and,  if  so,  providing  adequate  reasoning  to  justify  the   adverse
   conclusions reached. In his submissions, Mr McVeety very fairly  accepted
   that on this general ground the decision is difficult to defend.

13. By way of further example, at [14] of the decision,  the  judge  stated,
   "I found the latter part of the AIR to show  further  incredible  answers
   being  put  forward  by  the  appellant  in  response   to   increasingly
   challenging questions." However, the  judge  gave  no  examples  of  such
   "incredible answers". I am satisfied that there is force in  [4]  of  the
   grounds which  complains  that  "any  reader  checking  the  end  of  the
   interview would be left failing to understand the judge's reasoning."

14. Similarly, at [15] of the decision the  judge  states  that  there  were
   aspects of the appellant's evidence  that  had  shifted  when  discussing
   overheard conversations, giving a different account in interview to  that
   in his witness statement. "There was also a shift in  focus  relating  to
   carrying on with the bus journey when he  received  the  call  about  S's
   arrest." The judge gave no specifics or example  from  the  interview  to
   support these findings. At [17] the judge  was  not  satisfied  that  the
   appellant had given a credible  account  as  to  why  he  suddenly  found
   political interest and states that his lack of interest was  self-evident
   in the interview. Again, the conclusion is stated with  no  example  from
   the interview or other reasoning provided to support the conclusion.

15. Ms Mensah also drew my attention to part of [16]  of  the  decision,  in
   which she submitted the judge appeared to have required the appellant  to
   obtain verification of his account from the KDP's head office. It is  not
   clear to me that is what the judge actually intended to covey but I agree
   that based on the January 2019 CPIN at 6.4.1, letters  of  recommendation
   are restricted to verification of membership and not the  factual  claims
   of events or involvement of other persons; which would not  be  provided,
   for obvious reasons.

16. In relation to the general principle  requiring  adequate  reasoning  to
   justify findings, the grounds rely on MK (duty to give reasons)  pakistan
   [2013] UKUT 00641 (IAC), where  it  was  held  to  be  axiomatic  that  a
   determination disclose clearly the reasons for a tribunal's decision.  "A
   bare statement that a witness was not believed or  that  a  document  was
   afforded no weight was  unlikely  to  satisfy  the  requirement  to  give
   reasons." Similarly, In R (Iran) and others v SSHD [2005] EWCA  Civ  982,
   Lord Justice Brook held that there was no  duty  on  a  judge  in  giving
   reasons to deal with every argument and that it was  sufficient  if  what
   was said demonstrated to the parties the basis on  which  the  judge  had
   acted. This approach was adopted and applied by  the  Upper  Tribunal  in
   Budhathoki (Reasons for decision) [2014] UKUT 00341.

17. In summary, having read and  re-read  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
   Tribunal with care, I am concerned that it is difficult if not impossible
   to discern cogent reasoning for  a  number  of  the  adverse  credibility
   findings made. It may be that these findings and conclusions  would  have
   be sustainable, provided adequate reasoning had been  provided.  However,
   as drafted, I am satisfied that the decision discloses  clear  errors  of
   law by want of adequate reasoning, errors that cannot be overlooked.

18. In the circumstances and for the  reasons  set  out  above,  I  find  no
   material error of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal so  that
   it must be set aside.

19. When a decision of the First-tier Tribunal has been set  aside,  section
   12(2) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007  requires  either
   that the case is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal with directions,  or
   it must be remade by the Upper Tribunal.  The  scheme  of  the  Tribunals
   Court and Enforcement Act 2007 does not assign the  function  of  primary
   fact finding to the Upper Tribunal. The errors of the First-tier Tribunal
   Judge identified above vitiate all findings of fact and  the  conclusions
   from those facts so that there has not been a valid determination of  the
   issues in the appeal.

20. In all the circumstances, at the invitation and consent of both  parties
   to relist this appeal for a fresh hearing in the First-tier  Tribunal,  I
   do so on the basis that this is a case which falls  squarely  within  the
   Senior President's Practice Statement at paragraph 7.2.



Decision

      The appeal of the appellant to the Upper Tribunal is allowed.

      The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside and  remitted  to
      the First-tier Tribunal at Manchester to  be  remade  afresh  with  no
      preserved findings.

      I make no order for costs.



Signed: DMW Pickup

Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

Date:       7 January 2021





Anonymity Direction

I am satisfied, having had  regard  to  the  guidance  in  the  Presidential
Guidance Note No 1 of 2013: Anonymity Orders, that it would  be  appropriate
to make an order in accordance with  Rules  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 in the following terms:

        "Unless and until  a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
        appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
        shall directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his
        family.  This  direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  both  the
        appellant and the respondent. Failure to comply with this direction
        could lead to contempt of court proceedings."



Signed: DMW Pickup

Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

Date:       7 January 2021

