
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal    Appeal Number: PA/11838/2018
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated: |
|On 15 November 2019                         |On 21 November 2019             |
|                                            |                                |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between

                               D S B (Jamaica)
                           [ANONYMITY ORDER MADE]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Fiyaz Saeed, solicitor with Legal Eagles
solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Ian Jarvis, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                       DECISION OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

                        PURSUANT TO RULE 40(3)(a) OF
             THE TRIBUNAL PROCEDURE (UPPER TRIBUNAL) RULES 2008

Anonymity
The First-tier  Tribunal  made  an  anonymity  order.   The  Upper  Tribunal
continues that order, pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008.  Unless the Upper Tribunal,  the  First-tier  Tribunal
or a Court otherwise directs, no report of these proceedings  nor  any  form
of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the  appellant.
 This direction applies, among others, to all parties.
Any failure to comply with this direction could give rise to contempt of
court proceedings.

 1. The appellant appeals with permission from the decision of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal (Harmondsworth  Hearing  Centre)  dismissing  his  appeal
    against the respondent's  decision  to  refuse  him  asylum  under  the
    Refugee Convention, humanitarian protection,  or  leave  to  remain  on
    human rights grounds.

 2. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that  the  appellant  was
    unfairly denied an opportunity to present oral evidence by  video  link
    from two witnesses, who were only prepared to give evidence on terms of
    anonymity.  Evidence before  the  Upper  Tribunal  indicates  that  the
    appellant's representatives wrote to the First-tier Tribunal on 9 April
    and 9 July 2019, asking for this facility to be provided, but the Judge
    dealt with the application as though it were being made without notice,
    and it appears that the First-tier Tribunal  did  not  respond  to  the
    appellant's representatives' letters.

 3. The First-tier Judge refused an adjournment  and  counted  against  the
    appellant his finding that the letters  from  the  two  witnesses  were
    either unsigned or omitted the writers' credentials,  whereas  in  fact
    they were either signed, or had a typed name and set out  the  writer's
    credentials.

 4. At the hearing today, it was common ground that there  was  substantial
    procedural unfairness in the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal, at
    a level which amounted to an error of law.

 5. Both parties agree that this is a case where the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal must be set aside and remade.  The  appellant  has  asked
    that the appeal be reheard in Taylor House  where  there  are  adequate
    video link hearing facilities.

 6. I am also satisfied that the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  can
    properly be set aside without a reasoned decision notice.

Decision

 7. I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal, with  no  findings
    of fact or credibility preserved.

 8. The decision in this appeal will be remade in the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Taylor House Hearing Centre) with no findings of fact  or  credibility
    preserved.



Signed:  Judith A J C Gleeson                    Date:          14  November
2019
         Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson



