
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: pa/11176/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 27th September 2018                        |On 22nd October 2018          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KELLY


                                   Between

                                     t m
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Bandagani, Counsel instructed by Duncan Lewis
and Co
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

This is an appeal by TM against the decision of Judge Nixon to  dismiss  his
appeal against refusal of his Protection  Claim.   I  extend  the  anonymity
direction that was made by the First-tier Tribunal.

 1.  The  factual  basis  of  the  appellant's  Protection  Claim  may   be
    conveniently summarised as follows.

 2. The appellant was born in the Democratic Republic of Congo but moved to
    Rwanda when aged 19 years. He was became a close friend  of  a  lawyer,
    Toy Nzamwita, to whom he referred what appeared to be a straightforward
    medical negligence claim.  However,  upon  investigation,  Mr  Nzamwita
    discovered evidence  suggesting  that  the  victim  had  in  fact  been
    murdered by the Rwandan government. At the end  of  December  2016,  Mr
    Nzamwita was shot and killed by the police in what his family  believed
    to be staged incident. On the 15th  January  2017,  the  appellant  was
    kidnapped and detained for three days  by  government  agents.  He  was
    beaten and questioned about both Mr Nazamwita and the case he had  been
    investigating. The appellant initially denied all  knowledge  of  these
    matters, but under torture  he  eventually  told  them  what  he  knew.
    Although they released him, his captors made it plain  that  they  were
    not satisfied he had revealed all that he knew and were  not  therefore
    finished with him. On the 25th January 2017, armed men attended at  his
    house but the appellant refused to  let  them  in.  The  men  therefore
    called his wife's mobile telephone and threatened to eliminate him. The
    men returned on the 20th February 2017. On this occasion, the appellant
    decided to let them in. He was  again  questioned  about  Mr  Nzamwita.
    They returned for a third time in March 2017,  but  the  appellant  saw
    them entering his house and so he ran away. His wife later informed him
    that they had ransacked the house and  slapped  her  in  front  of  the
    children. The appellant and his family flew from Rwanda airport on  the
    2nd April 2017 and arrived in the United Kingdom on the following  day.
    He claimed asylum on the 4th May 2017  for  fear  of  being  killed  on
    return due to his imputed political opinion.

 3. The judge accepted that Toy Nzamwita  had  been  killed  and  that  the
    appellant had been a friend of his.  He  did  not  however  accept  the
    appellant's account of the circumstances in which Mr Nzamwita had died,
    and  neither  did  he  accept  his  account  of  being  kidnapped   and
    subsequently visited at  his  home  by  the  authorities.  The  grounds
    essentially attack the reasons given by the judge for not accepting the
    appellant's account. I consider them in turn.

 4. The first ground argues that the judge  failed  to  attach  appropriate
    weight to the opinion of a country expert, Dr Andrea Purdekova. This is
    what the judge said of her opinion at paragraph 20:

         The conclusion of Dr Andrea Purdekova that political dissidents and
         critics are at risk of persecution is not  disputed.  Indeed  there
         are a number of objective materials within the  appellant's  bundle
         confirming the same. The real  question  for  me  to  determine  is
         whether or not the appellant's account is credible ...

    In support of this ground, Mr Bandagani referred me to several passages
    in Dr Purdekova's written report in which she variously  describes  the
    appellant's account as "wholly credible" and "very plausible". I  would
    first observe that Dr Purdekova seems not to have distinguished between
    the discrete concepts of  plausibility  and  credibility.  Indeed,  she
    appears to use the terms interchangeably. Mr Bandagani  accepted  that,
    whilst Dr Purdekova was entitled as  an  expert  to  comment  upon  the
    plausibility of the appellant's account, matters  appertaining  to  the
    appellant's credibility as a witness of truth were  entirely  a  matter
    for the judge. I am nevertheless prepared to accept  that  despite  her
    somewhat inexact use of language, Dr Purdekova was  seeking  to  convey
    her opinion that all aspects of the appellant's account were plausible.
    The  remaining  question  is  whether  the  judge  failed   to   attach
    appropriate weight to  that  opinion  when  assessing  the  appellant's
    credibility. After some initial scepticism, I am persuaded that he did.
    Whilst the judge was right to say that it  was  for  him  to  determine
    whether the  appellant's  account  was  credible,  he  did  not  in  my
    judgement appreciate the true significance of Dr  Purdekova's  opinion.
    That significance lay  not  in  the  undisputed  fact  that  "political
    dissidents and critics are at risk of persecution", but rather  in  the
    finding that  the  appellant's  detailed  description  of  events   was
    plausible  when  viewed  within  the  context  of  background   country
    information concerning Rwanda.

 5. The second ground is that the judge failed to take account of  or  give
    reasons for rejecting the appellant's explanation for how,  if  he  was
    the subject of adverse interest  by  the  Rwandan  authorites,  he  was
    nevertheless allowed to leave the country. The appellant's  explanation
    was this was that his cousin had served in the  Rwandan  army  and  had
    facilitated his escape by paying a large  bribe  to  an  official.  The
    judge dealt with this issue (amongst others) at paragraph  22,  finding
    that if the appellant's account had  been  true  then  the  authorities
    would have detained him, "once he had made plain his plans to leave the
    country". There is no mention of the  appellant's  explanation  of  his
    cousin paying  a  bribe.  It  is  moreover  unclear  from  the  judge's
    reasoning as to how the appellant had supposedly, "made plain his plans
    to leave the country", given that his application for a visa  to  enter
    the United Kingdom would have been made to the British rather  than  to
    the Rwandan authorities. I therefore find this  ground  has  also  been
    made out.

 6. The third ground is that the judge failed to take account  of  or  give
    reasons for rejecting documentary evidence which the  appellant  argued
    supported his claim. The precise nature of the document in question  is
    arguably obscure. It is dated the 6th  June  2017  and  refers  to  the
    appellant's property as being "abandoned". Whilst it is debatable as to
    whether the document supported the appellant's oral testimony that  the
    state had confiscated his property, it nevertheless  remains  the  fact
    that the judge did not address it. I therefore  find  this  ground  has
    been made out.

 7. I am not persuaded that the fourth ground is  made  out.  It  complains
    that the judge's use of phrases such as, "I would  have  expected"  and
    "it makes little sense", betray an inappropriately subjective  approach
    to fact-finding. Absent independent evidence to  support  it,  I  would
    accept that a judge should be extremely cautious about basing a finding
    upon concepts such as 'implausibility'  and  'inherent  improbability'.
    Nevertheless, there comes a point when a judge is entitled to  consider
    that a claimed action or event is so contrary to  universally  accepted
    norms of human behaviour and/or physical laws of nature,  that  it  can
    safely be discounted as contrary to common sense. In my judgement,  the
    judge's reasoning in this regard fell on the right side of that line.

 8. Having upheld three of the four complaints  concerning  errors  in  the
    judge's reasoning, I  have  concluded  that  his  conclusion  that  the
    appellant would not be at risk of persecution on return  to  Rwanda  is
    unsafe. I accordingly set aside the decision and remit  the  appeal  to
    the First-tier Tribunal for a complete rehearing.

Notice of Decision

 9. The appeal is allowed and the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  is
    set aside.

10. The  appeal  is  remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  complete
    rehearing (no findings of fact being preserved) before any judge  other
    than judge Nixon.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date: 15th October 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Kelly


