
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11696/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 15 February 2019                  |On 11 March 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN


                                   Between

                        Mrs HELEN BERHANE WELDEGEBREL
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Parkin, Counsel instructed by Barnes Harrild &
                    Dyer Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms L Kenny, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Ethiopia born on 16 February  1989.   She
    appeals against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge M  R  Oliver,
    dismissing her appeal against the  refusal  of  the  respondent  on  21
    September 2018 to grant her asylum in the United Kingdom.

2.   The appellant came to the United Kingdom on 19 September 2015  to  work
    under a valid Tier 5 visa as a domestic servant to a  diplomat  at  the
    Ethiopian Embassy in London.  She stated that she was single and had no
    dependent children.

3.   At her screening interview on 23 March 2018 after claiming asylum,  she
    disclosed that she had been detained on  1  March  2014  for  allegedly
    selling an unwarranted flag and from  2015  had  been  a  supporter  of
    Patriotic and Ginbot-7 (PG7) Party.  She gave details  of  her  husband
    and a daughter who were in Ethiopia.  She said she had had  no  contact
    for fifteen days with her husband.  When she could not get  through  to
    him, she called her mother on 15 March 2018, who informed her  that  he
    had been arrested a week before.  The authorities had left some  papers
    with her mother showing that the  appellant  was  also  wanted  by  the
    government.

4.   In a witness statement dated 5 April 2018, the  appellant  stated  that
    she had married  her  husband  on  21  December  2009.   Following  her
    husband's arrest her daughter was living with her mother.  Her  husband
    had joined the anti-government Arbenche Ginbot-7 Party in 2005 when  it
    was known as Kenjet.   She  too  was  a  supporter  and  they  attended
    demonstrations.  When she was arrested and detained on  1  March  2014,
    she was tortured and beaten with a wooden stick and on her release  had
    to sign a document that she was not to sell the flags  in  the  future.
    She continued her political activities but did not  come  to  attention
    again.

5.   She met an agent who told her there was an opportunity  to  work  as  a
    maid at an Ethiopian diplomat's  house  in  the  United  Kingdom.   Her
    husband agreed because she would learn information which could be  used
    against the government.  The agent  advised  her  not  to  mention  her
    marital status and her daughter because her application  would  not  be
    accepted.  During the currency of her visa  she  visited  her  parents,
    husband and daughter in Ethiopia for a month  from  29  September  2017
    until 30 October 2017.  When this visa was coming to an  end,  she  was
    granted a further visa valid until 30 August 2018.

6.   It was when she tried to contact her husband in  March  2018  that  her
    mother told her of his arrest and when she realised that her  own  life
    was in danger she was advised by a friend to claim  asylum,  which  she
    did on 23 March 2018.  She had not tried to contact her  mother  again,
    fearing the phone would be tapped.

7.   She claimed to be  politically  active  in  the  United  Kingdom  as  a
    supporter of the Ginbot-7 Party and was currently being assessed to see
    if she was suitable for membership.  She attended a demonstration on 16
    March 2018 in Trafalgar Square.

8.   In her asylum interview on 20 September 2018 she stated that she  would
    be submitting the police arrest warrant in due course.

9.   In her asylum interview it was pointed out  to  her  that  PG7  was  no
    longer declared a terrorist group by the  government  and  its  leaders
    were now in talks with the government, but she maintained that she  was
    still afraid that she would be  imprisoned  and  tortured.   In  cross-
    examination when she was asked  about  recent  developments  concerning
    Ginbot-7, the appellant conceded that there  had  been  some  agreement
    with the government, but said that there were good and bad things and a
    number of young activists had been arrested again and released  fifteen
    days before the hearing.  Although the two  leaders  were  now  in  the
    country, she would not get the same treatment.

10.  The judge's findings are set out at paragraphs 29 to  33.   At  29  the
    judge found that it would be unsafe  to  draw  any  conclusion  in  the
    confused state of Ethiopian politics about the different names for  the
    Ginbot-7 movement.

         "30. The broad history in respect of what  I  shall  call  PG7  is,
             however, clear.  After being designated a terrorist  group  in
             2011 talks began in early  2017  between  the  government  and
             opposition parties which resulted in the lifting of the  state
             of emergency in August 2017.  Africa News reported on 22  June
             2018 that PG7 had  suspended  its  armed  operations  and  was
             supporting reformist elements in  the  EPRDF  government.   In
             September 2018 their leaders were welcomed home.

         31.  The appellant claims to have been detained and beaten in March
             2014  after  selling  unwarranted  flags.    She   broke   her
             undertaking not to continue her activities on release.  In the
             following year, however, she applied for  and  was  granted  a
             visa to work in what would be regarded as a sensitive position
             in the household of a  diplomat.   Although  her  husband  had
             encouraged this move so that she could gain useful information
             for the cause, she did not do so, but went  back  to  Ethiopia
             for a month in 2017 without receiving any attention.

         32.  She has provided no corroborative evidence from her mother  of
             her husband's  arrest  in  March  2018  at  a  time  when  the
             government was in talks with the opposition.  There  can  have
             been no reason for the issue of  an  arrest  warrant  so  long
             after her minimal offending, when the authorities were unaware
             that she had continued to ignore the very limited  undertaking
             she had given.  The beating she claimed to have received  when
             she was detained in 2014 had not caused her to reveal her true
             activities.

         33.  In all these circumstances, she  has  failed  to  substantiate
             that she will be  at  risk  of  persecution  or  serious  ill-
             treatment on return and therefore does not qualify for  asylum
             or humanitarian protection.  For the same reasons  there  will
             be no very significant  obstacles  to  her  return  safely  to
             Ethiopia, where all of her family life remains".

11.  Mr Parkin  submitted  that  the  judge  appears  to  have  reached  the
    conclusion he made at paragraph 30 from his  own  research.   This  was
    entirely unrelated to the evidence in fact before the Tribunal and  the
    judge cited no objective country evidence  which  could  have  led  the
    Tribunal to independently form that conclusion.  Mr Parkin said it  was
    not known what information the Tribunal relied upon or how reliable  it
    was.

12.  Mr Parkin relied on the respondent's current  policy  guidance  in  the
    publication entitled Country  Policy  and  Information  Note  Ethiopia:
    Opposition to the government, Version 2.0e October 2017 which states:

         "If the authorities have linked a person to a designated  terrorist
         group, principally the OLF, ONLF or AGUDM, and they have previously
         been arrested in connection with being  a  member  or  sympathising
         with such a group, or have previously come to the adverse attention
         of the authorities through activities connected to  a  group,  then
         they are likely to be at risk of persecution  or  serious  harm  on
         return".

    He also relied on the policy guidance which states:

         "If a person has close family links to someone who has a connection
         with the OLF, ONLF or AGUDM, then they  may  also  be  at  risk  of
         persecution or serious harm".

13.  Mr Parkin argued in his grounds that the  appellant  claimed  to  be  a
    supporter of Ginbot-7 (otherwise known as AGUDM) who  had  historically
    been identified as such by the authorities and associated with a family
    member who had been arrested.  She therefore fell within a category  of
    individuals identified as being at risk.

14.  Ms Kenny submitted that at paragraph 30  the  judge  relied  on  Africa
    News.  This  is  a  website  which  appears  at  paragraph  53  of  the
    respondent's Reasons for Refusal Letter.  She submitted that respondent
    relied on information contained in Africa News which said, referring to
    PG7,  "the  group  until  July  2018  were   considered   a   terrorist
    organisation by the Ethiopian government.   Parliament  voted  to  lift
    that label on the group and others like OLF and ONLF".  Ms  Kenny  said
    that it was the same article and that was where the judge's information
    came from.

15.  I accept Ms Kenny's submissions on this issue.   While  the  judge  may
    have used information that came from his  own  research,  the  research
    came from a reported source, that is Africa News, which  the  Secretary
    of State had also relied on in making his  decision.   Indeed,  in  her
    asylum interview (Qn 32) it was put to the appellant that  PG7  was  no
    longer declared a terrorist group by the  government  and  its  leaders
    were now in talks with the government.  In cross-examination when asked
    about recent developments concerning Ginbot-7, the  appellant  conceded
    that there had been some agreement with the government. I find that the
    judge was not relying on any new evidence that had not been put to  the
    appellant at the hearing, in  her  interview  or  in  the  Reasons  for
    Refusal Letter to come to the conclusion that he did at  paragraph  30.
    Accordingly, I find that the judge did not err in  law  in  relying  on
    information contained in Africa News.

16.  The second complaint made by Mr Parkin  was  in  respect  of  what  the
    judge said at paragraph 31.  Mr Parkin said that the judge was making a
    finding that the appellant's return to Ethiopia for a month in 2017 was
    inconsistent with her  fear.   Mr  Parkin  said  the  appellant's  fear
    originated in 2018 when she learned that her husband had been  arrested
    and also her participation in a demonstration in the UK.

17.  I find that this complaint is without merit.  The  judge  at  paragraph
    31 was setting out the appellant's own evidence.  This was in  relation
    to events prior to her husband's arrest.   Indeed,  the  appellant  had
    accepted in evidence that she did not come  to  the  attention  of  the
    authorities again after her arrest and detention in  2014.   The  judge
    was correct in saying that when she went back to Ethiopia for  a  month
    in 2017 she did not receive any adverse attention.  I fail to  see  the
    error in the judge's decision at paragraph 31.

18.  Mr Parkin submitted that the judge's finding at paragraph 32  that  the
    appellant had provided no corroborative evidence from her mother of her
    husband's arrest in March 2018 contravened paragraph 339L of the  Rules
    which states:

         "It is the duty of the person to substantiate the asylum  claim  or
         establish  that  they  are  a  person  eligible  for   humanitarian
         protection or substantiate their human rights claim.  Where aspects
         of  the  person's  statements  are  not  supported  by  documentary
         evidence  or  other  evidence,  those   aspects   will   not   need
         confirmation when other conditions are met".

    He set out what the conditions were in his skeleton argument.

19.  On this issue I accept Ms Kenny's  submission  that  the  corroborative
    evidence  could  be  reasonably  expected  from  the  appellant.    The
    appellant in her asylum interview on 20 September 2018 said  she  would
    be submitting the police arrest warrant in due  course.   She  has  had
    plenty of time to obtain that evidence.  The fact  that  there  was  no
    real  evidence  of  her  husband's  arrest  goes  to  the   appellant's
    credibility as a whole.  In the absence of  corroborative  evidence,  I
    find no error of law in the judge's decision.

20.  I accept that there was no finding on the appellant's  claim  that  she
    attended a demonstration on 16 March 2018 in Trafalgar Square.  I  find
    that the judge's failure to consider this evidence does not  materially
    undermine his decision.  Ginbot-7, the party she supports and on  whose
    behalf she would have attended the demonstration, is in talks with  the
    Ethiopian government and is no longer a proscribed organisation.

21.  For these reasons I find that the judge did not make a  material  error
    of law.

22.  The judge's decision dismissing the  appellant's  appeal  shall  stand.



No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date: 6 March 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun

