
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11869/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham Civil Justice    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Centre                               |                                     |
|On 18 June 2019                      |On 24 June 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE

                                   Between

                                 AITA SIDIBE
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Mr Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant was born on 28 April 1979 and  is  a  female  citizen  of
    Senegal. She appealed to the First-tier Tribunal against  the  decision
    of the Secretary of State to refuse her human rights and  asylum  claim
    following the making of a deportation order against her. The  appellant
    was sentenced to 10 months imprisonment in the Blackfriars Crown  Court
    on 29 July 2016 for possessing a false instrument with intent. She  had
    been granted a  six-month  visit  Visa  in  2001  and  had  overstayed,
    obtaining the false documents in order to enable her  to  work  in  the
    United Kingdom. The First-tier Tribunal in a decision promulgated on 28
    December 2018, dismissed her appeal. The appellant  now  appeals,  with
    permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The appellant appeared in person at the initial hearing  at  Birmingham
    before the Upper Tribunal on 18 June 2019. Her command of  English  was
    excellent and I believe that she understood the  proceedings.  I  asked
    the appellant to let me know if anything was  said  which  he  did  not
    fully understand.

 3. The grant of permission by Upper Tribunal Judge Grubb  notes  that  the
    judge applied paragraph 398(c) of HC 395 (as amended) and also  section
    117C of the 2002 Act on the basis that the appellant's  offence  caused
    'serious harm.' Consequently, the 'public interest in deportation  will
    only be  outweighed  by  other  factors  whether  our  very  compelling
    circumstances over and above those  described  in  paragraphs  399  and
    399A.' The appellant has no partner or children in the United  Kingdom.
    Neither Exception under section 117C applies to  her.  As  Judge  Grubb
    observe when granting permission, whether or not 'serious harm' is made
    out in the provision of the rules and the statute do or do not apply to
    the appellant, she may only appeal  on  Article  8  ECHR  private  life
    grounds which require her to show  the  existence  of  very  compelling
    circumstances.

 4. There is little guidance from  the  Senior  Courts  as  to  the  proper
    construction of 'serious harm.' In LT and DC [2016] EWCA Civ 1246,  the
    Court of Appeal dealt with appeals arising out of deportation decisions
    against individuals who had committed serious  drug  offences.  As  the
    appellant in the instant case pointed out, her offence was considerably
    less serious. However, it is clear from the Court of Appeal's judgement
    [19] that 'substantial weight should be accorded by  the  tribunals  to
    the [Secretary of State's] view that' particular offences cause serious
    harm either to individuals or to society  as  a  whole.  The  Court  of
    Appeal also stated that [24], 'the proposition that all drugs  offences
    are by their nature serious may be questionable.' By extension, not all
    offences involving  false  documents  will  be  by  their  very  nature
    serious. Having said that, the appellant  in  the  instant  appeal  has
    worked for a number of years on the basis of  false  documentation  and
    would no doubt have carried on working had she not been apprehended. In
    the light of the weight which the First-tier Tribunal  was  obliged  to
    give opinion of the Secretary of State, I am  satisfied  that,  on  the
    particular facts, the  appellant's  offence  can  be  characterised  as
    having caused serious harm to the community.

 5. Even if I am wrong in their conclusion, and the designation of  serious
    harm in this instance was inappropriate,  the  outcome  of  the  appeal
    would not have been different. This is because there is nothing in  the
    circumstances of this appellant which may be  accurately  described  as
    very compelling. The appellant was bound to lose her appeal on the only
    ground available to her, Article 8  ECHR.  In  the  circumstances,  and
    notwithstanding  the  judge's  error  at  [23]  in  misdescribing   the
    incidence of the burden of proof in a human rights appeal, I find  this
    appeal should be dismissed.

Notice of Decision

    This appeal is dismissed.


Signed                              Date 18 June 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane

