
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11753/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Liverpool                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 8 November 2018                           |On 27 November 2018           |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON

                                   Between

                                  MR [D N]
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 Secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr John Nicholson, Counsel instructed by
     Greater Manchester Immigration Aid Unit
For the Respondent:    Mr A Tan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, who  is  a  Palestinian  from  Gaza,  appeals  from  the
    decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Brunnen  promulgated  on  23
    February  2018  in  which  he  gave  his  reasons  for  dismissing  the
    appellant's  appeal  against  the  decision  of  the  respondent  ("the
    Department") made on 13 October 2016 to refuse his protection and human
    rights claims.

 2. The First-tier Tribunal did not make an anonymity  direction,  and  the
    appellant did not apply for anonymity in the Upper Tribunal. I also  do
    not consider that an anonymity direction is warranted on the particular
    facts of this case.

The Reasons for the Grant of Permission to Appeal

 3. On 4 September 2018, Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede granted permission  to
    appeal for the following reasons:

         Notwithstanding the unhelpfully lengthy and  repetitive  nature  of
         the grounds, there is some arguable merit in the assertion that the
         Judge arguably failed  fully  and  properly  to  grapple  with  the
         appellant's ability to return to Gaza and  the  consequences  of  a
         possible inability to return.  There is less arguable merit in  the
         grounds  seeking  to  challenge  the  Judge's  adverse  credibility
         findings but I do not exclude that ground.

Relevant Background

 4. The appellant is recorded  as  having  claimed  asylum  on  arrival  at
    Heathrow Airport on 17 April 2016.  He said that he had  left  Gaza  15
    months previously, on or around 17 January 2015.  En route to  the  UK,
    he had stayed in Cairo, Egypt, for 10 months.

 5. His account, which is set out more fully  in  paragraphs  [11]-[18]  of
    Judge Brunnen's decision, was that he had fled Gaza due to  a  fear  of
    persecution by Hamas.   He had been an ambulance driver in Gaza, and he
    had been interviewed about his work as an ambulance driver on  a  radio
    programme in or about 2011 or 2012.  Two days after the  interview,  he
    said that agents of Hamas had come to his home and threatened  to  kill
    him if he spoke to the media again concerning  anything  that  happened
    during his work.  About a year later, he set  up  a  Facebook  page  on
    which he posted comments or issues concerning ambulance  crews.   After
    he set up this page, he received a  phone  call  from  an  unidentified
    person who asked him whether he wanted to dig his own grave.

 6. In July 2014, the appellant was taken aside at the  hospital  where  he
    worked by two agents of Hamas who questioned him and told him  that  if
    they should discover that Israel had found  out  that  ambulances  were
    being used by Hamas for transport purposes, they  would  conclude  that
    the appellant was acting as an informant for the Israelis.

 7. Following this threat, the appellant  feared  for  his  life.   He  was
    unable to leave Gaza at the time because all the border crossings  were
    closed.  But in January 2015 he was able to use the Rafah  Crossing  to
    go to Egypt on the pretext of taking his son for medical treatment.  He
    then sent his son back to Gaza with someone else, while  he  stayed  in
    Cairo.

 8. In the refusal decision of 13 October  2016,  the  Department  did  not
    accept that the appellant faced a real risk of persecution  or  serious
    harm on return to Gaza because he had publicly disagreed with  the  use
    by Hamas of ambulance services in Gaza. The Department did  not  accept
    that he had worked as an ambulance driver, or that he had received  any
    threats from Hamas.  His general credibility was also considered to  be
    undermined by the fact that he claimed to have destroyed  the  passport
    which he had used to travel outside the Palestinian Authority.

 9. On the topic of future fear, the Department made reference  to  Article
    1D of the Refugee Convention and Article  12(1)  of  the  Qualification
    Directive.  Article 1D provides as follows:

       This Convention shall not apply  to  persons  who  were  at  present
       receiving organs or agencies of the United Nations  other  than  the
       United  Nations  High  Commissioner  for  Refugees   protection   or
       assistance.

       When such protection  or  assistance  has  ceased  for  any  reason,
       without the position of such persons being definitively  settled  in
       accordance with the relevant  resolutions  adopted  by  the  General
       Assembly of the United Nations, these persons shall  ipso  facto  be
       entitled to the benefits of this Convention.

10. The appellant had submitted a UNRWA  Family  Registration  Card,  which
    confirmed that he had been in the receipt of, or would be  eligible  to
    receive, assistance and protection from the UNRWA.  He had provided  no
    reasons as to  why  he  would  not  be  able  to  continue  to  receive
    assistance from the UNRWA, and therefore he did not qualify  for  (i.e.
    he was excluded from) refugee  protection.   He  was  not  entitled  to
    refugee status simply by leaving the  UNRWA  areas  of  protection  and
    claiming asylum elsewhere.

11.  The  Department  said  that  consideration  had  been  given  to   the
    feasibility and practicability of his return to the  Gaza  Strip.   The
    Department relied on HS (Palestinian  -  return  to  Gaza)  Palestinian
    Territories CG [2011] UKUT 124 (IAC) in support of the proposition that
    his re-entry to the Gaza Strip  was  feasible,  and  that  it  was  not
    unreasonable to expect him to return to the Gaza Strip.

12. On the topic of  humanitarian  protection  and  Article  15(c)  of  the
    Qualification Directive, the Department asserted that the  humanitarian
    situation in both the Gaza Strip and the West Bank was not such that it
    represented, in general, a risk of harm contrary to Article 3 ECHR.  In
    addition, following the signing of the long-term cease  fire  agreement
    in August 2015, the level of indiscriminate violence in the Gaza  Strip
    was not at such a level that, within the meaning of  Article  15(c),  a
    civilian faced a real risk of indiscriminate violence which  threatened
    his life  or  person  solely  by  being  present  in  the  Gaza  Strip.
    Accordingly, the appellant did  not  qualify  in  the  alternative  for
    humanitarian protection.

13. The appellant's appeal against this decision first came before a First-
    tier Tribunal Judge sitting in Manchester on 20 April 2017.  The  Judge
    dismissed the appeal in a decision promulgated on 5 May 2017.  However,
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal was set aside by Upper Tribunal
    Judge Bruce following an error of law hearing in Liverpool on 16 August
    2017.  The Upper Tribunal Judge found that there  had  been  procedural
    unfairness in the approach taken by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  the
    question of credibility, and also  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had
    misunderstood  or  diminished  certain   aspects   of   the   evidence,
    principally relating to the ability of Palestinians  to  travel,  these
    being significant in the assessment of both credibility and  risk.   As
    there were material errors in the approach of the First-tier  Tribunal,
    the Judge ruled that the most appropriate outcome was for the  decision
    to be set aside and the matter remitted for a hearing de  novo  in  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

The Hearing Before, and the Decision of, First-tier Tribunal Judge Brunnen

14. The de novo hearing took place before Judge Brunnen at Manchester on  1
    February 2018.  Mr Nicholson appeared on behalf of the appellant as  he
    had done previously, and the Department was represented by  Mr  Dillon,
    Home Office Presenting Officer.  The Judge received oral evidence  from
    the appellant, who was cross-examined by Mr Dillon.

15. In his subsequent decision, a Judge accepted at paragraph [20] that the
    appellant had worked as an ambulance driver.   At  paragraphs  [21]  to
    [27], the Judge gave his reasons for not accepting that  the  appellant
    left Gaza because he had been threatened by Hamas and was  in  fear  of
    his life.  He concluded that, by  the  time  the  appellant  left,  any
    threat that he may have received in 2011  or  2012  was  no  longer  an
    operative factor.  He found it was overwhelmingly more likely that  the
    appellant had left  Gaza  because  life  there  was  so  difficult  and
    restrictive, as the result of  the  general  conditions  in  which  its
    population had to live.

16. The Judge then addressed the submission  from  Mr  Nicholson  that  the
    Department was required to set out in the asylum  decision  letter  the
    method and route by which the appellant would be returned to Gaza.   Mr
    Nicholson submitted that the Department could not do this, as there was
    no possibility of returning the  Appellant  either  via  Egypt  or  via
    Israel.

17. At paragraph [30], the Judge said he was not referred to  any  evidence
    to demonstrate that the crossings into Gaza from Egypt and from  Israel
    were "entirely closed or closed to returning residents of Gaza."  As to
    the legal proposition advanced by Mr Nicholson,  he  had  mentioned  HS
    (Somalia) and AA (Iraq) but  he  had  not  provided  copies  of  either
    decision or demonstrated how those cases supported his argument.

18. The Judge went on to cite the Supreme Court decision in MS (Palestinian
    territories) [2010]  UKSC  25  in  support  of  the  proposition  that,
    "uncertainty as to the  possibility  of  removal  did  not  render  the
    decision to refuse asylum unlawful."

19. The Judge concluded his discussion of this  issue  with  the  following
    finding at the end of paragraph [34]: "I find that the fact (if  it  be
    the fact) that the borders of Gaza are  closed  against  the  Appellant
    does not entitle him to international protection."

20. At paragraph [35], the Judge turned to address what he characterised as
    Mr  Nicholson's  final  argument,  which   was   based   on   paragraph
    276ADE(1)(vi) of the Rules.  Mr Nicholson submitted that, as the result
    of the decision of the USA greatly to reduce its funding to the  UNRWA,
    there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles   to   the   appellant's
    reintegration in Gaza.  Mr Nicholson  maintained  this  argument  while
    accepting that humanitarian conditions in Gaza were not so poor  as  to
    engage  Article  15(c)  of  the  Qualification  Directive.   The  Judge
    continued: "Whilst some evidence has been adduced that the USA proposes
    to withhold part of its expected contribution to  UNRWA,  the  evidence
    also shows that the spokesman for UNWRA said that the organisation  had
    not been informed of any change of US  policy.   An  article  from  the
    Middle East Eye says the proposed cut would cause a  serious  reduction
    in  services,  in  particular  education  and   health   service,   for
    Palestinian refugees.  However, the Appellant does not say anywhere  in
    his evidence that if he returned to Gaza he would  be  reliant  on  the
    services provided by UNRWA.  I am not satisfied  the  proposed  funding
    cut does constitute a very significant obstacles to his reintegration."

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

21. At the hearing before me to determine whether an error of law was  made
    out, Mr Nicholson helpfully developed what he regarded as his strongest
    points first.  Accordingly, he began with an error of law challenge  to
    paragraph 35; he then moved on to an error  of  law  challenge  to  the
    Judge's treatment of the feasibility  of  the  appellant  securing  his
    readmission to the Gaza Strip, before finally developing his case  that
    the Judge's adverse credibility findings were not properly reasoned.

22. On behalf of the Department, Mr Tan submitted that  Judge  Brunnen  had
    directed himself appropriately on all the issues in dispute,  and  that
    no error of law was made out.

Discussion

23. It is convenient to deal with the three grounds of appeal  advanced  by
    Mr Nicholson in the order that he developed them.

Ground 1

24. Ground 1 is foreshadowed in paragraph 20 of the permission  application
    dated 27 March 2018 (which runs to 6 closely typed pages).  Ground 1 is
    that the Judge did not  properly  consider  that  the  appellant  would
    probably not be entitled to his previous UNRWA support, whether it  was
    totally or mostly cut by President Trump.

25.  In  oral  submissions,  Mr  Nicholson  drew  my   attention   to   the
    acknowledgement  in  the  refusal  decision  that  the  appellant   had
    submitted his UNRWA  Family  Registration  Card,  and  accordingly,  he
    submitted,  the  Judge  had  made  a  clear  mistake  of  fact  in  the
    penultimate sentence of paragraph [35].

26. This is not the way the case is put in the permission application,  and
    in any event I am  not  persuaded  that  the  Judge  made  a  factually
    incorrect statement.  Mr Nicholson did not refer  me  to  any  evidence
    given by the appellant that, if returned to Gaza, he would  be  reliant
    on services provided by the UNRWA.  He is not at a stage  in  his  life
    when he requires access to education services, and he is fit and  well,
    and so he does not have a pressing need to access  health  services  in
    the Gaza Strip.  Moreover, his evidence was that as well as working  as
    an ambulance driver in Gaza he had a side line business as  a  painter,
    decorator and tiler.  Accordingly, the fact that the appellant  was  in
    possession of an UNRWA Family Registration Card does not entail that he
    was reliant on UNRWA assistance for his survival in Gaza prior  to  his
    departure, or that the proposed cut in funding from the USA, and  hence
    the  consequential  serious  reduction  in  services  -  in  particular
    education and health services  -  would  impact  so  adversely  on  the
    appellant  as  to  constitute  a  very  significant  obstacle  to   his
    reintegration in Gaza.

27. In short, it was open to the Judge to find that  the  proposed  funding
    cut did not constitute a very significant obstacle to  the  appellant's
    reintegration, for the reasons which he gave.

28. In order to reinforce his argument that the  Judge's  finding  on  Rule
    276ADE(1)(vi)  was  inadequately  reasoned,  Mr  Nicholason  cited   MI
    (Palestine) -v-  SSHD  [2018]  EWCA  Civ  782,  a  decision  which  was
    published on 21 July 2018.

29. There are  three  reasons  why  this  authority  does  not  advance  Mr
    Nicholson's argument  under  Ground  1.   The  first  is  that  it  was
    published long after the decision was  promulgated,  and  therefore  it
    cannot be an error of law for the Judge not to take  it  into  account.
    The second is that it is not a Country Guidance decision, and the third
    is that it is not relevant.

30. In MI,  Deputy  Upper-Tribunal  Judge  Alis  had  applied  the  Country
    Guidance of HS [2011] UKUT  124  (IAC),  and  found  that  Palestinians
    returning to Gaza would not  face  a  real  risk  of  Article  3  harm.
    Counsel for MI invited the Judge to depart from the Country Guidance on
    the basis that the appellant's wife was then 36  weeks'  pregnant,  and
    there were serious concerns that her mental condition would deteriorate
    if the claim was refused.  Counsel also submitted that the situation on
    the ground was bleak, referring to an expert  report  from  Dr  George.
    The  majority  of  the  population  were  refugees  and  only  a  small
    proportion of funds had been delivered by donating nations.

31. In his decision promulgated on 22 October 2015, Deputy  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Alis dismissed the appeal.  His  reasoning  is  that  little  had
    changed since 2011 save for further conflict and destruction  following
    a period of re-building and development.   Counsel  for  the  appellant
    conceded that, without any additional factors, the appeal on Article  3
    grounds would fail. Counsel relied on the spouse's medical condition as
    tipping the scales in the appellant's favour.  The Judge held that  the
    decision was not tipped in the appellant's favour, because the House of
    Lords in N -v- SSHD [2005] UKHL 31 had set the bar  very  high  for  an
    Article 3 claim in medical cases, and the appellant's wife did not meet
    this threshold.

32. The Court of Appeal set aside the decision  of  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Alis, and  remitted  the  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal.   The
    reasoning of the Court of Appeal was that Deputy Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    had misdirected himself in law in applying  the  test  in  N  -v-  SSHD
    whereas he should have applied the less onerous test in Sufi  & Elmi -v-
     UK [2012] 54 EHRR 9 since the predominant cause  of  the  humanitarian
    crisis in Gaza was the conflict between Israel and Hamas.

33. The Court of Appeal also considered  that  the  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge had failed  to  have  proper  regard  to  the  Country  Evidence,
    particularly the evidence as to the seriously worsening position  after
    the Israeli military operation in 2014.

34. The decision in the Court of Appeal in MI (Palestine) does not  support
    the  argument  that  the  Judge's  reasoning  in  paragraph   [35]   is
    inadequate.  Mr Nicholson did not submit that conditions  in  Gaza  had
    deteriorated to a level where Article  3  ECHR  was  engaged,  or  that
    humanitarian conditions in Gaza were so poor as to engage Article 15(c)
    of the Qualification  Directive.   Mr  Nicholson  simply  relied  on  a
    proposed cut in UNRWA funding, and  I  consider  that  the  Judge  gave
    adequate reasons for finding that the appellant  did  not  qualify  for
    leave to remain under Rule 276ADE(1)(vi) on this basis.

Ground 2

35. Ground 2 relates to the feasibility of the appellant being returned  to
    Gaza, and it is developed discursively by Mr Nicholson at paragraphs 10
    to 19 of the permission application dated 27 March 2018.   In  essence,
    Mr Nicholson's submission is that the Judge ought to have held that  it
    would be impossible for the appellant to gain readmission to Gaza,  and
    that he would face real risk of Article 3 harm in Egypt in the form  of
    destitution while waiting indefinitely for the border crossing to be re-
    opened.

36. Mr Nicholson further submits that the Judge erred in law  in  following
    the Supreme Court decision in MS that the method and route of return to
    the Palestinian territories is a  technical  obstacle  which  does  not
    require to be considered as part of the evaluation of the merits of the
    appellant's protection and human rights claims.

37. I will deal with the evidential issue first.  In  the  course  of  oral
    argument, Mr Nicholson backtracked from his initial submission that the
    evidence before the Judge showed that crossings into  Gaza  from  Egypt
    were "impossible."  He agreed that he had  overstated  the  case.   The
    word 'impossible' did not appear in the background evidence that he had
    relied upon.  Sometimes the Rafah Crossing was open, but usually it was
    not open.  So it was very hard to re-enter Gaza by the Rafah Crossing.

38. In light of this acknowledgement by Mr Nicholson,  I  do  not  consider
    that Judge Brunnen misrepresented the position when he said he was  not
    referred to any evidence to demonstrate that the  crossings  into  Gaza
    from Egypt  and  from  Israel  were  "entirely  closed"  or  closed  to
    returning residents of Gaza.

39. On the question whether the Judge was wrong to treat the issue  of  the
    method and route of the appellant's  return  to  Gaza  as  a  technical
    obstacle which lay in the future, I do not consider that the Judge  was
    wrong to follow a Supreme Court authority directly on the point,  while
    at the same time  declining  Mr  Nicholson's  invitation  to  apply  by
    analogy lower Court decisions to contrary effect, especially when these
    decisions relate to countries or territories other than the Palestinian
    territories.

40. The Judge acknowledged that MS  had  been  decided  under  a  different
    statutory regime in respect of appeals  by  asylum  claimants,  but  he
    explained why he considered that the authority remained relevant  under
    the new statutory regime: the  prospective  nature  of  the  ground  of
    appeal under the old section 84(1)(g) was preserved in the  new  ground
    of appeal under section 84(1)(a). The issue was whether the removal  of
    the appellant from the United Kingdom would breach the UK's obligations
    under the Refugee Convention.

41. I note that, notwithstanding the Supreme  Court  decision  in  MS,  the
    Tribunal in the Country Guidance case of HS [2011] UKUT 124  held  that
    the Tribunal had jurisdiction to consider practical  issues  concerning
    the return of a Palestinian family to Gaza.  However, the  guidance  in
    HS was that return to Gaza  is  feasible.  Conversely,  Mr  Nicholson's
    submission that the appellant would face Article 3 harm in Egypt  while
    waiting to cross into Gaza runs directly contrary to  the  guidance  in
    HS, which held that conditions likely to be experienced by Palestinians
    in Egypt while waiting to cross into Gaza were not such as to give rise
    to a breach of their human rights.

42. Mr Nicholson was very critical of the Judge for dismissing his argument
    by analogy because he had not provided copies  of  the  authorities  on
    which he relied.  I consider  it  was  incumbent  on  Mr  Nicholson  to
    provide copies of the authorities on which he relied so that the  Judge
    could see the context of the particular passages cited by him, so as to
    be able to  evaluate  whether  they  illuminated  a  point  of  general
    principle that was applicable to prospective returns to the Gaza  Strip
    as well as to prospective returns to Iraq or Somalia.

43. It is not clear whether Mr Nicholson relied on an asserted  absence  of
    relevant documents to enable the appellant's re-entry.  But if he  did,
    the Judge did not err in not specifically addressing this issue for two
    reasons.  Firstly, it was open to him to  rely  on  the  Supreme  Court
    decision of MS for the  reasons  which  he  gave;  and,  secondly,  the
    appellant had not shown that he was unable to obtain a new passport via
    the Palestinian Commission in the UK, or that his wife would be  unable
    to sponsor his return to the Gaza Strip or that he would be denied  re-
    entry into the Gaza Strip as her returning husband; see paragraph 50 of
    the refusal decision.

Ground 3

44. Ground 3 is that the  Judge's  adverse  credibility  findings  are  not
    adequately reasoned. I consider that this ground is  no  more  than  an
    expression of disagreement with findings that were reasonably  open  to
    the Judge for the reasons which he gave.

45.  This  is  exemplified  by  the  Judge's  reasons  for  rejecting   the
    appellant's account of the incident which he says led  to  him  fleeing
    Gaza in  2014.  The  Judge  gave  four  reasons  for  disbelieving  the
    appellant's account of being threatened for a third time in 2014. These
    were:

          a) His interview did not record any intelligible context for  the
             third threat;

          b)  He  had  no  explanation  for  the  third  threat  in  cross-
             examination;

          c) Neither in his interview nor in his oral evidence did he  rely
             on the conflict situation in 2014 as a reason  for  the  third
             threat;

          d) In his statement of 7 March 2017 the  appellant  made  another
             elaboration,  which  was  significantly  different  from   the
             account of the incident given by him in interview.

46. In the permission application, Mr Nicholson submits  that  a  prolonged
    assault by Israel in 2014 provides  a  credible  context  for  a  third
    threat in 2014, and that it should not be held  against  the  appellant
    that he did not mention the conflict situation in 2014 in interview  as
    the background to the third threat, as he was not asked  the  question.
    But Mr Nicholson does not in terms challenge the sustainability of  the
    other reasons given by the Judge, and neither in  his  written  or  his
    oral submissions does he make out an error of law under Ground 3.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain  an  error  of  law,
and accordingly the decision stands.  This appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  is
dismissed.

I make no anonymity direction.



Signed                              Date 10 November 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson






