
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: pa/11435/2019 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided under rule 34                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 20 May 2020                       |On 22 May 2020                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                                     LS
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS

This decision has been made on the papers, under Rule  34  of  The  Tribunal
Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules  2008,  further  to  directions  issued  by
Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce sent out on 9 April 2020.

The appellant is a national of Afghanistan born on 1 June  1993.  He  claims
to have arrived in the United Kingdom on  18  June  2018  clandestinely.  He
claimed asylum on 20 June 2018 and was served  with  removal  papers  as  an
illegal entrant. His claim was initially refused  on  18  December  2018  on
third country grounds, with an intention to return him to Bulgaria where  he
had previously claimed asylum, but the  respondent  subsequently  agreed  to
consider his claim in the UK. His claim was then considered and  refused  on
12 November 2019.

The appellant claims to be from Baghlan Province in Afghanistan and to  have
worked with his father as a farmer. He claims that  his  father  worked  for
the Ministry of Agriculture and also assisted the Taliban by  allowing  them
to hide weapons in his house. The house was raided one  day  by  the  Afghan
authorities in May 2016  and  the  weapons  were  discovered  and  explosive
devices found. There was a fight between the authorities and his family  and
his father and maternal uncle were killed. The appellant was wounded  during
the raid from an explosion and was taken to hospital where he stayed for  20
days receiving treatment for shrapnel injuries and a broken leg and he  then
spent two months at his uncle's friend's house before leaving  the  country.
The Taliban blamed the appellant and his brother for reporting  the  weapons
to the authorities and visited his home  whilst  he  was  in  hospital.  His
mother has, since his departure, received warning letters from  the  Taliban
trying to locate him and his brother. As a result, he fears the  Taliban  as
well as the Afghan authorities who are also looking for him.

The respondent, in  refusing  the  appellant's  claim,  found  there  to  be
inconsistencies and discrepancies in his evidence and  did  not  accept  his
account. No  weight  was  given  to  photographs  apparently  depicting  his
deceased father and uncle and  showing  his  own  injuries.  The  respondent
considered that in any event  the  appellant  could  safely  and  reasonably
relocate to Kabul and that the Taliban would not be motivated to pursue  him
there. The respondent concluded that he would not be at risk  on  return  to
Afghanistan and that his removal to that country would not breach his  human
rights.

The appellant appealed against that decision. His appeal was heard by  First
tier Tribunal Judge Buckwell on 24 December 2019. The appellant submitted  a
bundle of documents for the hearing which included statements  from  himself
and a family friend,  a  letter  from  his  GP,  warning  letters  from  the
Taliban, an arrest warrant from the police command in Baghlan,  a  statement
from the village elders, a letter from the Ministry of  Agriculture  to  his
father  terminating  his  employment,  his  father's  Afghan  ID  card   and
photographs of his deceased father and uncle and  of  the  injuries  to  his
leg. Judge Buckwell did not accept that the documents were  genuine,  noting
that they had only recently  been  produced,  and  he  did  not  accept  the
appellant's account to be a credible one. He concluded  that  the  appellant
would not be at risk in his home area and  that  he  could,  in  any  event,
safely and reasonably relocate to Kabul. He  dismissed  the  appeal  on  all
grounds, in a decision promulgated on 29 January 2020.

Permission to appeal was sought by the appellant on  the  grounds  that  the
judge failed to consider and engage with material documentary  evidence  and
failed to give adequate reasons for rejecting the documentary evidence,  and
that he failed to carry out an assessment of  "very  significant  obstacles"
under paragraph 276ADE(1) in light of the medical assessment of PTSD.

Permission was granted on 1 March 2020.

In light of the need to take precautions against  the  spread  of  Covid-19,
the matter was not listed for a hearing and the  case  was  reviewed  by  an
Upper Tribunal Judge on 3 April 2020. In a Note and Directions sent  out  on
9 April 2020, Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce indicated that she had reached  the
provisional view that the question  of  whether  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
decision involved the making of  error  of  law  and,  if  so,  whether  the
decision should be set aside, could be made without a  hearing.  Submissions
were invited from the parties.

Neither party has made any submissions nor provided reasons for there to  be
a hearing  in  accordance  with  [3]  of  UTJ  Bruce's  directions.  In  the
circumstances I see no reason why  the  error  of  law  question  cannot  be
determined without a  hearing  and  do  not  consider  that  any  issues  of
procedural unfairness arise from doing so.

The  appellant's  grounds  challenge  the  judge's  consideration   of   the
documentary evidence, both in respect  to  a  failure  to  engage  with  the
contents of the documents  and  a  failure  to  give  adequate  reasons  for
according the documents no weight. The  grant  of  permission  was  made  in
particular on the basis of the judge's adverse  findings  being  limited  to
the late production of the documents. However, I do not find the grounds  to
be made out.

The judge's decision is a thorough and comprehensive one  and  it  is  plain
from his detailed record of, and references to,  the  oral  and  documentary
evidence that he gave full  consideration  to  all  the  evidence  presented
before him and fully engaged with the evidence. At  [40]  he  particularised
the  documents  within  the  bundle;  at  [51]  to  [57]  he  recorded   the
appellant's oral evidence in response to the documents  being  put  to  him;
and at [103] he confirmed that he had taken into account  all  the  evidence
whether or not specifically referred to. It is clear from his findings  from
[105] to [118] that the judge fully  and  properly  assessed  the  documents
together with the evidence as a whole in accordance  with  the  guidance  in
Tanveer Ahmed [2002] UKIAT 439.   He  was  not  required  to  make  specific
reference to, and assess the contents of, each document  individually.  What
mattered was  that  he  had  regard  to  the  documents  and  assessed  them
alongside the oral evidence, which is precisely what he did. Accordingly,  I
reject the assertion in the grounds that the judge  failed  to  engage  with
the documentary evidence.

As to the assertion in the grounds of appeal,  and  the  indication  in  the
grant of permission, that  the  judge's  conclusion  on  the  weight  to  be
accorded to the documents lacked adequate reasoning, again I  find  that  to
be without merit. Contrary to the assertions made, the judge was  fully  and
properly entitled to draw adverse conclusions from the  late  production  of
the documents. The documents were dated from 2016, but yet  aside  from  the
photographs, were not produced until just before the hearing in  the  appeal
bundle. The judge  considered  the  appellant's  explanation  for  the  late
production, at [57]  and  [107],  and  was  entitled  to  make  the  adverse
findings that he did in that regard. In any event, that  was  not  the  sole
reason given by the judge for according the documents no weight.  The  judge
gave detailed  and  cogent  reasons  at  [108]  to  [118]  for  finding  the
appellant's account of his experiences in Afghanistan to  lack  plausibility
and credibility and it was as a result  of  his  overall  concerns  that  he
accorded the weight that he did to the oral and documentary evidence, as  he
was entitled to do.

The appellant's grounds  make  specific  reference  to  the  medical  letter
stating that the appellant suffered from PTSD  and  assert  that  the  judge
failed to consider that document, or the  arrest  warrant.  With  regard  to
both, I refer back to my views expressed  above  and  reject  the  assertion
that the documents were not considered. I would make a  further  observation
with regard to the medical letter, which is at page 47 of the  bundle,  that
the letter refers to the appellant's  condition  involving  flashbacks  from
being tortured by the Taliban, yet the  appellant's  account  in  his  claim
made no reference to any such treatment. In any event, the judge  considered
at various parts of his decision the diagnosis in that letter  of  PTSD  and
took that into account. I refer in particular to [45],  [54]  and  [94],  as
well as the judge's detailed consideration of the appellant's injuries  said
to have contributed to that condition, from [109]. As for the  assertion  in
the grounds that the judge failed to consider the diagnosis of PTSD  in  the
context of paragraph 276ADE(1) of the immigration rules, it  is  clear  from
the  appellant's  statements  and  the  judge's  detailed  summary  of   the
submissions made on behalf of the appellant, that  that  was  not  a  matter
specifically advanced at the hearing. In any event the  judge  plainly  took
account of all relevant  matters  when  considering  Article  8  within  and
outside the immigration rules, at [121] and [123], and there is  nothing  in
the evidence produced before him, particularly the medical  letter  at  page
47, which could possibly have established an Article 8 claim.

Accordingly, I find no merit in the assertion in the grounds and  the  grant
of permission that the judge failed fully and properly to  engage  with  the
documentary evidence. The judge was fully  entitled  to  accord  the  weight
that he did to  the  evidence  and  his  conclusions  in  that  regard  were
supported by full and cogent reasoning. The judge was entitled to reach  the
adverse conclusions that he did and to dismiss the appeal on the basis  that
he did. He made no errors of law.



DECISION

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  did  not  involve  an
error on a point of law. I do not set aside the decision.  The  decision  to
dismiss the appeal stands.

    Anonymity

    The anonymity direction made by the First-tier Tribunal is maintained.


Signed:  S Kebede
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede     Dated: 20 May 2020
