
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11090/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 4th April 2019                    |On 10th April 2019                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

                                     DS
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss Cleghorn, Counsel instructed on behalf of the
Appellant
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwncyz, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    Direction Regarding Anonymity -  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008

    Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  Appellant
    is granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
    indirectly identify him.  This direction applies both to the  Appellant
    and to the Respondent.  Failure to comply  with  this  direction  could
    lead to contempt of court proceedings



 1. The appellant is a  citizen  of  Iran,  who  with  permission,  appeals
    against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Hands), who,  in
    a determination promulgated on the 30th  October  2018,  dismissed  his
    claim for protection.

The appellant's claim:

 2. The appellant's claim is set out in the determination of the  FtTJ  and
    in the summary set out in the decision letter dated 7  September  2018.
    The appellant claimed to have been involved with the KDPI in Iran since
    he was 24 years of age beginning in December 2011 and finishing  in  or
    about early 2018.  He  distributed  leaflets  and  fixed  flags  during
    Kurdish festival times and had sometimes written graffiti on walls.  He
    did not attend any meetings, protests or demonstrations.

 3.  The appellant claimed to have been involved in the party through a man
    called Z. He describes this man as "doing activities" and that  he  had
    asked him if he could  help  but  that  Z  did  not  accept  this.  The
    appellant stated that he had asked him repeatedly to get  involved  and
    then Z agreed for him to be involved.

 4. He stated that Z brought the leaflets/materials and he distributed them
    with his friend R when Z was not around. He collected the material from
    an orchard.

 5. The appellant left Iran because Z had been arrested and had  given  the
    appellant's name to the authorities. The appellant was not at home when
    that had occurred but found out when contacted by  his  relatives.  The
    appellant claimed that his father had been arrested on three  occasions
    by the authorities as a result of the appellants activities; the  first
    time before he left Iran and twice since.

 6. The appellant left Iran approximately  seven  days  after  Z  had  been
    arrested and had stated his aunt's house for two days (approximately 40
    minutes from his home area) and then to another area.  His  cousin  had
    collected money from the appellant's father (US$14,000) which had  been
    taken in cash to the currency exchange and an  agent  was  involved  in
    providing his journey from Iran through a number of countries until  he
    reached the United Kingdom on 14 March 2018 when  he  was  detected  by
    police and when he claimed asylum.

The decision of the respondent:

 7. The claim was refused by the Secretary of State in a decision letter of
    7th September 2018 although it is right to record that  the  respondent
    accepted his nationality and his Kurdish ethnicity.

 8. As to his claim to have  actively  supported  members  of  the  Kurdish
    Democratic party of Iran (hereinafter referred to as the  "KDPI"),  the
    respondent considered  his  replies  in  interview.  In  his  screening
    interview, he stated that  he  had  been  involved  with  the  KDPI  by
    supporting the party by helping  members.  When  questioned  about  the
    organisation to establish his affiliation, the appellant  was  able  to
    answer basic questions regarding  the  party's  founder,  headquarters,
    current leader and their objectives however  whilst  his  answers  were
    externally consistent it was noted that  that  information  was  widely
    available in the public domain. When questioned further, he was  unable
    to describe the structure of the party or what  party  Mustafa  Mawuldi
    lead in the separatist movement and simply answered "I don't  know"  (Q
    74, 78). It was considered that his lack of specific knowledge  of  the
    KDPI damaged the credibility of his claim and reducing  the  likelihood
    of his support for them. This was further  through  his  own  admission
    that he did not continue political activity regarding the KDP I in  the
    UK.

 9. In his interview, he claimed that he was  not  a  member  of  the  KDPI
    because he did not want to listen to them all the time. He  was  unsure
    if his friend Z was a member as "he didn't say to  us  anything  and  I
    never asked him" (Q135) although he did ask repeatedly to get  involved
    in the activities of the KDPI (Q 90). The respondent considered that if
    as claimed he did speak to him on  a  number  of  occasions  about  the
    party, he would have  been  inquisitive  regarding  his  own  role  and
    activities and have a clear idea of this. The lack  of  detail  impacts
    upon his credibility.

10. When asked to explain all the reasons why he could not return  to  Iran
    in his screening interview, he stated it was because  of  "cross-border
    travelling" as he had helped "members of the  KDPI".  However,  in  the
    asylum interview, when asked what activities he did for  the  party  he
    claimed to have been distributing leaflets, fixing flags at  night.  He
    then confirmed he did not carry out any other activities for the party.
    He later added that he did graffiti for the KDPI  and  denied  crossing
    the border stating that he went to villages to collect items  from  his
    friend  Z  to  distribute.  The   respondent   considered   that   this
    contradicted  his  initial  reason  for  claiming  asylum  and  was   a
    significant inconsistency as his fear of persecution due to support for
    the KDPI was at the core of his claim.  The  appellant  was  unable  to
    provide a consistent account of what activities he did  carry  out  the
    KDPI and again this damaged his overall credibility.

11.  The  respondent  considered  that   the   appellant's   own   evidence
    demonstrated  that  he  did   not   attend   any   meetings,   protests
    demonstrations or events for the party (Q101 - 103). Furthermore,  with
    regards to his claim of being an active supporter of the KDPI,  it  was
    noted that he failed  to  produce  any  documentation  to  confirm  any
    activism or sympathies he had for that party or that he  had  to  leave
    Iran due to any political activism. The respondent  made  reference  to
    the objective  material  in  which  it  was  stated  that  the  party's
    sympathisers would be able to get a letter of recommendation  from  the
    KDPI if the party was certain that the person asking for the letter had
    to leave due to political activism.

12. Consequently, the respondent did not accept his claim of supporting the
    KDPI.

13. As to whether he had come to the attention of the  Iranian  authorities
    the respondent rejected that party of his claim having considered it in
    the light of the country materials.

14. The appellant had claimed that the man Z  had  been  arrested  for  his
    smuggling activities rather  than  KDPI  involvement  although  it  was
    stated that he was carrying leaflets to bring  back  for  distribution.
    However, as his KDPI political support  was  not  the  reason  for  his
    arrest, it had not been credibly explained why  Z  would  be  asked  to
    provide the names of the appellant and R when  nobody  knew  about  the
    appellant's political activities (see question 111).

15. It was considered that his claim concerning the arrest  of  Z  and  his
    father was not consistent. He stated that he left Iran two  months  ago
    when interviewed  initially  (which  would  be  January  2018).  Z  was
    arrested on 11 December however the appellant also claimed to have left
    Iran in October 2017 or October 2018 and this was not  consistent  with
    his claim of leaving Iran after the arrest of his friend Z.

16. Furthermore, he stated his father was first arrested two days after the
    arrest of Z. However, he had previously claimed Z did not  provide  his
    name to the authorities until he had been  imprisoned  for  three  days
    claiming that his father was advised that he had to hand the  appellant
    in, or he would be arrested in his place. However, his father  had  not
    been arrested even though the appellant had not been back. It  was  not
    accepted as a reasonable explanation and therefore the account  of  his
    father being arrested was also not plausible or credible.

17. The appellant claimed to have left Iran seven days after the arrest  of
    Z. He also stated that Z had given his name after three days of torture
    however, the appellant had been wholly inconsistent regarding when this
    incident occurred. Furthermore, it  was  considered  that  the  Iranian
    authorities have the opportunity to locate and arrest him  during  this
    period. In particular, it was noted that his cousins knew where he  was
    (question 1 54) and it was  considered  that  the  Iranian  authorities
    possess the intelligence required to  monitor  the  appellant  and  his
    family had he been of genuine interest to them as demonstrated  through
    the objective evidence (see paragraph 75 of the decision letter).

18. It was further considered that if his activities had been noted by  the
    Iranian  authorities  when  Z  provided  his  name  as   claimed,   the
    intelligence organisations as set out in the country information  would
    have acted upon this  (see  country  information  and  guidance,  Iran:
    curtain Kurdish political groups version  2.0  July  2016  5.2.4).  The
    country information guidance states, "authorities have no tolerance for
    any activities connected to Kurdish political  groups"  and  thus  this
    supports that the  authorities  have  the  potential  opportunities  to
    arrest the appellant  and  at  an  earlier  date  if  they  viewed  his
    activities as a genuine threat. It  was  also  noted  that  I  was  not
    arrested.

19. Consideration was given to his  smuggling  activities  however  he  was
    inconsistent concerning his description of his employment and thus  his
    lack of  consistent  account  as  regards  his  employment  damage  the
    credibility of his claim.

20. Consideration was given to Section 8 of the 2004 Act, and it was  noted
    that before arriving  in  the  United  Kingdom,  he  travelled  through
    France, Greece and Italy which were considered safe countries.  He  was
    detained in Greece and claimed asylum however he did not wait  for  the
    outcome of his application as it was claimed the  agent  asked  him  to
    leave the country. It was also noted that he did not  claim  asylum  in
    Italy or in France despite having been there for 20 days. Therefore, it
    was considered that  he  failed  to  take  advantage  of  a  reasonable
    opportunity to make an asylum human  rights  claim  whilst  in  a  safe
    country.

21. For the reasons set out in the decision letter, the respondent did  not
    accept that he demonstrated a reasonable degree of likelihood  that  he
    would be at risk of suffering persecution or ill-treatment on return to
    Iran.

22. The respondent gave consideration to the issue of the appellant being a
    failed asylum seeker and the issue of illegal exit by reference to  the
    country guidance decision of SSH (illegal exit: failed  asylum  seeker)
    Iran CG [2016] UKUT 00308 (IAC). It recorded that an  Iranian  male  in
    respect of whom no adverse interest has previously been  manifested  by
    the reigning state did not face a real risk  of  persecution/breach  of
    his article 3 rights on return to Iran on account of having  left  Iran
    illegally and/or being a failed asylum seeker. No such risk  exists  at
    the time of questioning on return to Iran nor after the fact  (i.e.  of
    illegal exit and being a failed asylum seeker) have  been  established.
    In particular, there is not a  real  risk  of  prosecution  leading  to
    imprisonment (see paragraph 33 (B) of determination).

23. Consideration was also given to his treatment as a Kurd  on  return  to
    Iran by reference to the objective material and  the  country  guidance
    decision of SSH (cited). This stated that the level  of  discrimination
    faced by Kurds in Iran is not such that it  will  bring  the  level  of
    being persecutory or otherwise inhuman or degrading treatment.  The  CG
    decision held that the evidence did not show that there would be a risk
    to returnees on the basis of  Kurdish  ethnicity  and  low  unless  the
    person is otherwise of interest to the Iranian authorities.

24. In the light of the above conclusions,  it  was  not  accepted  by  the
    respondent that there was a reasonable degree  of  likelihood  that  he
    will be persecuted on return to Iran by reason  of  political  opinion,
    either imputed or actual or on account of his ethnicity.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal:

25. In a decision promulgated on  the  30th  October  2018  the  FtTJ  made
    adverse credibility findings in relation to the appellant's account and
    his appeal was dismissed.

26. The judge set out his  findings  of  fact  and  as  to  credibility  at
    paragraphs 13-28. The judge accepted that he was  an  Iranian  national
    and was of Kurdish ethnicity ([12]).

27. At paragraphs 15 and 16 the judge set out aspects  of  the  appellant's
    claim

           . the appellant lived with his family in Iran which consisted of
             his father, brother and sister;

           . none of his family were involved with the security  forces  or
             military in Iran nor involved in any political parties;

           . the appellant was educated  at  the  local  mosque  where  his
             grandfather taught, and he  worked  on  the  family  farm  and
             worked as a goods transporter; he  claimed  to  have  smuggled
             goods but did not smuggle political material.

           . He claims to have been involved with the KDPI from the age  of
             24.

           . He distributed leaflets and fixed flags at most he did this on
             eight occasions in a year at festival times. Sometimes he  did
             not do it eight times a year because of the weather or because
             of the security.

           . He claimed have started the activities in  December  2011  and
             left Iran in January 2018, meaning  that  most  the  appellant
             carried out these activities and 56 occasions.

           . the appellant did nothing else for the KTP are as he  did  not
             attend meetings, protests,  demonstrations  get-togethers  all
             parties.

           . He would pick up the leaflets and flags from the orchard which
             where they were left by Z  and  he  and  his  friend  R  would
             distribute them in the surrounding villages.

           . No one knew about these activities and no  charges  have  ever
             been brought against him and his right never been detained.

28. The judge considered the  appellant's  claim  in  the  context  of  the
    objective material which she had referred to paragraphs 13 and  14  but
    concluded on the evidence before her that he had not given a  credible,
    consistent or plausible account of being involved in  the  distribution
    of leaflets in Iran for the  KDPI.  The  judge  expressly  rejected  as
    account for lack of consistency and credibility that he was  wanted  by
    the Iranian authorities on return on the basis that they had arrested Z
    who had given his name to the authorities.  I will  make  reference  to
    the findings of  fact  made  and  the  assessment  of  the  appellant's
    credibility when considering the grounds and  the  submissions  of  the
    advocates.

29. The Appellant sought permission to appeal that decision and  permission
    was granted by FtTJ McCarthy on the 21st November 2018.

The grounds of challenge:

30. There were 2 grounds relied upon in the permission grounds;  the  first
    ground challenged the credibility findings of the FtTJ and  the  second
    ground challenged the risk on return (in the context of  the  appellant
    as a supporter of the KDPI and failed asylum seeker and  having  exited
    illegally). The judge granting permission expressly  refused  to  grant
    permission on Ground 2 and no application has been  made  to  challenge
    that refusal, either by way of application before the hearing or at the
    hearing. Miss Cleghorn therefore confined her submissions to  ground  1
    which centred upon the assessment of the appellant's credibility.

31. Miss Cleghorn relied upon the grounds. She submitted that the judge had
    applied an ethnocentric approach in her assessment  of  credibility  by
    assessing  the  evidence  from  a   Western   perspective.   This   was
    demonstrated at paragraph 19 where the judge referred to the  appellant
    being able to ask his parents to send  an  email  and/or  documents  to
    support his claim.  She  submitted  villages  in  Kurdistan  are  often
    without electricity and the concept of sending an email to  the  UK  is
    taking a westernised approach. She further submitted that the judge did
    a similar thing when referring to his lack of involvement with the KDPI
    since his arrival in the United Kingdom.

32. In respect of paragraph 18, she submitted  that  the  finding  in  that
    paragraph that he could have been involved in the KDPI  in  the  United
    Kingdom failed to take into account that he is on a limited income.  It
    would also require the ability to access information from the  Internet
    which failed to take into account his literacy (see paragraph 3 of  the
    grounds).

33. As to paragraph 19, she submitted it was difficult to decipher what was
    being said by the judge.

34. In relation to paragraph 21, again she submitted she struggled  to  see
    what the paragraph meant. The judge noted that there was  no  reference
    to the contact made in the asylum interview but the  judge's  reference
    to the facts at paragraph 19 said that he was in Mxxxx with friends  in
    a park and therefore there had been a reference to that.  However,  she
    submitted that the most important issue as regards paragraph 20 is that
    there was no inconsistency  and  that  given  the  Iranian  authorities
    suspicions that there was no inconsistency in his behaviour.

35. As to paragraph 22, the judge erred in this  paragraph  by  reaching  a
    conclusion that he was making up his account before  she  assessed  the
    evidence  in  the  round.  Furthermore,  it  was  not  clear  how   the
    appellant's number will be traceable to him as  quickly  as  the  judge
    considered.

36. As to paragraph 23 she submitted that paragraph did not make sense  and
    that propaganda and the  advertising  of  events  served  a  number  of
    purposes and not just, as the judge suggested, to inform people of  the
    time and date of an event but also the objects of the party.

37. In respect of paragraph 24 and 25, she submitted that those  paragraphs
    did not add anything to the claim and in relation to  paragraph  26  he
    was not asked about the timeline of events. Furthermore,  even  if  the
    appellant had asked his father such questions, no  one  would  want  to
    hear the details of torture and it is  not  reasonable  that  a  parent
    would share with this with their child.

38. As to paragraph 28 it was submitted that this paragraph  also  did  not
    make sense and that the judge approached it from a Western  perspective
    assuming a value on education as reflected in the UK.

39. The she submitted the credibility assessment was flawed and  should  be
    set aside.

40. Mr Diwnycz on behalf of the respondent submitted that the determination
    may not have been a model of clarity due to the  convoluted  nature  of
    the appellants claim however the judge reached findings that were  open
    to her on the evidence and the grounds were merely a disagreement  with
    those findings of fact. In particular at paragraph 28, it was  open  to
    the judge to consider the issue of literacy. There are different levels
    of literacy and the  judge  considered  this  against  the  appellant's
    account that he claimed have been schooled in a  mosque  and  therefore
    they must have been some level of literacy as the Koran is  in  Arabic.
    Thus, the judge was entitled to find that  he  was  not  illiterate  as
    claimed.

41. In summary, he submitted that the findings were open to the  judge  and
    that the appeal should be dismissed.

Discussion:

42. Dealing with the first ground, at its heart it  challenges  the  judge'
    assessment of the appellant's credibility and refers to each individual
    paragraph  within  the  determination.  It  is  trite  law,   but   the
    determination should be read as a whole to consider whether  the  judge
    has given adequate and sustainable reasons  for  reaching  the  overall
    conclusion where she disbelieved the core of his account.

43. In cases (such as the present) where the credibility of  the  appellant
    is in issue courts adopt a variety of different  evaluative  techniques
    to assess the evidence. The court will for instance consider:  (i)  the
    consistency (or  otherwise)  of  accounts  given  to  investigators  at
    different points in time; (ii) the consistency  (or  otherwise)  of  an
    appellant's narrative case  for  asylum  with  his  actual  conduct  at
    earlier stages and periods in time; (iii) whether, on  facts  found  or
    agreed or which are incontrovertible, the appellant is a person who can
    be categorised as at risk if returned, and, if so, as to the nature and
    extent of that risk (taking account of  applicable  Country  Guidance);
    (iv) the adequacy (or by contrast  paucity)  of  evidence  on  relevant
    issues that, logically, the appellant should be able to adduce in order
    to support his or her case; and (v), the  overall  plausibility  of  an
    appellant's account.

44. The basis of the appellant's claim was that he was a supporter  of  the
    KDPI and helped out in activities for that party. The judge had  regard
    to the objective material relating to that party at paragraph 13  where
    she  set  out  the  Iranians  authorities'  suppression   of   cultural
    activities and expression of Iranians Kurds. At paragraph 13, the judge
    also set out the circumstances of the KDPI, a  banned  organisation  in
    Iran and thus operated from out  of  the  country.  She  set  out  that
    nonetheless the party operated and that there were three categories  of
    person affiliated with the KDPI "members,  sympathisers  and  friends".
    She recorded "letters of recommendation about members  or  sympathisers
    are issued by the Paris office of the KDPI and will be sent directly to
    the asylum administration of the country in question and  not  directly
    to the recommended person himself." This reflected the material set out
    in the Country Information Guidance, Iran: Kurds in  Kurdish  political
    groups, version 2.0 July 2016 and set out paragraph 68 of the  decision
    letter.

45. The judge considered his account that he had carried out the activities
    for a lengthy period of time from 2011 - 2018 and on his evidence  that
    he would distribute leaflets eight times per year. It had also been his
    claim in interview that he had become involved through Z  whom  he  had
    asked repeatedly to let him help. It was through the arrest of Z it  is
    claimed  that  the  authorities  knew  of  his   involvement   in   the
    distribution of leaflets. The  judge  therefore  had  to  consider  the
    evidence as to whether his account of the activities  and  interest  in
    the KDPI were credible, consistent and plausible  and  whether  he  had
    demonstrated to the lower standard of proof that Z  had  been  arrested
    therefore linking him to the activity.

46.  In  interview  the  appellant  was  able  to  answer  basic  questions
    concerning the KDPI (see paragraph 63 to 68). The decision letter noted
    that the answers to those questions were all in the public  domain  and
    that when probed further he was unable to answer  questions  about  the
    party structure, whether there was a youth group. Thus,  the  inference
    raised  was  that  his  knowledge  was  purely  superficial   and   not
    commensurate with his claimed activities from 2011 - 2018.

47. Furthermore, as set out in the decision letter, when  asked  whether  Z
    was a member or a supporter of  the  KDPI  the  appellant  claimed  "he
    didn't say anything I never asked him "and a similar response  was  set
    out in his witness  statement  in  reply  to  the  decision  letter  at
    paragraph 6. The decision letter concluded that  if  his  account  were
    true that he had spoken to Z on a number of occasions about  the  party
    that the appellant will be inquisitive about his role and his  lack  of
    detail relating to  the  man  with  whom  he  worked  impacted  on  his
    credibility.

48. It was against  that  background  that  the  judge  observed  that  the
    appellant was able to answer correctly basic details about  the  KDPI's
    founder, their headquarters and current leader  but  that  "other  than
    that the appellant was unaware  of  any  other  aspects  of  the  party
    because they were based in Iraq and he had no direct  involvement  with
    the party". The judge then considered the lack of  supporting  evidence
    from the KDPI (see paragraph 17, 18 and 19). As set  out  earlier,  the
    country material made it plain that if someone who had given support to
    the KDPI they would be able to confirm this in writing to confirm their
    role and to assist them in establishing their claim.

49. Contrary to the grounds, it is clear that at paragraphs 17 and  18  the
    judge considered the  overall  lack  of  supporting  evidence  for  his
    claimed activities for the KDPI. Whilst  there  is  no  requirement  to
    corroborate an asylum claim, if there  is  information  which  claimant
    could have access to it would be open to a judge to  find  that  it  is
    reasonable for that evidence to be obtained to lend  support  to  their
    claim and establish the  factual  circumstances  (see  decision  in  TK
    (Burundi (2009) EWCA Civ 40). This is  what  the  judge  considered  at
    paragraphs 17 and 18. The judge expressly  considered  his  explanation
    for not providing any information from the KDPI at paragraph 17 and his
    explanation was that he had limited finances and therefore he could not
    join the KDPI in the United Kingdom.

50. It was submitted on behalf of the appellant that he was  on  a  limited
    income  and  therefore  did  not  have  the  resources  to   do   this.
    Furthermore, in the grounds at paragraph 3 it  is  submitted  that  the
    finding made was unreasonable because the appellant was illiterate  and
    therefore, he could not write or email the KDPI.

51. However, it was open to the judge to find that  in  both  respects  the
    appellant had not provided a reasonable explanation  for  the  lack  of
    evidence to  demonstrate  his  involvement  in  the  KDPI.  As  to  the
    financial aspect the judge took into account his claim  that  he  could
    not join the KDPI in the UK due to lack of finances but was entitled to
    place weight in reliance upon the appellant's  own  evidence  that  his
    family were and remained "financially well off" and that  against  that
    background made a finding that his family would be able to  send  funds
    to him to assist in this regard. Or in the alternative, that they would
    have been able to make a payment to obtain information from the KDPI.

52. Whilst the grounds also assert that he was illiterate and therefore  he
    could not undertake any activities, the judge  expressly  rejected  his
    account of being illiterate at paragraph 28  of  her  decision.  Whilst
    this was in the context of his claim that he did not know how to  claim
    asylum, the judge took into account the evidence he had given as to his
    ability to provide information as to what was written on  the  leaflets
    he claimed  he  was  distributing,  his  own  knowledge  of  Iran,  his
    knowledge of the monetary system and numeracy; all of  which  had  been
    set out in the interview. The judge also took into account that his own
    evidence was that he had  been  educated  in  the  mosque  through  his
    grandfather. As Mr Diwncyz submitted there are degrees of literacy  and
    that was a finding open to the judge to make on the evidence before her
    taking into account the evidence in the round.

53. Miss Cleghorn submitted that she struggled to decipher what  the  judge
    had meant it her finding at paragraph 19. In the written grounds it was
    stated that the criticism appeared to be that the appellant did not get
    an email from a family member to support his claim. In this context  it
    is submitted that if he had provided such evidence limited weight would
    been placed on the document and  it  would  have  been  interpreted  as
    entirely "self-serving".

54. At paragraph 19 the judge begins by recording the  appellant's  account
    as to why he had left Iran noting his evidence that he had left because
    his father and R's  brother  were  arrested  and  were  told  that  the
    appellant and R were disputing leaflets. That his  auntie  and  cousins
    had been told by his family to get the appellant out of Iran because he
    had been at his aunt's house when they had been  informed.  As  to  the
    whereabouts of R judge recorded the evidence of the appellant  that  he
    had been in the village but "as far as the appellant knows he left Iran
    at the same time." The judge then went on to set  out  the  appellant's
    claim to have telephoned his  parents  and  therefore  concluded  "this
    would leave it open to the appellant to ask his cousins  or  father  or
    mother to send an email or information to provide some documentation to
    support his claim."

55. I do not consider that that paragraph is difficult to  understand.  The
    judge was simply recording the appellant's evidence as  to  events  and
    his lack of knowledge as to specific details, including  what  happened
    since he left and the position of R. The judge took into  account  that
    the appellant's own evidence that he had been in  contact  with  family
    members in Iran since he had left and therefore he had the  opportunity
    to obtain evidence or documentation from his relatives  in  support  of
    his claim. The assertion in the grounds that  such  evidence  would  be
    "self-serving" and therefore would be ignored by the  Tribunal  is  not
    tenable. A statement from a family member is capable of lending  weight
    to a claim, the issue is whether looked in the round it does so in  the
    particular case question (see R (on the application of SS v SSHD ("self-
    serving statements" [2017] UKUT 0019.) The judge's observation was that
    his lack of detail as to events both in Iran  and  after  he  had  left
    could  have  been  addressed  by  the   appellant   obtaining   further
    information from his relatives.  I  do  not  consider  that  the  judge
    address this from a Westernised perspective and there was  no  evidence
    to support the submission made by Ms Cleghorn that their village had  a
    lack of electricity.

56. Therefore, the findings paragraphs 17 - 19 properly led to the  judge's
    conclusion that the appellant had not taken all steps open  to  him  to
    establish his claim.

57. The judge then considers the circumstances in which he left  Iran.  The
    grounds challenge the findings of paragraph 21 and it is  submitted  by
    that paragraph 21 makes no sense. I do not agree with that  submission.
    The judge found at  paragraph  21  that  the  appellant  had  not  been
    consistent about the events that occurred in Iran. The account given is
    that the authorities became aware of the appellant's activities with  Z
    after Z's arrest. He claimed Z gave his name but only after he had been
    tortured after three days to give the appellant the chance  to  escape.
    However, as the judge noted that account was not  consistent  with  the
    account given in interview. Here he claimed that it was two days  after
    Z's arrest that his father was arrested. At this stage Z and not  given
    the appellant's name and there was no other evidence to link him to any
    activities on his own account and therefore  there  was  no  reason  to
    arrest the appellant's father. That was  the  inconsistency  which  the
    judge referred to paragraph 21- "the appellant has not been  consistent
    with these events which, as they have meant a complete upheaval in  his
    life, are vitally important." The  Judge  also  made  reference  to  an
    inconsistency between his contact with R  when  in  his  interview  his
    account was that he was visiting his aunt made no reference to  contact
    with R.

58. The second point made at paragraph 21 the  judge  found  no  reasonable
    explanation was given as to why he waited  until  his  father's  arrest
    before making plans to leave if he knew Z been arrested. The submission
    made by Miss Cleghorn is simply a disagreement with  that  finding  and
    does not demonstrate that the finding was not one open reasonably  open
    to the judge on the evidence.

59. Miss Cleghorn submits that paragraph 22 does not stand up to  scrutiny.
    Her first submission is that the judge was in  error  by  reaching  the
    conclusion that he was not telling the truth instead of considering all
    the evidence "in the round". Secondly, she submits that  there  was  no
    evidence, or it was speculative that the authorities would be  able  to
    find out the appellant's identity without the need  to  illtreat  Z  to
    obtain the information. I do not accept that submission.  At  paragraph
    22 judge was referring back  to  the  evidence  given  to  support  his
    departure from Iran therefore it was open to the  judge  to  reach  the
    conclusion that she did not believe those events. It was also  open  to
    the judge to take into account the appellant's  evidence  that  he  had
    kept in touch with Z by telephone when in Iran and that if Z  had  been
    arrested, the details on his phone as to those he  had  kept  in  touch
    with would have been available and accessible.

60. As to paragraph 23 the judge gave reasons as to why  she  rejected  his
    account of having photographs of leaders of the KDPI kept in a  box  in
    his home. The judge here was contrasting his lack of involvement in the
    party and lack of his real knowledge with the claim that he  had  saved
    such photographs and found "the appellant does not  know  enough  about
    these people he claims to have pictures of to support this claim."  The
    grounds are a disagreement with that finding do not demonstrate that it
    was not one reasonably open to the judge on the evidence.

61. As to the distribution of leaflets, the judge  at  paragraph  23  found
    that the appellant was  unable  to  explain  why  he  would  distribute
    leaflets at the time of Kurdish festivals when they  would  already  be
    aware of the events. The judge also took  into  account  the  objective
    material  in  the  light  of  the  appellant's  evidence  that  Kurdish
    festivals did take place but considered  that  the  objective  material
    suggested that the authorities had clamped down on such activities  and
    that against that background it  was  likely  that  there  would  be  a
    security presence. She had recorded the appellant's  evidence  that  he
    did not carry out activities if there was such a high security presence
    and therefore the judge concluded "it brings into doubt just  how  many
    times he distribute material if  at  all."  I  would  accept  that  the
    finding could have been better expressed but the point  the  judge  was
    making that was it she did not believe that he had distributed leaflets
    in the circumstances as claimed because the  appellant's  own  evidence
    was that he would not do so if there were high levels of  security  and
    the objective material demonstrated that there had been a crackdown  by
    the authorities and thus they would be limited opportunities  available
    which therefore brought his claim into doubt.

62. The finding at paragraph 24 relates to the nature of his activities and
    that his evidence was vague as to how he could fix flags  high  upon  a
    public building such as a school or where  he  wrote  graffiti  or  the
    villages, he distributed leaflets in. The judge gave three reasons  why
    she reached the conclusion that his account lacked plausibility because
    of the lack of detail and connectivity between his life prior  to  2011
    and after 2011 when he claimed he activities began.

63. The grounds  do  not  expressly  challenge  paragraphs  24  or  25.  At
    paragraph 25 the judge  highlighted  the  inconsistent  nature  of  the
    appellant account. The judge recorded the appellant's evidence that  he
    claims to know that Z had given his name  to  the  authorities  because
    when his family were allowed to visit him in prison, he told them  that
    he managed to survive three days  of  torture  in  order  to  give  the
    appellant time to escape before he gave the appellant's  name  and  R's
    name. However, the judge concluded that  Z  would  not  know  that  the
    appellant knew of his arrest at the time it had  happened  therefore  Z
    would not know when he would need three days  (or  sufficient  time  to
    escape). The appellant's statement claimed that it  was  two  days  and
    three nights but that does not undermine the finding made by the judge.

64. The finding at paragraph 26 related to the appellant's lack  of  detail
    in support of his claim and as he was in contact with his father  there
    would be no reason or explanation as to why that evidence had not  been
    clearly given to him. The judge also  made  findings  under  section  8
    paragraphs 33 and 34 (the failure to claim asylum).

65. In the decision of   SB (Sri Lanka) v SSHD [2019]  EWCA  the  issue  of
    credibility and reasoning was considered as follows:

         "29. The duty is contextual. The level of detail required will vary
         considerably from case to case and I  am  not  suggesting  that  in
         every Tribunal case a detailed evidential exegesis is required.  To
         suggest as much would be  impractical  and  inconsistent  with  the
         recognised limits  on  an  appellate  court  interfering  with  the
         evaluative judgments of trial  courts:  In  Piglowska  v  Piglowski
         [1999] UKHL 27 Lord Hoffman stated: "...the  appellate  court  must
         bear in mind the advantage which the first instance  judge  had  in
         seeing the parties and the other witnesses. This is well understood
         on questions of credibility and findings of primary  fact.  But  it
         goes further than that. It applies also to the  judge's  evaluation
         of those facts. ...". Lord Hoffman cited his own judgment in Biogen
         Inc v Medeva [1996] UKHL 18 (a patent case) to the effect that "...
         findings of fact, even by the most meticulous judge, are inherently
         an incomplete statement of the impression which was made  upon  him
         by  the  primary  evidence.  His  expressed  findings  are   always
         surrounded by a penumbra of imprecision as  to  emphasis,  relative
         weight, minor qualification  and  nuance  ...  of  which  time  and
         language do not permit exact expression,  but  which  may  play  an
         important part in the judge's overall evaluation."

66. In this appeal the judge had the advantage of hearing the  evidence  of
    the appellant and  considering  his  account  in  the  context  of  the
    evidence in the round. Overall the judge made findings of fact  on  the
    evidence before her and I am  not  satisfied  that  those  findings  of
    credibility were flawed in the way submitted by Miss Cleghorn on behalf
    the appellant.

 Decision:

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    an error on a point of law and the appeal is dismissed; the decision of
    the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him.  This direction applies both to the  Appellant  and
to the Respondent.  Failure to comply with  this  direction  could  lead  to
contempt of court proceedings.


Signed [pic]
                                Date:        5th April 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds
