
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11702/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 14 March 2019                              |On 7 May 2019                 |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

                                     F C
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms J Blair, instructed by Duncan Lewis Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Holmes, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant's case is that he is at risk on return  to  Sierra  Leone
    primarily on account of his mental ill-health and the difficulties that
    would arise for him on return to Sierra Leone.

 2. The appellant was born in 1976, entering (he says) the  United  Kingdom
    on 17 January 2002.  An application for leave to remain with  relatives
    here was made on 22 August 2002 was rejected and a  second  application
    on the same basis was refused on 28 March 2006 with a right of  appeal.
    The appeal against that decision was dismissed.

 3. A further application on human rights basis was refused  and  certified
    in 2016 and after that, on 4 October 2016 the appellant claimed asylum.
     That application was refused on 8 September 2017.  Further submissions
    followed and finally, asylum was refused  on  19  September  2018.   An
    appeal against that decision was lodged and it is against that decision
    which this appeal lies.

 4. The appeal against that decision was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Sweet at Hatton Cross on 21 November 2018.  For the reasons set out  in
    the decision of 29 November 2018 he allowed that appeal  on  the  basis
    that the appellant would have difficulty in obtaining  suitable  mental
    health treatment on return, is  likely  to  suffer  mistreatment.   The
    judge concluded that, given the lack of treatment available  in  Sierra
    Leone this appellant would not be  able  to  access  a  hospital  based
    psychiatric care in Sierra Leone, that he would suffer societal  stigma
    and harm due to his mental illness and his return would be in breach of
    Article 3 and 8 of the Human Rights Convention.

 5. The Secretary  of  State  sought  permission  to  appeal  against  that
    decision on the grounds that the judge had erred:

      i) In concluding that the appellant had met the threshold outlined  in
         AM (Zimbabwe) v SSHD [2018] EWCA Civ 64  where  it  had  only  very
         modestly modified the threshold from that established in N  v  SSHD
         [2005] UKHL 31; and

     ii) having applied the incorrect threshold had erred  in  allowing  the
         appeal on both Articles 3 and 8 grounds.

 6. As the judge records at paragraph [22] the medical experts  agree  that
    the appellant is suffering from a psychotic disorder and  he  needs  to
    have in-patient treatment with anti-psychotic medication and assessment
    under the Mental Health Act.  The  appellant  does  not  recognise  his
    condition and he has not undergone any medical treatment.

 7. The judge then directed himself in line with AM (Zimbabwe) [2018]  EWCA
    Civ 64 and then went on to consider the objective evidence  in  respect
    of medical services in Sierra Leone noting that there was very  limited
    cover for mental health illness.  He also took into account the country
    expert report of Dr Abramowitz of 24 October 2018 confirming  that  the
    appellant would not be able to access hospital based  psychiatric  care
    and that he was likely  to  experience  societal  stigma  and  harm  if
    repatriated to Sierra Leone due to his mental illness.

 8. The  judge  took  into  account  that  the  appellant  has  not  sought
    specialist medical treatment and that he  had  been  convicted  on  two
    occasions. He also noted on the other hand that there was  considerable
    evidence, both medical and country experts, that  the  appellant  would
    have difficulty in obtaining suitable mental health treatment in Sierra
    Leone on return and is likely to suffer mistreatment as a result.

 9. The judge then said:-

         "However I am persuaded that the appellant's medical condition  and
         recommended medical treatment, and the lack of  such  treatment  in
         Sierra Leone on  return,  leads  me  to  the  conclusion  that  the
         appellant should indeed succeed under Articles  3  and  8  ECHR  in
         respect of his human rights claim."

10. In a  detailed  Rule  24  response  from  the  respondent's  solicitors
    defending the decision with regard to the self-direction on  Paposhvili
    as amplified by Miss Blair's skeleton  argument  which  emphasises  the
    extent to which the judge relied upon the report from  Dr  Ali  and  Dr
    Abramowitz setting out that there would be real societal  stigma  about
    mental health and outlining the risks that the appellant would face  on
    return to Sierra Leone.

11. Given the particular factual matrix of this case,  which  is  that  the
    appellant suffers from a serious mental ill-health  disorder,  and  the
    unchallenged evidence of the societal difficulties that he  would  face
    on return as a result of his mental ill-health, there is in my  view  a
    material error in this case.  First, the  judge  appears  not  to  have
    directed himself properly to the test in AM and had dealt  specifically
    with the issues which would need to be addressed as  to  the  imminence
    and the fact of lack of treatment.  As Miss Holmes submitted this is  a
    case in which somebody is not in fact at present  receiving  treatment.
    That is something that the judge should have addressed.

12. While it would have been possible for the judge to allow the appeal  on
    the basis of the background evidence as set out by Miss  Blair  in  her
    skeleton argument, the judge did not set  out  sufficiently  the  steps
    necessary to explain why,  on  the  basis  of  the  evidence  which  he
    accepted, there would be a breach of Article 3 in the sense that  there
    was no analysis of the difficulties on return,  what  ill-treatment  he
    would face, and from whom. There was no analysis of whether he would be
    able to access state protection or if not, why not. There is, I  regret
    to say, no proper reasoning set out in the decision as to how the judge
    arrived at an Article 3 decision.  Equally, in failing properly to  set
    out the relevant steps and tests that would need to be undertaken,  the
    judge has failed properly to actually address Article 8  for  the  same
    reasons and I conclude that for these reasons the decision did  involve
    the making of an error of law.

13. Having announced at the hearing that the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal involved the making of an error of law and that  it  would  be
    necessary to remake this decision I now do  so  on  the  basis  of  the
    submissions made.

14. In reaching my decision on asylum and article 3 grounds,  I  apply  the
    lower standard of proof applicable. I have also, even if they  are  not
    expressly referred to, taken into account the  documents  and  evidence
    present to me.

15. There is no challenge to the findings of Judge Sweet who found that the
    appellant had spent the last sixteen years in the  United  Kingdom  and
    whose claim for asylum was based on a number of  factors,  firstly  his
    fear on return that he will be victimised as  he  is  the  son  of  Bob
    Marley; that the Sierra Leone government  would  want  to  recruit  him
    because Bob Marley was his father and that he is thus at risk on return
    because of the political situation.  It was conceded that  a  claim  on
    that basis could  not  succeed  as  that  arose  from  the  appellant's
    delusions. I do not accept that the concession made was that an  asylum
    claim could not succeed if based on other factors.

16. The judge relied on two  medical  reports  from  Dr  Syed  Zia  Ali,  a
    consultant psychiatrist instructed by the appellant's  solicitors,  and
    Dr Wilson dated 27 July 2018 that the appellant  is  suffering  from  a
    psychotic disorder,  needs  to  have  inpatient  treatment  with  anti-
    psychotic medication and to be assessed pursuant to the  Mental  Health
    Act.  It is recorded also that the appellant  does  not  recognise  his
    condition, has not undergone any medical treatment in  respect  of  his
    diagnosis and relies on support of family and  friends  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  The most recent report of 16 November 2018 confirmed that  he
    requires  medication  and  treatment  in  a  psychiatric  hospital  and
    psychological services  to  help  him  to  rehabilitate  him  once  his
    delusional disorder had been treatment.

17. The respondent's case, set out  in  the  refusal  letter  is  that  the
    appellant would receive adequate treatment for his ill-health in Sierra
    Leone having concluded [62] that Dr Ali  had  not  said  what  methods,
    tests or questioning was used to reach the findings that the  appellant
    suffers from an elaborate set of delusional psychosis, although  noting
    [63] that a psychiatric advisor to the Home Office who had reviewed  Dr
    Ali's report also viewed that the mental health  should  be  monitored,
    commenting on the delusional disorder in general terms  only.   It  was
    observed at [67] that he would not change his behaviours if returned to
    Sierra Leone as he himself did not believe that he had a mental  health
    issue.

18. I bear in mind in assessing this case that the appellant needs to  show
    to the lower standard applicable in asylum and humanitarian  protection
    cases, that he has a well-founded fear of persecution (or serious harm)
    on return to Sierra Leone.  The starting point in analysing  this  case
    are the medical reports provided by Dr Ali and Dr  Wilson.   The  first
    report was prepared by Dr Ali who examined  the  appellant  on  26  May
    2018.  The doctor is a consultant psychologist and  is  approved  under
    Section  12(2)  of  the  Mental  Health  Act  1983.   The   appellant's
    solicitors had asked for a report to be undertaken as they believed  he
    was suffering from delusional disorder given the contents of his asylum
    claim, namely that he is the son  of  Bob  Marley;  that  he  is  in  a
    relationship with Rita  Ora  and  fears  the  Freemasons.    Under  the
    heading "Mental State Examination" the doctor wrote the following:-

         "12.2    He had an entire  set  of  elaborate  delusional  beliefs,
             focusing around his exalted birth; that he was the son of  Bob
             Marley and that he had been conceived when Bob Marley  was  in
             Sierra Leone and that Bob Marley was the cause of the  war  in
             Sierra Leone.  He had beliefs that as  a  consequence  he  was
             targeted by the Sierra Leonean people and that  his  life  had
             been miserable as a result of this.

         12.3 He also believes that Bob Marley left a lot of properties  and
             he has exposed  the  president  of  Sierra  Leone  and  Sierra
             Leone's President's official residence is  also  Bob  Marley's
             property.  That if he were to return  he  will  be  having  to
             claim this back, and this would put him in  jeopardy  and  put
             his life at risk if he were to return to Sierra Leone  and  he
             seriously believes this with all conviction.  He  clearly  has
             an elaborate delusional belief system which focuses around Bob
             Marley, Rita Ora, the Freemasons and his risks of returning to
             Sierra Leone."

19. The doctor noted that the appellant does not believe he  has  a  mental
    illness [12.4] and [12.5(c)] he clearly has a psychotic disorder  which
    requires treatment in an environment which focuses primarily on  mental
    health treatment rather than being in a confined environment like  IRC.
    A 24 hour monitoring of mental health was recommended  ideally  in  the
    psychiatric hospital not in a detention centre.

20. Dr Wilson was commissioned by  the  Home  Office  to  review  Dr  Ali's
    report.  What the doctor stated:

    Based on the information submitted, the applicant appears to be acutely
    psychotic although his symptoms appear somewhat  chronic.   It  is  not
    clear that he has received any treatment for his condition which  would
    typically compromise anti-psychotic medication.  At this  point  it  is
    difficult to advise that the applicant would be fit to  fly  given  the
    nature of his ongoing psychotic disorder.

21. In general  terms  delusions  disorder  can  respond  poorly  to  anti-
    psychotic medication although without a trial of appropriate treatment,
    it is difficult  to  establish  whether  his  prognosis  will  improve.
    Ideally this would amount to an in-patient setting, probably under  the
    Mental Health Act.  At this stage, I do not think he  is  suitable  for
    dispersal given the fact he is mentally unwell  with  active  psychotic
    symptoms.  My view is that he  needs  appropriate  inpatient  treatment
    with anti-psychotic medication to be assessed under the  Mental  Health
    Act given his symptoms.

22. In a further report following an interview on 3 November 2018,  Dr  Ali
    said this, in the report dated 16 November 2018.

         "Current Presentation

         11.1 Since I last saw the appellant  there  is  no  change  in  his
             presentation  and  he  continues  to  exhibit  his  delusional
             belief.  He is now spending more time on  various  forums  and
             social media and playing music and broadcasting his  music  on
             social media.  He now has the conviction that there is chatter
             on social media about him being Bob Marley's son.  He is  able
             to pick up the coded message and various references to him  on
             social media."

23. Further on in the  report  at  [11.4]  it  is  recorded  that  he  very
    seriously believes he is the son of Bob Marley and that this  had  been
    kept from him.

24. At section 12, commenting on the appellant's mental state,  the  doctor
    recorded at [12.4] that he was oriented according to the time and place
    of person but was absolutely lacking in the belief that he has a mental
    illness [12.5] and does not at [12.6] have capacity with regards to his
    treatment to his illness and is not able to make an  informed  decision
    regarding illness and treatment.

25. In response to specific questions the doctor concluded that  there  had
    been  no  significant  improvement  or  deterioration  since  the  last
    assessment and that he was able to instruct representatives and to give
    evidence to the Tribunal.

26. Turning to the prognosis if he received no treatment or  care,  Dr  Ali
    opines that the delusions have resulted  in  him  being  excluded  from
    various  relationships  and  contacts  and  that  there  has   been   a
    significant decline in his overall functioning  where  he  has  focused
    mainly around his delusional beliefs.  It is  also  opined  that  there
    will be a worsening of these delusions  to  the  extent  that  he  will
    eventually become incapacitated and no will to function in society.

27. Asked specifically about the removal from the UK to Sierra Leone Dr Ali
    said this:

         "The appellant's entire delusional belief is focused  around  being
         Bob Marley's son and his exalted birth, his relationship  with  the
         ex-president and the fact that his properties in Sierra  Leone  are
         currently being occupied,  of  willing  faction  in  Sierra  Leone.
         Therefore as such someone who has an ongoing active psychosis to be
         removed to a country such as Sierra Leone, is tantamount  to  being
         punished.  Sierra Leone has a very poor  healthcare  infrastructure
         and even poor or no mental facilities.  If he is  going  to  Sierra
         Leone because he believes his  life  was  at  risk,  therefore  his
         conviction is such that he cannot fathom the idea of  returning  to
         such a place where he is likely to be put to death, the fear  alone
         could result in his mental health state completely collapsing."

28. Ms Holmes made no submissions that I should not accept this account  of
    the appellant's mental ill-health and I am satisfied that Dr Ali was in
    a position to give an accurate diagnosis of the appellant's  condition.
    I accept that the appellant  suffers  from  delusions  of  a  psychotic
    nature and I accept also, importantly, that he has no insight into  his
    illness or that he does in fact need treatment.  First,  the  issue  is
    not whether there would be treatment available for him.  Whilst  it  is
    clear that he does need treatment he appears to lack  the  capacity  to
    make a decision about this, certainly under  the  law  of  England  and
    Wales.

29. There is no suggestion that the appellant would act violently on return
    to Sierra Leone but I concluded there is a real risk of him  not  being
    able to conduct proper relationships with people, given the evidence of
    this from Dr Ali, nor is it likely that he would be able to conceal his
    delusional beliefs from those interacting with him.   I  bear  in  mind
    that on return he would have no family to protect him and that he would
    be facing a difficult adjustment to life in Sierra  Leone  having  left
    the country which has been through a significant  number  of  upheavals
    since 2002.

30. It is in assessing what is likely to happen to the appellant on  return
    to Sierra Leone the starting point must be that he is unlikely to  seek
    treatment as he is unaware that he is suffering from  any  mental  ill-
    health.  It is evident from Dr Abramowitz's report  that  Sierra  Leone
    has little capacity for addressing the needs of individuals with  major
    mental illnesses such as delusional or  schizotypic  disorders  [16(a)]
    and that [17] in the one psychiatric hospital  providing  24-hour  care
    patients are shackled by their hands or feet without proper clothing or
    beds. The alternative is the "City of Rest" which is a rundown building
    that houses 40 patients crammed  into  small  rooms  and  patients  are
    chained by the ankle when they first arrive and  that  although  things
    appear to be getting better there is little evidence of this.  There is
    little or no community based treatment.

31. This information is well supported  by  citations  to  sources  and  is
    evidence on one which I can rely.  I conclude I can also  rely  on  the
    evidence set out at section 19 of the report that Sierra Leoneans  with
    major mental illnesses  are  subject  to  extreme  exposure  to  abuse,
    neglect and violations which may include  forced  physical  containment
    and may include false labour.  It is also of note  that  the  appellant
    has  no  social  support  network  to  ensure  his  safe   return   and
    reintegration and without that he is  likely  to  experience  community
    ostracism and rejection.  It is stated also that "Sierra Leoneans, like
    many  West  Africans  with  severe  mental  illnesses,   are   socially
    ostracised.  Their routine  is  subjected  to  public  taunts  shaming,
    teasing, laughter,  ridicule  and  non-verbal  harassment  like  having
    vegetables or trash thrown at them by children and youths.  With formal
    healthcare options essentially non-existent for the majority of  people
    who experience mental illness, local socio-cultural  attitudes  towards
    mental illness are particularly important.  Mental  illness  in  Sierra
    Leone (and across the West Africa region) is strongly  stigmatised  and
    based on spiritual and religious beliefs.  Despite twenty plus years of
    efforts to combat such stigma, cultural mores and harm individuals with
    mental illness remain pervasively regionally and globally.

32. Of particular  note  is  the  observation  that  behaviour  and  speech
    associated symptoms of delusional disorders continue to be stigmatised.
    That, in the appellant's situation, is relevant.

33. In the circumstances I conclude that there is significant merit in  the
    observation that the  appellant  would  have  difficulty  in  obtaining
    housing and would be at risk of being stigmatised, punished and so-on.

34. Further, Dr Abramowitz is of the opinion that the appellant  would  not
    be assisted by the Sierra Leone government  [21]  giving  his  lack  of
    resources  and  that  the  negative  stigmatising   attitudes   towards
    individuals with mental illness are so widespread  it  is  likely  that
    individual governments share such views and it  is  unlikely  that  the
    government of Sierra Leone would seek to open conflict with  those  who
    take a contrary view such as traditional healers.  I conclude that this
    is evidence on which I can rely.

35. Given the lack of kin or other forms  of  support  in  Sierra  Leone  I
    conclude that the appellant would be at risk on return  of  significant
    ill-treatment by the general population flowing from how his mental ill-
    health manifests itself.  There is a real risk that this will  lead  to
    him becoming incapacitated and unable to function, exacerbated by  ill-
    treatment he would face and the inability to the  active  ill-treatment
    he is  likely  to  face  as  a  result  of  his  delusions  manifesting
    themselves.  I find that the appellant is at real risk of ill-treatment
    from society in Sierra Leone as to amount to persecution and/or serious
    harm or engage Article 3.

36. I conclude also that the appellant would  not  receive  any  assistance
    from the State in protecting  him  from  any  abuse  from  the  general
    population.  He faces being  put  compulsorily  into  a  mental  health
    hospital where he would be at risk of treatment which is on  the  basis
    of what the evidence set out above degrading and inhuman.   I  conclude
    also that there is a real risk that the Sierra  Leone  State  would  be
    unable  or  unwilling  to  assist  the  appellant  given  the  societal
    attitudes towards those who are mentally ill in  any  event.   Further,
    this appellant is unlikely to be able to obtain assistance  given  that
    he himself fears the State and  has  no  insight  whatsoever  into  his
    illness.  He has no idea  that  he  is  in  need  of  help.   For  this
    combination of reasons, I conclude that there would be  no  sufficiency
    of protection for the appellant in  Sierra  Leone.  In  addition  I  am
    satisfied that the risk to the appellant would exist wherever  he  were
    in Sierra Leone as is clear from the medical reports before me.

37. Accordingly, I conclude that the appellant has a well-founded  fear  of
    persecution in Sierra Leone on account of how  he  would  as  a  person
    suffering from mental ill-health, be  treated.   I  am  satisfied  that
    those who have significant, and in this case apparently chronic, mental
    disorders are treated as different from the rest of society  in  Sierra
    Leone and are seen as a particular social group.  Accordingly, I  allow
    the appeal on Refugee Convention and Human Rights  Convention  grounds.
    In the circumstances, it is unnecessary for me to  address  any  issues
    regarding Article 8.



Notice of Decision

      1) The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making  of  an
         error of law and I set it aside;

      2) I remake the decision by allowing the appeal on asylum grounds  and
         on human rights grounds on the basis that the appellant is at  risk
         of ill-treatment of sufficient severity to engage Article 3.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date 18 April 2019

[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul
