
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
PA/11318/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House               |                  Decision & Reasons    |
|                                   |Promulgated                             |
|on 1 February 2018                 |                  on 12 February 2018   |
|                                   |                                        |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE blum

                                   Between

                                     AS
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms M Gherman, Counsel, instructed by Virgo
                    Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Fijiwallah, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

     1. This is an appeal against the decision of Judge of  the  First-tier
        Tribunal N J Bennett (the judge), promulgated on 26 September 2017,
        dismissing the appellant's appeal against the respondent's decision
        dated 29 September 2016 refusing his protection  and  human  rights
        claims.



   Factual Background


     2. The appellant is a national of Iran, of Kurdish ethnicity, date  of
        birth 10 November 1994. He claims to have arrived in the  UK  on  6
        March 2016. He made an appointment to  claim  asylum  on  10  March
        2016. His asylum claim centred on his  involvement  with  the  PJAK
        (Party of Free Life for Kurdistan), a pro-Kurdish group that  often
        carried  out  armed  attacks  in  North-West  Iran,  sometimes   on
        civilians. The following is a summary of his  account.  In  January
        2015 he began working for a friend of his father, Mr H, who  was  a
        member of the PJAK and told him about the group. Twice a  month  Mr
        S, a friend of Mr H, would bring boxes to Mr H's garage which  were
        collected by other people in vehicles. The  appellant  helped  load
        the boxes onto the  vehicles.  He  was  told  that  they  contained
        medical and other supplies for the PJAK.


     3. On 9 February 2016 Mr S telephoned the appellant and told him  that
        two people would be coming to collect some goods. Mr H was ill  and
        therefore not present at the garage. After arriving Mr S  sent  the
        appellant to a nearby restaurant to get some food. On  leaving  the
        restaurant the appellant saw that the Iranian security  forces  had
        arrested Mr S and the other men at the garage. The  appellant  went
        to a friend's house where he spent the  night.  The  next  day  the
        appellant was informed by his friend, who visited  the  appellant's
        house, that the security  services  had  left  a  warrant  for  his
        arrest. Arrangements were made  for  the  appellant  to  leave  the
        country.


     4. The respondent did not accept the appellant gave a credible account
        of his involvement with the PJAK,  or  that  he  left  the  country
        illegally. The appellant's knowledge of the PJAK  was  limited  and
        some of the information he provided was incorrect.  The  respondent
        relied on inconsistent evidence allegedly given  by  the  appellant
        relating to the arrest warrant, and because he  could  not  explain
        incriminating evidence allegedly found on his mobile phone  by  the
        Iranian security services.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

     5. The judge heard  evidence  from  the  appellant,  who  adopted  his
        statement dated 10 November 2016, through examination in chief  and
        cross  examination.  At  paragraph  20  the  judge  summarised  the
        respondent's 'Country  Information  and  Guidance'  (CIG)  document
        relating to Kurds  and  Kurdish  political  groups  in  Iran.  This
        indicated that the Iranian government  does  not  tolerate  Kurdish
        political parties and regards the PJAK as a banned terrorist group.




     6. At paragraph 21 the judge accepted  that  the  appellant  displayed
        "some knowledge of the PJAK" when interviewed and that he may  have
        learnt  this  from  someone  with  whom  he   worked.   The   judge
        acknowledged the appellant's claim that all he did  for  the  party
        was help load boxes at Mr H's garage which were brought there by Mr
        S. The judge therefore accepted that the appellant may have  learnt
        about the PJAK from Mr H and that he  may  have  been  involved  in
        helping Mr H load vehicles with goods destined for the PJAK.


     7. From paragraphs 22 to 28 the judge gave reasons for  rejecting  the
        appellant's account of the raid on Mr H's garage. At  paragraph  23
        the judge specifically rejected  the  appellant's  claim  that  his
        mother had lost or misplaced the arrest warrant.  The  judge  noted
        that the arrest warrant was "... a most important  document"  which
        went to the heart of the claim, and that  his  mother  should  have
        realised the need to keep it safe because its absence  could  cause
        her  serious  problems.  The  security  services  had   asked   the
        appellant's mother where he was  and  told  her  to  give  him  the
        warrant.  If  she  was  unable  to  produce  the  warrant  to   the
        authorities they would conclude that she had given it  to  him  and
        that she knew more than she was telling them. The judge referred to
        background  documents  indicating  that  the  Iranians  authorities
        applied considerable  pressure  to  family  members  to  make  them
        disclose a suspect's whereabouts.


     8. Given that the appellant had been legally represented since  August
        2016 the judge considered that his late discovery of  the  fate  of
        the warrant (his mother has lost or misplaced  the  warrant),  just
        before an initial appeal in the  First-tier  Tribunal  in  November
        2016, lacked credibility. The judge noted the absence of any  other
        evidence, such as local newspaper reports, confirming the  raid  on
        the garage, and there was no evidence that he attempted  to  obtain
        such evidence. Nor was there any evidence from the mother about the
        arrest  warrant.  The  judge  did  not  accept  that  her  age  and
        illiteracy were good reasons for the absence of such evidence given
        that she could have asked others, such as the appellant's uncle, to
        assist  her  in  writing  a  letter.  The  judge   considered   the
        appellant's claim that the authorities had seized his mobile  phone
        as speculative, and noted that he could not explain  how,  even  if
        the authorities had his phone, they would have been  aware  of  his
        involvement in loading boxes or his home address.


     9. At paragraph 29 the judge stated,


          Miss Gherman accepted in her skeleton argument that the  Tribunal
          found in [SSH and HR (illegal exit: failed asylum seeker) Iran CG
          [2016] UKUT 00308 (IAC)] that there was no real risk to returnees
          on the basis of ethnicity alone unless that person was  otherwise
          of interest to  the  Iranian  authorities.  Having  rejected  the
          appellant's account, I do not accept that it is reasonably likely
          that the Iranian authorities are aware of  his  support  for  the
          PJAK which, he says, was confined to helping Mr H and  Mr  S,  or
          that they will become aware of this at some future date. I do not
          accept that it is reasonably likely that he will  engage  in  any
          activities after returning to Iran which  manifests  support  for
          the PJAK. He became involved with the PJAK to help his  employer.
          He has not expressed any wish to continuing [sic] helping it.  He
          has not expressed any continuing interest in  the  PJAK  or  done
          anything to support it in this country. If he  is  asked  why  he
          left Iran, he can give his real reasons, which were not  imparted
          to me. It is fanciful to suggest that he will be asked about  his
          or his previous employer's political sympathies.


    10. The judge consequently dismissed the protection appeal.  The  judge
        gave brief reference to an article 8 argument advanced on behalf of
        the appellant but concluded, in light of his factual findings, that
        there  were   no   significant   obstacles   to   the   appellant's
        reintegration into Iran.



The grounds of appeal and the error of law hearing

    11. The grounds are twofold. The  1st  ground  relies  on  the  judge's
        limited credibility findings. Given that the judge found  that  the
        appellant supported the PJAK, and was therefore connected  in  some
        way with an illegal political party, there was be a real risk  that
        he would disclose his involvement when interrogated  on  return  to
        Iran. In reliance on RT (Zimbabwe) [2012]  UKSC  38  the  appellant
        could not be expected to lie in order to  achieve  safety  in  Iran
        and, as he would come into direct contact with the  authorities  if
        returned home, who had both the time and inclination to interrogate
        returnees (AB and Others (internet activity -  state  of  evidence)
        Iran [2015] UKUT 0257), he could  not  be  reasonably  expected  to
        conceal his political support and actions.


    12. The 2nd ground contends  that  the  judge  placed  disproportionate
        weight on the appellant's inability to produce the arrest  warrant.
        The grounds criticise the judge's reliance on a lack of  supporting
        evidence for the raid and contend that he placed too great a weight
        on other matters without considering  any  explanation  as  to  why
        other documentary evidence might be lacking. Permission was granted
        on both grounds.


    13. Ms Gherman adopted and expanded upon her grounds at the  'error  of
        law' hearing. She submitted that the appellant would be at risk  if
        the  Iranian  authorities  became  aware  of  his  albeit   limited
        involvement in the transportation of goods  for  the  PJAK.  I  was
        referred to paragraph 36 of RT. A person should never have  to  lie
        in order to avoid persecutory treatment. With respect  to  the  2nd
        ground, it was submitted that the judge  attached  disproportionate
        weight to the appellant's inability to produce the  arrest  warrant
        and that he failed to take into account the  explanation  given  by
        the appellant.


    14. Ms Fijiwala submitted there was no material error.  The  judge,  at
        paragraph 20, took  into  account  the  Iranian  regime's  lack  of
        toleration of opposition political  parties,  but  found  that  the
        appellant's involvement with an  opposition  political  party  only
        extended to loading boxes onto vehicles. The  judge's  findings  at
        paragraph 29 suggested that the appellant would  not  have  to  lie
        because his involvement with the PJAK was only  tangential  to  his
        employment by Mr H and he would not continue supporting the  party.
        I reserved my decision.

Discussion

    15. It is appropriate to consider the 2nd ground of  appeal  first.  Ms
        Gherman relies on TK (Burundi) [2009] EWCA Civ 40  to  support  her
        submission that the judge attached  a  disproportionate  amount  of
        weight to the appellant's inability to produce the arrest  warrant,
        that the judge focused to a disproportionate extent on the  absence
        of the arrest warrant, and that he failed to take  account  of  the
        appellant's explanation for the absence of this document.


    16. I cannot accept these submissions. The arrest warrant was clearly a
        central feature of the appellant's account. At paragraphs 22 to  26
        the  judge  gave  careful  and  detailed   consideration   to   the
        appellant's account concerning the arrest warrant. At paragraph  23
        the judge specifically engaged with the explanation provided by the
        appellant for  his  failure  to  produce  the  arrest  warrant.  In
        rejecting the appellant's claim that his mother lost  or  misplaced
        the arrest warrant the judge noted the significance that the arrest
        warrant would have had for the appellant's mother. It was  open  to
        the judge to conclude that the absence of the arrest warrant  could
        cause the appellant's mother significant problems  given  that  the
        Iranian authorities applied considerable pressure to family members
        to make them  disclose  a  suspect's  whereabouts.  The  judge  was
        additionally entitled to rely on the  appellant's  relatively  late
        discovery that the warrant was missing as a factor undermining this
        aspect of his account, especially given that the appellant had been
        legally represented from August 2016. The  judge  was  additionally
        entitled, for the reasons given in paragraph 25,  to  rely  on  the
        absence of any letter or any other evidence  from  the  appellant's
        mother detailing her involvement with the arrest warrant.


    17. The judge provided a number of other reasons to support his finding
        that the appellant's account of  the  raid  on  the  garage  was  a
        fabrication. Given that the authorities would  have  engaged  in  a
        successful raid on a  terrorist  organisation  if  the  appellant's
        account was accepted, the judge was entitled to note the absence of
        any local newspaper report concerning the raid. It was open to  the
        judge at paragraph 26 to draw an adverse inference relating to  the
        timing of the disclosure of the arrest warrant at the initial stage
        of the  investigation.  Moreover,  given  the  timeline  of  events
        provided by the appellant the judge was again  rationally  entitled
        to hold against him the "very considerable speed" with which he was
        identified by the Iranian authorities.

  18.  The  challenge  to  the  judge's  adverse  credibility  findings   is
      essentially a disagreement with  the  weight  the  judge  attached  to
      certain aspects  of  the  appellant's  account.  The  judge's  factual
      findings were however rationally open to him on  the  evidence  before
      him and were supported by legally sustainable reasons.


  19. I turn now to the 1st ground of appeal. It is important to note at the
      outset that the judge did not find that  the  appellant  was  involved
      with the PJAK other than by helping Mr H and Mr S to load boxes  [21].
      In  his  statement  (2(c))  the  appellant  indicated  that   he   was
      sympathetic to the PJAK. It was never his case that he was a member of
      the organisation or that he provided any other support for them  other
      than by loading boxes in the course of his employment. The judge found
      that the garage had never been raided, and there was  consequently  no
      basis for the authorities to suspect that the appellant had ever  been
      involved, to any extent, with a proscribed organisation. At  [29]  the
      judge did not find it  reasonably  likely  that  the  appellant  would
      engage in any activities after being  returned  to  Iran  which  would
      manifest support for the PJAK. The judge specifically found  that  the
      appellant became involved with the PJAK to help his employer, that  he
      had not expressed any wish to continue helping the  organisation,  and
      that he had not expressed any continuing interest in the  PJAK.  These
      were factual findings rationally open to the  judge  on  the  evidence
      before him.

  20. The judge's findings at paragraph  29  are  to  the  effect  that  the
      appellant does not have any continuing interest in the PJAK  and  that
      his  very  limited  prior  involvement  was  only  tangential  to  his
      employment. As the judge determined that the appellant  did  not  have
      any continuing interest in the PJAK he would not be  required  to  lie
      about his political beliefs if questioned on return. As the judge made
      clear in paragraph 29, if the appellant was asked why he left Iran  he
      would be able to give his real reasons, which were not imparted to the
      judge, but which, in view of the judge's findings, did not stem from a
      fear of the authorities as a result of loading  boxes  for  the  PJAK.
      There was no reason for the authorities to suspect that the  appellant
      was ever involved with the PJAK. There was therefore little evidential
      basis capable of supporting a finding that he would be at real risk of
      being questioned about the PJAK given that the authorities would  have
      no reason to suspect him  of  any  involvement.  The  appellant  would
      therefore not be required to modify his behaviour or lie in  order  to
      avoid persecutory treatment.

Notice of Decision

The First-tier Tribunal did not make any material legal  error.  The  appeal
is dismissed.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  in
this appeal is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.  This
direction applies both to the appellant and to the  respondent.  Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


[pic]                               8 February 2018

Signed                                  Date
Upper Tribunal Judge Blum
