
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  PA/12240/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 21 November 2019                  |On 28 November 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          ABDULRAHMAN MOHAMMED ALI
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr A Govan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr U Aslam, of McGlashan MacKay, Solicitors


                          DETRMINATION AND REASONS

 1. Parties are as above, but the rest of this determination refers to them
    as they were in the FtT.

 2. FtT Judge Mrs Debra C Clapham  allowed  the  appellant's  appeal  by  a
    decision promulgated on 25 June 2019.

 3. Permission to appeal to the UT was granted on grounds set out at  [1  -
    14] of the SSHD's application dated 5 July 2019.

 4. Mr Govan referred at the outset to SB (refugee revocation;  IDP  camps)
    Somalia [2019] UKUT 00358 (IAC), published only recently.

 5. Mr Aslam did not concede that SB  shows  that  the  FtT  erred  in  its
    decision, but he accepted that although not available to  the  FtT,  SB
    sets out the criteria by which its decision must now be assessed.

 6. Mr Aslam showed in his submissions that parts of  the  SSSHD's  grounds
    are badly taken.  It is convenient to dispose of these first.

 7. The decision was based to  a  large  extent  on  an  expert  report  by
    Professor Nurse, in turn based on a questionnaire sent to the appellant
    for completion through his representatives.  The grounds at [7] suggest
    that the questionnaire might not have been completed by  the  appellant
    in presence of his representatives but "taken away to be  completed  at
    his leisure".

 8. The report itself, and other materials which were before the FtT,  show
    that the questionnaire was completed by the appellant  in  presence  of
    his representatives in the manner prescribed by Professor Nurse.   That
    information may not have been before the author of the  grounds;  as  I
    understand it, applications for permission are prepared in  a  separate
    unit, with access to the decision but not to  the  complete  file.   Mr
    Govan  did  not  mention  this  matter  in  his  submissions,  but  the
    suggestion should not have found its way into the grounds in the  first
    place, and should not have been left standing.

 9. The grounds at [8] say that less weight should have been given  to  the
    evidence of a witness on the assumption that he had "not undergone  the
    rigours of cross examination".  There cannot be even a weak excuse  for
    this ground, because  the  decision  records  the  examination,  cross-
    examination and re-examination of the witness in detail at [35  -  63].
    Again, Mr Govan did not mention this matter in his submissions, but  it
    should never have been in the grounds, nor been left there.

10.  Mr  Govan  condensed  the  grounds  into  (1)  error  undermining  the
    conclusion that the appellant is a Somali  Bajuni,  and  (2)  error  in
    concluding at [98] that as a Somali Bajuni he faced  "a  real  risk  of
    having no alternative but to live in makeshift accommodation within  an
    IDP camp", and so allowing the appeal "under s117 and article 3".

11. Mr Govan said, correctly, that if ground  1  was  made  out,  ground  2
    became irrelevant; but it is convenient to deal with ground 2 first, as
    it also requires a set aside, if made out, and its resolution  is  more
    obvious.

12. At [94] the judge said that applying MOJ & others (return to Mogadishu)
    Somalia CG [2014] UKUT 00442 the appellant could not succeed under  the
    Refugee Convention  "since  relocation  is  now  feasible".   Mr  Aslam
    accepted that no error could be suggested therein, as  the  authorities
    stood even before SB.

13.  Despite  valiant  efforts  by  Mr  Aslam,  I  find   that   conclusion
    irreconcilable with the conclusion at [98].   The  outcomes  are  self-
    contradictory.

14. At  [95-96]  the  judge  finds  that  the  appellant  cannot  meet  the
    exceptions to deportation set out in paragraphs 399  and  399A  of  the
    immigration rules.  The appellant suggests no  error  in  that.   Those
    conclusions appear to have been practically inevitable.

15. At  [97]  the  judge  turns  to  whether  there  are  "very  compelling
    circumstances in terms of  s117  (c)".   The  reference  should  be  to
    section 117C(6) of the 2002 Act, "very  compelling  circumstances  over
    and above those described in exceptions 1 and 2", which is mirrored  in
    paragraph 398 of the rules, "very  compelling  circumstances  over  and
    above those described in paragraphs 399 and 399A".

16. Such very compelling circumstances would also have to go beyond matters
    which had been held to defeat the Refugee Convention claim  on  grounds
    of relocation.

17. SB is headnoted thus:

         "(1)     In Secretary of  State  for  the  Home  Department  v  MS
         (Somalia) [2019]  EWCA  Civ  1345,  the  Court  of   Appeal   has
         authoritatively decided that refugee status can be revoked  on  the
         basis that the refugee now has the ability to  relocate  internally
         within  the  country  of  their  nationality  or  former   habitual
         residence. The  authoritative  status  of  the  Court  of  Appeal's
         judgments in MS (Somalia) is not affected by the fact that counsel
         for MS conceded that internal relocation could in principle lead to
         cessation of refugee status. There is also nothing in the House  of
         Lords'  opinions  in R  (Hoxha)   v   Special   Adjudicator   and
         Another [2005] UKHL 19 that compels a contrary conclusion to that
         reached by the Court of Appeal.

         (2)      The conclusion of the Court  of  Appeal  in Secretary  of
         State for the Home Department v Said [2016] EWCA Civ 442 was that
         the country guidance in MOJ & Ors (Return to  Mogadishu)  Somalia
         CG [2014] UKUT 442 (IAC) did not include any finding that a person
         who finds themselves in an IDP  camp  is  thereby  likely  to  face
         Article  3  ECHR  harm  (having  regard  to  the   high   threshold
         established by D v United Kingdom (1997) 24 EHRR 43 and N v United
         Kingdom (2008) 47 EHRR 39). Although that conclusion may have been
         obiter, it was confirmed by Hamblen LJ in MS (Somalia).  There  is
         nothing in  the  country  guidance  in AA  and  Others (conflict;
         humanitarian  crisis;  returnees;  FGM)  Somalia [2011]  UKUT  445
         (IAC) that requires a different view to be taken of the position of
         such a person. It will be an error of law for a judge to refuse  to
         follow the Court of Appeal's conclusion on this issue.

18. It is the second headnote which is relevant to this case.

19. The decision at [98] turns on the appellant being at risk of having  to
    live in an IDP camp, which (a) contradicts the finding at [95]; (b) was
    not in itself sufficient, in terms of MOJ; and (c) is plainly  now  not
    sufficient, in terms of SB.

20. Parties agreed that if set aside on ground 2, the case should be listed
    to enable both sides to lead such further evidence as they thought fit,
    and to make further submissions.

21. Ground 1 is less clear cut.  Parts of it are not well taken,  as  dealt
    with above.  Some parts are re-argument.  Others are arguments that, as
    Mr Aslam pointed out, could have been advanced in  the  FtT.   However,
    there was some force  in  the  respondent's  critique  of  the  judge's
    treatment of the evidence from the appellant, both directly and through
    the medium of the report by Professor Nurse - in particular,  that  the
    more recent  analysis  had  been  accepted  uncritically,  with  little
    reference to how the appellant presented himself at an earlier date.

22. It would be artificial and unworkable to  evaluate  evidence  from  the
    appellant about his prospects in Somalia without an overall assessment,
    beginning with his claim about his place  of  origin.  The  issues  are
    inextricable.  I do not limit the exercise by  purporting  to  preserve
    any previous findings.

23. The decision of the FtT is set aside, and stands only as  a  record  of
    what was said at the hearing.

24. The nature of the case is such that it is appropriate under section  12
    of the 2007 Act, and under Practice Statement 7.2, to remit to the  FtT
    for an entirely fresh hearing.

25. The member(s) of the FtT chosen to consider the case are not to include
    Judge Clapham.

26. The FtT would no doubt be assisted by written submissions, at least  in
    outline, from both sides.

27. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.

      [pic]

      22 November 2019
      UT Judge Macleman




