
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12969/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Centre City Tower, Birmingham|Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11 September 2017                  |On 13 September 2017                 |
|                                      |                                     |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON

                                   Between

                                bc (albania)
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 Secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J. Fraczyk, Counsel instructed by Fountain
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr G. Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant appeals to the Upper Tribunal from the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge Juss sitting at Sheldon Court, Birmingham on
    19 January 2017) dismissing her appeal  against  the  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State to refuse her  protection  claim,  although  it  was
    accepted by the Competent Authority that  she  had  been  a  victim  of
    trafficking for sexual purposes.  While the First-tier Tribunal did not
    make an anonymity direction, and  I  was  not  asked  to  make  one,  I
    consider  that  the  appellant  should  be  accorded  anonymity  as   a
    vulnerable person who was the victim of rape and now has mental  health
    problems (it being accepted by Judge Juss that the appellant was forced
    into prostitution and now has mental health problems).

The Reason for the Grant of Permission to Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 2. On 13 July 2017, a First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  granted  the  appellant
    permission to appeal for the following reason:

         It is arguable that the Judge has misdirected himself by  accepting
         all of the Appellant's arguments but in the notice of decision  has
         dismissed the Appellant's appeal.

Reasons for Finding an Error of Law

 3. Rule 31 of the Tribunal Procedure Rules 2014 provides that the Tribunal
    may at any time correct any clerical mistake or any accidental slip  or
    omission in a decision, direction or any document produced by it, by  -
    (a) providing notification of the alleged decision or direction,  or  a
    copy of the amended  document  to  all  parties;  and  (b)  making  any
    necessary amendment to any information published  in  relation  to  the
    decision, direction or document.

 4. There is a clear error "on the face of the record" as all  the  Judge's
    reasoning points towards the appeal being allowed, and it  is  only  in
    the formal conclusion at the end  that  he  notifies  his  decision  to
    dismiss the appeal. I am satisfied that if the anomaly in the Notice of
    Decision had been drawn to his attention, he would have corrected it to
    say that he was allowing the appeal. I am certain that this is what  he
    intended to say.

 5. The Specialist Appeals Team rightly accepted in their Rule 24  Response
    that the decision was vitiated by a material error of law, and that  it
    should be set aside and remade.

The Remaking of the Decision

 6. Mr Bates did not oppose the decision being remade  in  the  Appellant's
    favour. The Judge has given  adequate  reasons  for  finding  that  the
    Appellant faces a real  risk  of  persecution  on  return  to  Albania,
    including but not limited to a real risk of re-trafficking, bearing  in
    mind her particular risk profile  and  her  vulnerability,  and  having
    regard inter alia to Para (h) of TD  and  AD  (trafficked  women)  (CG)
    [2016] UKUT 92 (IAC).

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  contained  an  error  of  law,  and
accordingly the  decision  is  set  aside  and  the  following  decision  is
substituted: the appellant's appeal  is  allowed  on  protection  and  human
rights grounds.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 12 September 2017


Judge Monson

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD


No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date 12 September 2017


Judge Monson

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge

