

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
PA/12972/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at North Shields
Decision Promulgated
On 24th November 2017                                                On
19th December 2017



                                   Before


                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FARRELLY

                                   Between


                                   MRS.L Z
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                              Appellant

                                     And


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                    Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:
For the Respondent:  Mr Mills, Home Office Presenting Officer.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

   1. The appellant has been given permission to appeal the decision of
      First-tier Judge Turnock who dismissed her claim for protection from
      her former husband. This was on the basis it was arguable the judge
      did not deal adequately with the question of sufficiency of protection
      and relocation for the appellant is accepted victim of domestic
      violence.


   2. She was born in May 1970 and married in December 1987. Her husband was
      born in 1962. They lived in the capital, Tirana. They had two sons, A,
      born in June 1989 and B, born in July 1992. She obtained a divorce in
      April 2004, having separated from her husband in 2003. Custody of the
      youngest child was to the appellant and custody of the elder to his
      father with mutual visitation rights. In fact the children lived with
      their father but they saw each other because they continued to live in
      a converted factory, each occupying separate parts. The appellant said
      her parents were deceased but she had siblings, some of whom were in
      Albania. She said they did not maintain contact but she remains close
      to her brother in Canada who funded the journey to the United Kingdom.
      She had previously moved to Italy but returned after several months.

   3. The refusal letter accepts the appellant is Albanian and was the
      victim of domestic violence. However, it was not accepted that the
      Refugee Convention was engaged. The respondent concluded she was not
      part of a social group as the victim of domestic violence on the basis
      there was sufficiency of protection. In support of this, reference was
      made to the Albanian Constitution which proscribed the equality of men
      and women. There was also a reference to the Albanian criminal code
      which provided sanctions for domestic abuse, with sentences of 3 to 4
      years for serious threats of violence and sentences from 3 to 15 years
      for injury. Reference was also made to country guidance material from
      2015 which confirmed the existence of a police force in Albania. It
      was pointed out there were avenues of redress against police who would
      not act but the appellant had not pursued this. There was also mention
      of help lines and shelters for women in the appellant's position. The
      respondent felt that she could reasonably relocate to one of the two
      other cities in Albania which were over 130 km away which had
      shelters. There was nothing to suggest her husband was a man of
      influence with the police who could pursue her.


   4. The appellant was not represented before the judge. There was no
      appeal bundle on her behalf beyond letters of support as set out at
      para 39 of the decision. The judge noted that it was accepted she was
      the victim of domestic violence. The judge heard evidence about the
      private life she had established in the United Kingdom.

The Upper Tribunal


   5. In the Upper Tribunal the appellant was represented. It was pointed
      out that the decision only dealt briefly with sufficiency of
      protection and relocation and replicates the refusal letter. Even
      after the appellant had been divorced her husband continued to cause
      difficulties. There was reference to an updated Home Office guidance
      of April 2016. This recorded domestic violence was a serious and
      widespread problem in Albania. It estimated 53% of women were affected
      on this issue. The guidance referred to the need for an individual
      assessment and pointed out that a woman's social status was relevant.


   6. In response, the presenting officer acknowledged that the reasons
      given on sufficiency of protection were limited. However, the judge
      was faced with an unrepresented appellant and did not have evidence to
      call into question the material presented by the respondent in the
      refusal letter. As stated, it was acknowledged that she had been the
      victim of domestic violence but the provisions in the Constitution and
      the country information had been set out. Paragraph 45 was specific to
      the appellant and noted that she had worked in the past. There is an
      old country guidance decision, DM (Sufficiency of Protection - PSG -
      Women - Domestic Violence) Albania CG [2004] UKIAT 00059 which
      indicates a general willingness on the part of the authorities to act.
      The presenting officer suggested the appellant's difficulties were
      compounded by the fact that she lived in close proximity to her
      husband and if she relocated this would no longer be an issue.

   7. By way of reply, the appellant's representative said that she wants to
      maintain contact with her children. However, this would mean that her
      former husband could trace her through them. The presenting officer
      pointed out at the time of divorce they were in their mid teens. They
      are now adults who should have an appreciation of their mother's
      position and would be more independent of their father.

Consideration

   8. As stated, the appellant has experienced domestic violence. To this
      end there was a medical report which showed she had been admitted to
      hospital here complaining of chest pains in September 2016 and it was
      noted that there were three old fractures to her ribs. Although
      divorced in 2004 she continued to live in close proximity to her
      husband because they occupied the same premises. She had said she had
      worked in various jobs but the pay was poor and she could not afford
      to pay rent for alternative accommodation. The refusal letter had
      pointed out that she had been able to make the journey to the United
      Kingdom and settle here. By the same token it was considered
      reasonable to expect her to relocate within her home country.


   9. The judge's decision is brief. It does not mean it was inadequate. The
      respondent had accepted the appellant was Albanian and had suffered
      domestic violence in the past. The outstanding issues were sufficiency
      of protection and relocation in Albania. The only objective evidence
      presented to the judge was that contained in the refusal letter. Based
      upon the evidence the judge was entitled to reach the conclusion
      reached. Nothing at hearing in the Upper Tribunal has been presented
      to suggest such a conclusion was unreasonable or perverse.
      Consequently, I do not find a material error of law established.

Decision

The decision of First-tier judge Turnock dismissing the appellant's
appealed shall stand. No material error of law has been established



Deputy Judge Farrelly of the Upper Tribunal
