
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
              (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/12143/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Determined at Field House without a hearing|Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 3 December 2019                         |On 4 December 2019              |
|                                           |                                |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between
                                     A Y
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. On 11 November 2019 I gave the following directions:-

          1. Having had regard to the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal,
             and  the  grounds  of  challenge  upon  which  permission  was
             granted,  it  is  my  preliminary  view  that  the  First-tier
             Tribunal erred:

             (1) with respect to his approach to the  Article  8  case  and
             permitted a procedural error amounting to an error of law: and

             (2) in his approach to credibility, making  contrary  findings
             as is averred in the grounds at 3  (b)  and  (d),  the  latter
             resulting from a manifest factual error by the judge.

          2. In the circumstances, and given that the (2) goes to the  core
             of the claim, it is my preliminary view that the  decision  of
             the First-tier Tribunal should be set aside on the basis  that
             it involved the making  of  an  error  of  law  and  that  the
             appropriate course of action would be to remit the  appeal  to
             the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh decision on all issues.

          3.  Unless  within  ten  working  days  of  the  issue  of  these
             directions there is any written objection to  this  course  of
             action, supported by cogent argument, the Upper Tribunal  will
             proceed to determine the appeal without an  oral  hearing  and
             will remit it to the First-tier Tribunal.

          4. In the absence of a timely response by a  party,  it  will  be
             presumed that it has no objection  to  the  course  of  action
             proposed

 2. On 2 December 2019, the respondent wrote to the Upper Tribunal  stating
    that they accept that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved
    the making of an error of law.

 3. In the circumstances, I am satisfied that the decision  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal did involve the making of an error of law and  I  set  it
    aside. I remit the decision to the First-tier Tribunal.



Summary of conclusions

      1. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the making
         of an error of law and I set it aside.

      2. I remit the decision to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing
         on all grounds. For the avoidance of doubt none of the findings  it
         made are preserved.


Signed                                             Date:  3 December 2019
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul


