

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/12878/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                |Decision Promulgated                  |
|On 19 May 2017                      |On 23 May 2017                        |
|                                    |                                      |

                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Southern

                                   Between

                                    A P I

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                  SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr C. Mannan, of counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr K. Norton, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                                  DECISION

   1. The appellant has  been  granted  permission  to  appeal  against  the
      decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Lal  who,  by  a  determination
      promulgated on 29 December 2016, dismissed his appeal.  On  behalf  of
      the respondent Mr Norton, realistically, did not attempt to defend the
      decision of the judge. In those circumstances,  I  need  explain  only
      briefly the nature of the error of law made  by  the  judge  that  was
      material to the outcome of this appeal.


   2. The appellant did not attend before the First-tier  Tribunal  and  was
      not represented. He  did,  though,  submit  a  bundle  of  documentary
      evidence running to 278 pages, making clear that  he  wished  to  rely
      upon it. That bundle contained a substantial body of country  evidence
      which was tendered in  support  of  the  proposition  that  there  was
      evidence of an escalating incidence of violence towards Christians  in
      Bangladesh as well as evidence specific to this particular  appellant,
      such as articles published in  local  newspapers.  Despite  this,  the
      judge said, at para 23, "there is nothing to suggest in  the  material
      before the Tribunal that being a Christian convert would entail a real
      risk of persecution in Bangladesh for this Appellant".


   3. Although the judge said in his decision that he  had  regard  to  this
      material, there is no discussion or analysis of any of it.  The  judge
      did not refer either to the written submissions contained within  this
      bundle between pages 39-48. Had he done so  he  would  have  seen  the
      specific reference by the appellant to the fact that he was submitting
      new evidence not considered at his earlier  appeal  and  that  he  was
      saying that this did show that the risks faced by  Christian  converts
      was increasing.  If the judge did consider this material,  we  do  not
      know  why  he  did  not  accept  that  it  provided  support  for  the
      appellant's case. Of course, the judge was not bound  to  accept  that
      the evidence established the  case  being  advanced  but  if  evidence
      relied upon by the appellant is rejected he is entitled to know why.


   4. That is sufficient to establish that the judge made a  material  error
      of law and that his decision to dismiss the appeal cannot stand.

Summary of decision:

        i) The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal made a  material  error  of
           law error of law and the decision of the judge  to  dismiss  the
           appeal shall be set aside

          ii) The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is  allowed  to  the  extent
              that the appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to  be
              determined afresh.

                               Signed        [pic]


                               Upper Tribunal Judge Southern


                               Date: 22 May 2017

