
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12635/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester CJC                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 31st October 2018                          |On 29th November 2018         |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                    [a o]
                         (ANONYMITY direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Karnik (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates (Senior HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against a determination of First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    A R Hudson, promulgated on  3rd  July  2018,  following  a  hearing  at
    Manchester  on  21st  June  2018.   In  the  determination,  the  judge
    dismissed  the  appeal  of  the  Appellant,  whereupon  the   Appellant
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Nigeria, a female, and was born  on  19th
    February 1981.  She appealed against a decision of the Respondent dated
    15th November 2017 refusing  her  claim  for  asylum  and  humanitarian
    protection pursuant to paragraph 339C of HC 395.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The basis of the Appellant's claim is that she has  been  a  victim  of
    sexual abuse and assault.  As a claim, this was accepted.  However, the
    basis upon which the claim has been raised, has been  rejected  in  its
    various aspects.  As the refusal letter makes clear, the Appellant  had
    a previous appeal, where she claimed to have been  sexually  abused  by
    her husband and needed to bring her child to the UK to protect him from
    terrorists (see Annex C).  She did not mention in the  appeal  that  it
    was due to either the Nigerian police force, or that  it  involved  her
    kidnapping in Nigeria, both of which claims were now raised before  the
    Secretary of State, to be addressed in  the  decision  letter  of  15th
    November 2017.   Nevertheless,  as  the  refusal  letter  makes  clear,
    because the Appellant had provided medical documentation to support her
    claim "of gynaecological trauma" it was therefore accepted that she had
    been a victim of sexual assault (paragraph 47 of the  refusal  letter).
    In short, therefore, the refusal letter concluded  that  the  Appellant
    had been a victim of sexual assault.  On the other  hand,  it  was  not
    accepted that she had been sexually assaulted by the  Nigerian  police,
    or had been captured by a group of men when fleeing her area of origin,
    namely, Modakeke, or that she had been raped by her mother's neighbours
    in 2016, as she claimed to now be the case (paragraph 55).

The Hearing

 4. At the hearing before Judge A R  Hudson,  there  was  evidence  to  the
    effect that the Appellant was a vulnerable witness who  was  not  in  a
    position to give evidence.  The judge  at  the  outset  addressed  this
    matter under the heading  "Introduction"  and  made  it  clear  to  the
    Appellant's representative, Ms  Mottershaw,  that  whilst  it  was  the
    Appellant's prerogative not to give evidence, "it would not lead to any
    inferences against her" although given  "the  weight  of  the  evidence
    within the bundles" which could not  be  tested  in  cross-examination,
    there may be "gaps in the evidence" which could "not  be  explained  in
    oral testimony".  The Appellant "understood this but did  not  wish  to
    give evidence" (paragraph 8).

 5.  The  judge  went  on  to  consider  the  evidence  before  her,  in  a
    determination that was detailed and comprehensive, and  concluded  that
    the Appellant could not succeed in the appeal, because her claim  could
    not be substantiated to the requisite  level  of  proof  in  an  asylum
    appeal, and that in any event, she came from the capital city  of  Osun
    State, in her region, where she had visited last in 2014 and  2016  and
    stayed with her mother and her son.  Indeed, "the whole family is  said
    to live in Modakeke" and the Appellant "will find  internal  relocation
    in that area, or  elsewhere  in  Nigeria".   She  was  clear  that  the
    Appellant

         "would have a number of locations open  to  her.   Her  family  are
         local to Modakeke  but  nothing  about  any  person  complained  of
         suggests that anyone would have the power or the  desire  to  track
         her elsewhere in the country" (paragraph 27).

 6. The appeal was dismissed.

Grounds of Application

 7. The grounds of application  state  that  the  judge  had  fundamentally
    flouted the Rules of fair  procedure  in  an  asylum  claim.   This  is
    because  the  judge  had  failed  to  heed  the  requirements   in   AM
    (Afghanistan) [2017] EWCA Civ 1123, in that she had failed  to  explore
    other avenues in the context of which the Appellant's evidence could be
    assessed, given that it was the extra opinion that she should not  give
    oral evidence, but which did not obviate the need for there to still be
    a fair hearing.  The grounds state that the judge had simply  proceeded
    "to treat the consequences as being adverse to his credibility" of  the
    Appellant not giving evidence, whereas "the proper question had  to  be
    where  there  is  such  medical  evidence  how  can  the  Appellant  be
    accommodated so that a fair hearing can take place" (paragraph 8).

 8. Second, it was stated that the judge had wrongly come to the conclusion
    that the Appellant's evidence was implausible  (see  paragraphs  22  to
    23), because, in  circumstances  where  the  Appellant  had  not  given
    evidence and had not been cross-examined, issues in relation to matters
    such as the photographs which the Appellant presented to her mother  in
    Nigeria in 2016, could not be addressed by way of  evidence  from  her,
    and yet the judge took the conclusion that her evidence  was  one  that
    could not be treated as reliable (see paragraph 11 of the grounds).

 9. Permission to appeal was granted on 7th August 2018.

Submissions

10. At the hearing before me on 31st October 2018, Mr Karnik, appearing  on
    behalf of the Appellant proceeded to make good the grant of application
    upon  which  permission  had  been  granted.   He  made  the  following
    submissions.

11. First, the strictures of AM (Afghanistan) had not been followed  so  as
    to ensure that the Appellant was a beneficiary of a fair hearing.

12. Second, given that the medical evidence was that the  Appellant  was  a
    "vulnerable witness", the Joint Presidential Guidance  in  relation  to
    vulnerable witnesses had not been properly applied.  On  the  contrary,
    the judge had held the Appellant to a higher standard of  proof  simply
    because he had failed to  give  evidence.   This  was  clear  from  her
    analysis at paragraph 22, where the judge deals  with  the  Appellant's
    complaint of having been raped by a  group  of  men  in  2016  who  had
    targeted her due to her marriage to a white man, but  where  the  judge
    proceeded to dismiss the entirety of the claim as it  was  put  by  the
    Appellant.

13. Third, the Secretary of State had accepted that  the  Appellant  was  a
    victim of sexual violence, and this had  to  be  the  backdrop  against
    which the Appellant's situation had to be ultimately evaluated.

14. Fourth, the judge accepted that the Appellant  had  been  subjected  to
    extreme violence.

15. Fifth,  at  A10  of  the  bundle  there  was  expert  evidence  from  a
    psychiatrist and at A11 it was confirmed that the  Appellant  had  PTSD
    and anxiety and had "chronic levels of anxiety".  The medical  evidence
    states that her condition is such that it would "place her  at  a  high
    risk of suicide".

16. Sixth, it was in these circumstances that the  Appellant's  fitness  to
    give evidence had to be  assessed,  and  yet  this  was  not  what  had
    happened in this case.  The judge had taken the view that the Appellant
    had the ability to give  instructions  to  her  legal  representatives.
    However, giving instructions was not the same as  being  able  to  give
    evidence and to be subjected  to  cross-examination.   The  expert  was
    clear that the Appellant should not give evidence.  The judge failed to
    grapple with the distinction between  giving  instructions  and  giving
    evidence in court.

17. Seventh, at A62 there was the Joint Presidential Guidance  in  relation
    to one of the witnesses.  The bottom page of this makes it  clear  that
    some people are vulnerable simply on account of what  has  happened  to
    them, and the Appellant plainly fell into such a category.

18. Eighth, all in all, therefore one had to look at the way in  which  the
    judge had approached the issue of the Appellant's  vulnerability.   One
    had to start with what the judge said at paragraph 15, where  she  made
    it clear that she had seen a letter dated 13th June 2018 asserting that
    the Appellant "has been identified as vulnerable" and  therefore  would
    not  be  giving  evidence.   The  judge  then  referred  to  the  Joint
    Presidential Guidance Note of 2010.  It was observed that the Appellant
    was 18 and receiving a form  of  healthcare.   Reference  was  made  to
    Section 59 of Safeguarding Vulnerable Groups Act  2006.   However,  the
    judge then went on to say that, "having ascertained that she understood
    the limitations in her case were the Respondent unable to cross-examine
    her, I do not consider that it is necessary  to  require  her  to  give
    evidence" (paragraph 15).  Mr Karnik submitted that  the  reference  to
    there being a recognition by the Appellant of the "limitations  in  her
    case" if she  were  not  to  be  subjected  to  cross-examination,  was
    effectively to penalise her for her not being able  to  give  evidence.
    The judge could not simply rule that it was not necessary  for  her  to
    give evidence.  Other avenues had to be explored.

19. In the same way, at paragraph 25 of the determination, the  judge  goes
    on to say that she accepts what had happened to the Appellant in  2000,
    which addresses her sexual assault by  the  Nigerian  police,  and  the
    judge observes that the Appellant for that reason "may have an inherent
    distrust of those in authority".

20. However, she then goes on to say that the Appellant

         "subsequently spent a decade working in  medical  facilities  where
         she would undoubtedly have had dealings with  public  bodies.   Her
         evidence was that she worked for the government as a  nurse.   That
         is likely to have simply assisted any inherent mistrust" (paragraph
         25).

21. The judge had observed that the Appellant's witness statement  recorded
    that "any contact with men frightens  me"  (see  witness  statement  of
    March 2017) and that she had also added that, "I can barely go out  and
    I am terrified in the presence of men".  However, the judge  was  wrong
    in the light of this, to then go on to say that "I do  not  accept  Mrs
    O's assertions of the level of her vulnerability" (paragraph  25).   It
    was almost as if the Appellant was being disadvantaged by  her  failure
    to have given evidence before the judge.   Mr  Karnik  ended  with  the
    observation that there had been no Rule 24 response in this  case,  and
    it was plain that there had been an error of law.

22. For his part, Mr Bates submitted that the first question  was  why  the
    Appellant was claiming asylum in the first  place.   First,  the  judge
    addresses this at paragraph 21.  She observes that the  incidents  that
    the Appellant recounted "will have undoubtedly had  a  profound  effect
    upon her" but that she was able to live and work in Nigeria as both are
    married and a single woman, without persecution" (paragraph  21).   She
    went on to say that the  humanitarian  situation  in  Nigeria  had  not
    changed over almost twenty years since the instance described had taken
    place.

23. Second, the judge indeed, goes on to say that

         "in the immediate aftermath of the 2000 violence,  Mrs  O  and  her
         family returned to Modakeke without further incident.  Having  left
         Nigeria in 2011  Ms  O  felt  able  to  return  to  Nigeria  -  and
         specifically Modakeke - for holidays on two occasions  since  then.
         Ms O accepted that those instances were  related  to  a  crisis  in
         Modakeke and that once that crisis ended the region  was  at  peace
         (AIR question 276 to 278).  I therefore find that neither  incident
         formed the basis of a claim for asylum or humanitarian  protection"
         (paragraph 21).

    The judge then went on to consider the 2016 incident  and  rejected  it
    outright as not being credible.  The judge was entitled to come to that
    conclusion.

24. Third, if it is now being suggested that there is a misdirection in the
    way that the judge treated the Appellant's inability to  give  evidence
    at the hearing, it is necessary to ask how differently the judge  could
    have approached the matter.  It was the Appellant's wish  not  to  give
    evidence.  It was the extra medical evidence that she should  not  give
    evidence.  The Appellant did not give evidence.  She was not forced  to
    do so.   She  was  given  the  requisite  breaks  that  she  needed  in
    confirming her witness statement and correcting  it.   The  judge  then
    considered the whole of the evidence.  She did not resile  from  saying
    that the Appellant had not been a victim of sexual violence.  The judge
    accepted that she had.

25. However, the judge then went on to reject other aspects of  the  claim,
    and concluded that she was not credible in these other  respects.   For
    example, in her screening interview the Appellant  had  said  that  she
    took walks at night and was raped (at question 4.1).   The  implication
    of this, noted the judge, was that she was raped  during  these  walks.
    However, given the dangers of a woman walking alone in Nigeria  in  any
    circumstances I find it unlikely that she would  have  put  herself  in
    that position" (paragraph 23).

26. Mr Bates submitted that even  if  the  Appellant  had  given  the  same
    evidence orally, the judge was entitled to come to the conclusion  that
    this evidence was simply not credible of a woman walking late at  night
    and being easy prey to a rape assault.  In the same way, the  Appellant
    had given evidence that her son was not beaten but the  affidavit  then
    goes on to say that he  was.   The  judge  was  entitled  to  draw  the
    inference from this that, "I would expect her to remember that her  son
    had been beaten if she believed that he had been" (paragraph 24).  This
    conclusion was equally open to the judge.

27. Finally, even if the Appellant was believed comprehensively,  the  fact
    remained that the Appellant had the availability of internal relocation
    to Nigeria as a backstop.  The judge made it clear  (at  paragraph  27)
    that the Appellant came from the capital city of Osun State, which  was
    not a rural location, and that the Appellant had  been  educated  there
    and had spent time, there, and had family there.  Moreover, "Nigeria is
    a very large country  and  there  are  many  areas  where  Ms  O  could
    establish herself" (paragraph 21).  But most importantly,  "her  family
    are local to Modakeke  but  nothing  about  any  person  complained  or
    suggest that anyone would have the power or the  desire  to  track  her
    elsewhere in the country" (paragraph 27).  The judge  was  entitled  to
    dismiss the claim.

28. In reply, Mr Karnik submitted that the reference to internal relocation
    being available, by the judge (at paragraph 27), was inadequate because
    it does not address the issue of safety of relocation.  I am  bound  to
    say that I disagree with this, because the  judge  in  terms  makes  it
    clear that there is nothing in the evidence about any person complained
    of that suggests that "anyone would have the power  or  the  desire  to
    track her elsewhere in the country".  Second, Mr Karnik submitted  that
    it was important to explore other methods by which the Appellant  could
    give evidence, or that her evidence could be taken, and the failure  of
    the judge to do so, with the cautionary note added, that  her  evidence
    could have gaps and could have limitations,  was  indicative  of  there
    being a failure of a fair hearing.

No Error of Law

29. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA 2007) such that I should set aside the  decision  and  remake  the
    decision.  My reasons are as follows.

30. First, in what is a careful and sensitive determination, the judge  had
    a situation before her, where the Appellant herself  was  unwilling  to
    give evidence.  This is clear from the determination that, on  the  day
    of the hearing, "it is not suggested before me that she [the Appellant]
    should not give evidence because she would be unable to  give  good  or
    reliable evidence, but because it would cause her distress"  (paragraph
    16).  When I asked Mr Karnik whether this  was  indeed  the  case,  he,
    being the adept and a seasoned practitioner in this  Tribunal  that  he
    is, helpfully made it clear that he did not represent the Appellant  at
    the hearing below, and he could say neither way, what  was  indeed  the
    case.

31. But in any event, it was also the case before  Judge  Hudson  that  the
    expert evidence was that the Appellant should not give evidence because
    this would be damaging to her.  The judge expressly addressed  this  as
    well making it clear that the letter dated 13th June 2018 had  asserted
    that the Appellant  "has  been  identified  as  vulnerable",  and  that
    "therefore would not be giving evidence".  The judge in terms  set  out
    "the Joint Presidential Guidance Note of 2010 and  Section  59  of  the
    Safeguarding Vulnerable Groups Act 2006".  There is then the  issue  as
    to whether the judge had used language that was inadvertently  such  as
    to penalise, or to be seen to be  penalising,  the  Appellant  for  not
    giving evidence.  Nothing could be further from the truth.

32. The language that was carefully used by  the  judge  was  that  "having
    ascertained that she understood the limitations in her  case  were  the
    Respondent unable to cross-examine her, I do not consider  that  it  is
    necessary to require her to give evidence".  The reference here  is  to
    "limitations", and this must plainly  be  right  as  a  purely  factual
    aspect of the appeal, where a party to the proceedings chooses  not  to
    give evidence, and chooses not  to  be  orally  cross-examined  on  it.
    There is, however, nothing whatsoever that suggests that the judge took
    an unnecessarily unsympathetic view to the Appellant, purely on account
    of her not being able to give evidence orally.

33. Second, this is manifestly shown  by  the  fact  that  the  judge  then
    immediately goes on to say that she has  read  the  transcript  of  the
    asylum interview and that it was clear that  the  Appellant  "was  more
    than capable of coping with questioning from the interviewing officer".
     The judge goes on to say that, she appears to have  acquitted  herself
    well and given comprehensive  answers  to  the  questions  asked.   She
    brought a wealth of documentation, explained all of it,  and  corrected
    previous recorded errors".  The judge goes on to say that the Appellant
    did become upset when speaking about the 2000 sexual exploitation,  but
    that, "she asked for a  break,  had  one,  and  was  able  to  continue
    thereafter".

34. The sensitivity of the judge to the  Appellant's  predicament  is  also
    clear from the reference to how

         "when recounting the most traumatic incident -  the  detention  for
         five days -  she  insisted  on  completing  her  account  when  the
         interviewer would have moved on.  There is no indication within the
         transcript that she was inhibited in her responses" (paragraph 17).



    It is in this context that the judge then concluded, as it was open  to
    her to conclude, that the Appellant "is  not  in  any  way  cognitively
    impaired and is clearly competent" (paragraph 18).

35. Third, the judge does not discount the incidents that have taken place.
     It would have been otherwise had she  done  so.   The  refusal  letter
    recognises that the Appellant had been a  victim  of  sexual  violence.
    The judge used that as a starting  point.   She  makes  it  clear  that
    "these incidents will have undoubtedly had a profound effect upon her",
    but then goes on to say that "she was able to live and work in  Nigeria
    as both are married and a single woman, without persecution" (paragraph
    21).

36. Finally, it is salutary to remember the basic jurisprudence in relation
    to expert reports.  It is well established that experts do  not  decide
    cases.  Judges do.  The expert's function is to advise the judge.   The
    judge is fully entitled to accept or reject  expert  opinion.   If  the
    judge decides to reject an expert's advice, he or she, must then have a
    sound basis upon which to do so, and must then explain why  the  advice
    has been rejected: see M-W (a child), Re [2010] EWCA Civ 12,  per  Wall
    LJ (at paragraph 39).  There is nothing  in  the  determination,  which
    suggests that the judge did not heed these strictures.

37.  Accordingly,  notwithstanding  Mr  Karnik's  valiant  and  commendable
    efforts to persuade me otherwise on behalf of his  client,  I  have  to
    conclude that there is no error of  law  in  this  determination.   The
    judge was entitled to proceed in the manner that she did.  The decision
    stands.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of  an
error of law such that it falls to be set aside.

The appeal is dismissed.

An anonymity direction is made.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 23rd November 2018
