
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                    Appeal Number:
PA/12535/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 10th May 2019                        |On 22nd May 2019                    |
|                                        |                                    |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL

                                   Between

                                     TM
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr I Konusanac of Igor & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Miss J Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant appealed against a decision of Judge Malcolm (the  judge)
    of the First-tier Tribunal (the FtT) promulgated on 17th January 2019.

 2. The Appellant is an Algerian national who claims to have been living in
    the UK since May 2001.  He applied for leave to remain on private  life
    grounds on 20th June 2012 which was refused on 13th September 2013.  He
    made a further claim on 15th November 2013 which  was  refused  on  8th
    January 2014 and a reconsideration request  refused  on  12th  February
    2014.  The Appellant then made further submissions, claiming asylum, on
    17th November 2015, which was refused by the Respondent on 15th October
    2018.

 3. The Respondent contended that this decision did not confer a  right  of
    appeal as it was a rejection of further submissions, not a refusal of a
    protection and human rights claim.   A  Duty  Judge  at  Arnhem  House,
    Leicester decided that the decision was in fact appealable.

 4. The international protection  claim  was  based  upon  the  Appellant's
    military service in Algeria between 1995 and 1997.  He claimed to  have
    witnessed civilians who were killed by  the  army  and  he  feared  the
    Algerian government because of what  he  had  witnessed,  and  he  also
    feared terrorists in Algeria because he had served in the army.

 5. The appeal was heard by the FtT on 28th November 2018.  The judge found
    that the Appellant would not be at risk if returned  to  Algeria.   The
    judge found that the Appellant had delayed his asylum claim by fourteen
    years without giving a satisfactory explanation.   The  judge  did  not
    find, even taking the Appellant's evidence at its highest,  that  while
    undertaking military service he witnessed human rights abuses, and  the
    judge did not find that he would be at any risk on return  either  from
    the government in Algeria or from terrorist groups.

 6. The judge found that  Article  8  was  engaged  on  the  basis  of  the
    Appellant's  private  life  but  there  would  be  no  breach  as   the
    Appellant's removal from the UK to Algeria would be proportionate.  The
    appeal was dismissed on all grounds.

 7. The Appellant applied for permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal.
    It was contended that the judge had erred in  law  in  considering  the
    asylum claim, and the  Article  8  claim,  including  consideration  of
    paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi).

 8. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Hollingworth of  the  FtT  in
    the following terms;

         "It is arguable that the judge has attached insufficient weight  to
         the evidence of Professor Joffe in evaluating the criteria pursuant
         to  paragraph  276ADE  and  in  not  considering  that   compelling
         circumstances existed enabling a  consideration  of  whether  there
         would be a breach of Article 8 outside the rules  and  in  carrying
         out  a  proportionality  exercise.   The   permission   application
         identifies the salient aspects of the expert evidence of  Professor
         Joffe which in these  contexts  should  arguably  have  been  fully
         evaluated and the weight to be attached to them set out."

Error of Law

 9. On 4 April 2019 I heard submissions from the parties regarding error of
    law. On behalf of the Respondent it was contended that  the  judge  had
    not materially erred in law and had made findings which  were  open  to
    make on the evidence.

10. On behalf of the Appellant it was confirmed that there was no challenge
    to the findings made by the judge in relation to refusal of asylum  and
    no challenge to the findings that the Appellant would not be at risk on
    return.  It was contended that  the  judge  had  erred  in  considering
    Article 8 and paragraph 276ADE,  having  not  taken  into  account  and
    analysed the expert report of Professor Joffe.

11. I set out below paragraphs 9-16 of my error of law decision  dated  4th
    April 2019 which contain my reasons for finding an  error  of  law  and
    setting aside the decision of the FtT;

         9.   The judge considered Article 8 at paragraphs  123-137  of  the
             decision.  At paragraph 128 the judge found that it was  clear
             from  medical  evidence  that  the  Appellant   suffers   from
             depression and has suffered from recurrent depression over the
             years.  The judge did not doubt the Appellant's evidence  that
             when he was in Algeria his father paid for medication for him.
              It was not in dispute that the  Appellant's  father  had  now
             passed away.

         10.  The judge found at paragraph 129 that  if  the  Appellant  was
             required to return to Algeria  appropriate  medical  treatment
             would be  available  to  him  and  that  medication  would  be
             available free of charge.  It is unclear how the judge reached
             this conclusion as there is no reference to evidence that  was
             considered to bring about that conclusion.

         11.  The judge in considering Article 8 does not make any reference
             to Professor Joffe's expert  report.   The  expert  report  at
             paragraph 127 concludes that the Appellant would not  be  able
             to access the state medical services.  The  opinion  is  given
             that the Appellant would be disadvantaged by his mental  state
             in  relation  to  finding  employment  given  high  levels  of
             unemployment.  The  opinion  is  given  that  the  Appellant's
             health will seriously decline if he returns to Algeria because
             of his current medical condition, and the lack of support that
             he would receive in Algeria.

         12.  The judge finds that the Appellant would  be  able  to  access
             free medication, and would be  able  to  find  employment  and
             accommodation, given that the Appellant has extended family in
             Algeria.

         13.  I find that the judge erred in law in failing to  analyse  and
             explain why the opinion  of  the  expert  was  not  given  any
             weight.  There is simply no reference  to  the  expert  report
             when Article 8 and paragraph 276ADE are being considered.   In
             my view that amounts to a material error of  law.   The  judge
             has not considered potentially material  evidence  and  should
             have made findings upon that evidence.

         14.  Therefore the decision must be set aside and  re-made.   There
             was no challenge to the findings made by the judge in relation
             to asylum and humanitarian protection, and those findings made
             by the judge in relation  to  risk  on  return  stand.   Those
             findings are that the  Appellant  would  not  be  at  risk  on
             return.

         15.  I do not consider it appropriate, having considered the Senior
             President's Practice Statements at paragraph 7, to remit  this
             appeal to the FtT to be heard again.

         16.  There will be a further hearing before the Upper Tribunal.  It
             is a matter for  the  Appellant  as  to  whether  any  further
             evidence is called.  The Tribunal will arrange for  an  Arabic
             interpreter.  If further oral evidence  is  not  required  the
             Appellant  must  notify  the  Tribunal  immediately  that  the
             interpreter is not needed.  The purpose of the next hearing is
             to consider Article  8  and  paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)  of  the
             Immigration Rules.

Re-making the Decision

12. At the resumed hearing I ascertained that I had all documentation  upon
    which the parties intended to rely.  I had the documentation  that  had
    been before the FtT.  This amounts  to  the  Respondent's  bundle,  two
    bundles submitted on behalf of the Appellant, one containing 256  pages
    and the other 116 pages, together with a list of essential reading.  In
    addition, a skeleton argument had been  prepared  in  relation  to  the
    issues to be considered  by  the  Upper  Tribunal,  and  the  Appellant
    produced a further witness statement dated 30th April 2019 and a letter
    from his sister who resides in the UK, dated 26th  April  2019.   There
    was also a letter from a  lawyer  in  Algeria  dated  29th  April  2019
    confirming  the  living  arrangements  of  the  Appellant's  family  in
    Algeria,  email  communication  dated  17th  April  2019  between   the
    Appellant's solicitors  and  Professor  Joffe,  and  letters  from  the
    Appellant's GP, Dr Raphael dated 26th April 2017 and 8th June 2018.

13. The Appellant gave oral evidence, adopting his witness statement  dated
    30th April 2019.  He was questioned by  the  representatives.   I  have
    recorded all questions and answers in my Record of Proceedings  and  it
    is not necessary to reiterate them here.  If relevant I will  refer  to
    the oral evidence when I set out my findings and conclusions.

14. I then heard oral submissions which I summarise very briefly below.

15. On behalf of the Respondent it was submitted that  there  would  be  no
    very significant obstacles if the Appellant returned  to  Algeria.   He
    had confirmed in evidence that he had a large  family  in  Algeria  and
    that he remains in contact with them.  Although there was some  medical
    evidence regarding the depression that the Appellant suffers, there was
    no up-to-date psychiatric report.  The fact that there may be a lack of
    space for the Appellant in the family home  does  not  amount  to  very
    significant obstacles or compelling circumstances.

16. I was referred to background evidence, and Professor Joffe's report and
    it was submitted that it was clear that adequate medical facilities are
    available in Algeria.

17.  The  evidence  did  not  demonstrate  that  the  Appellant  had   been
    continually receiving medication while in the UK, and his own  evidence
    indicated that he had been in employment continually since his  arrival
    in 2001.

18. On behalf of the  Appellant  reliance  was  placed  upon  the  skeleton
    argument.  I was asked to take into  account  that  the  Appellant  had
    lived in the  UK  for  eighteen  years.   He  did  not  claim  to  have
    established family life in this country, although he does have a sister
    living here who has her own family, and had established a private  life
    that engaged Article 8.

19. It was accepted that the Appellant had received  medical  treatment  in
    the UK and that he had received treatment in Algeria for depression.

20. I was asked to find that the Appellant would have to pay for medication
    in Algeria and he would be unable to do so.  That would mean  that  his
    mental  health  would  suffer,  and  he  would  not  be  able  to  find
    employment, and he would not have accommodation.   The  combination  of
    his inability to access medication, lack of accommodation, and lack  of
    employment amounted to very significant obstacles to his integration.

21. If I did not accept that there would be very significant  obstacles  to
    integration, I was asked to allow the appeal with reference to  Article
    8 outside the Immigration Rules and to place  substantial  weight  upon
    the expert report of Professor Joffe.

22. At the conclusion of oral submissions I reserved my decision.

My Conclusion and Reasons

23. The findings made by the FtT to the effect that the Appellant would not
    be at risk if returned to Algeria stand.   The  Appellant  now  accepts
    that he  is  not  entitled  to  a  grant  of  asylum  or   humanitarian
    protection, and his removal from the UK would not breach Articles 2  or
    3 of the 1950 Convention.

24. The issue that I  have  to  decide  is  whether  there  would  be  very
    significant obstacles to the Appellant's integration into Algeria.  The
    burden of proof in relation to that issue is on the Appellant  and  the
    standard is a balance of probabilities.  In deciding this appeal  I  am
    conscious of the balance sheet approach recommended at paragraph 83  of
    Hesham Ali [2016] UKSC 60.  In relation to  Article  8  the  burden  of
    proof lies on the Appellant to establish his personal circumstances  in
    the UK, and to establish  that  Article  8  is  engaged,  and  why  the
    decision made by the Respondent interferes  disproportionately  in  his
    private life rights in this country.   It  is  for  the  Respondent  to
    establish the public interest factors weighing against  the  Appellant.
    The standard of proof is a balance of probabilities throughout.

25. It is clear that the Appellant has established a private  life  in  the
    UK.  I accept that he  arrived  in  this  country  in  May  2001.   The
    Appellant does not contend that he has established family life in  this
    country which would engage Article 8 and  that  concession  is  rightly
    made.  The Appellant is a single man, not in  a  relationship,  and  he
    does not have children.

26. I accept that the Appellant has an adult sister in the UK who  has  her
    own family.  The Appellant is currently residing with her.

27. The Appellant has family members in Algeria.  I accept the  Appellant's
    evidence that he has three brothers and four sisters living in Algeria,
    as well as his mother.  The three brothers and their families live with
    the Appellant's mother in the family home.  The sisters are married and
    do not live in the  family  home.   The  Appellant  confirmed  in  oral
    evidence that his grandfather had four sons who have now  passed  away,
    but their families remain living in Algeria in the  same  area  as  his
    family home.  Therefore the Appellant has a number of  cousins,  living
    in the same area as his brothers and sisters.  The Appellant  confirmed
    that he is in contact with his mother.  The Appellant  stated  in  oral
    evidence, when asked whether he had asked his family whether they could
    assist him to find employment, that he did not have a good relationship
    with his family.  The Appellant had previously not  mentioned  that  he
    did not have a good relationship with his family and I  do  not  accept
    that evidence.  Prior to that  remark,  which  was  in  response  to  a
    question I asked by way of clarification, the  Appellant  had  made  no
    mention of not having a good relationship with his family  in  Algeria.
    The Appellant was also asked whether he had enquired  with  his  family
    whether they could assist him with accommodation, and his response  was
    that his mother had asked him not to return to Algeria.

28. I find as a fact that the Appellant does have numerous  family  members
    in Algeria, and he has not asked them whether  they  could  assist  him
    with employment or help him with accommodation.  I find  that  when  in
    Algeria the Appellant served in the army for a two year period  between
    1995 and 1997.  There is documentary evidence received from Algeria, to
    the effect that he received medication for depression.

29. I accept the Appellant's evidence that he has had continual  employment
    in the UK.  He has worked in hotels as  a  room  attendant,  a  kitchen
    porter and a house porter.  The Appellant has never had leave to remain
    in the UK, and has never had permission to work.

30. There is no evidence that the  Appellant  received  any  treatment  for
    mental health difficulties in the UK until 2013.  I have  considered  a
    letter from Dr Grewal who is a consultant psychiatrist.  The letter  is
    dated 21st October 2013 and  confirms  that  Dr  Grewal  was  privately
    instructed by the Appellant, to respond to questions set out  in  a  UK
    Border Agency letter dated 30th July 2013.  Dr Grewal  had  been  given
    access to medical notes obtained from Algeria.

31.  Dr  Grewal  diagnosed  the  Appellant  as  suffering  from  "recurrent
    depressive disorder, current episode mild".   The  medical  notes  from
    Algeria confirmed that the Appellant was treated for  major  depressive
    episodes between December  1997  and  October  1999.   The  Appellant's
    current depressive episode is described as being in the mild  range  of
    severity.  The Appellant was not receiving treatment for the  recurrent
    depressive disorder.  Dr Grewal gave the opinion that the Appellant was
    likely to be fit to return to Algeria after his symptoms of  depressive
    disorder have been  adequately  treated,  which  was  likely  to  occur
    between six and eight months after initiation of treatment.

32. I have taken into account a further letter written by Dr  Grewal  dated
    27th August 2015.  Dr Grewal described the Appellant as  not  having  a
    GP, and appeared to be  developing  early  symptoms  of  post-traumatic
    stress  disorder.   Dr  Grewal  diagnosed  Paroxetine,  and   Zopicione
    tablets.

33. It appears that after the consultation with Dr Grewal in  August  2015,
    the Appellant consulted a GP  who  is  Dr  Raphael,  who  has  provided
    letters dated 9th November 2016, 15th December 2016, 27th  April  2017,
    and 8th June 2018.  The first letter  is  brief,  confirming  that  the
    Appellant suffers with a mixed anxiety and depression disorder which Dr
    Raphael believes is directly related to  the  asylum  seeking  process.
    The second letter, dated  15th  December  2016,  is  also  very  brief,
    describing the Appellant as suffering from a  combination  of  anxiety,
    depression and post-traumatic stress.

34. The letter dated 26th April  2017  describes  the  Appellant  having  a
    diagnosis of mixed anxiety and depressive disorder,  with  features  of
    post-traumatic stress, and confirms that for the past  eighteen  months
    the Appellant has  been  treated  with  an  antidepressant  medication,
    Citalopram.  Dr Raphael comments that he is aware  that  the  Appellant
    attempted suicide while in Algeria.  The letter  dated  8th  June  2018
    gives further detail in relation to previous suicide attempts,  stating
    that the Appellant said he first felt suicidal  in  1998  and  he  felt
    suicidal on several occasions that year but took no action, other  than
    to cut his right upper arm with window glass.

35. With reference to the Appellant's medical condition, I find that he did
    not receive any medication prior to meeting  Dr  Grewal  in  2015,  and
    since approximately the latter part  of  2015  he  has  been  receiving
    Citalopram and his diagnosis is anxiety and depression.  I do not  find
    there is a formal diagnosis of  post-traumatic  stress  disorder.   The
    Appellant, on his own evidence, was able to  work  in  the  UK  without
    medication until he was prescribed medication in 2015,  shortly  before
    he made his claim for international protection in November 2015.

36. Background evidence, including the expert  report  of  Professor  Joffe
    which  is  dated  14th  August  2015,  confirms   that   antidepressant
    medication  is  available  in  Algeria.   I  accept  that  the  medical
    facilities in Algeria would not be of the same standard as the  medical
    facilities in the UK.  I accept the Appellant's evidence that  when  he
    received medication while in Algeria, his father paid for this.  I also
    accept that his father has now passed away.

37. Professor  Joffe  considered  mental  health  services  in  Algeria  at
    paragraphs 111-117 of his report.  Financing  of  medical  services  is
    contained at paragraphs 118-121.  I accept  Professor  Joffe's  opinion
    that there is state medical care in Algeria and private  medical  care.
    I accept that hospital costs are covered by the state but this  is  not
    the case with outpatient costs, where  patients  who  are  entitled  to
    state health care would  initially  have  to  pay  but  would  then  be
    reimbursed.  I accept Professor Joffe's opinion at paragraph  127  that
    the Appellant would not be able to access state medical services as  he
    has not been contributing to the funding body.  If he was  hospitalised
    then medical services would be free but outpatient treatment would need
    to be paid for and he would not be reimbursed.

38. I also accept Professor Joffe's opinion at paragraph 127(b) that  there
    is a shortage of housing in Algeria, and at paragraph 127(c) levels  of
    unemployment in Algeria are officially 10% of the work  force,  but  in
    reality 15%.

39. I do not accept Professor Joffe's view at  paragraph  127(e)  that  the
    Appellant's state of health would seriously decline if he  returned  to
    Algeria.  I do not find that this is within Professor Joffe's  role  as
    an expert.  Professor Joffe bases this opinion on a  lack  of  support,
    and the Appellant's fears over the continuing interest of the  security
    and intelligence services in him.  It has been found by  the  Tribunal,
    that the security and intelligence services in Algeria would  not  have
    any interest in the Appellant.

40. In  considering  paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)  I  follow  the  guidance  in
    Treebhawon [2017] UKUT 00013 (IAC) in which  it  was  found  that  mere
    hardship,  mere  difficulty,  mere  hurdles,  mere  upheaval  and  mere
    inconvenience, even where multiplied, are unlikely to satisfy the  test
    of very significant obstacles.

41. In relation to integration I follow the guidance in Kamara [2016]  EWCA
    Civ 813.  At paragraph 14 it is explained that there must  be  a  broad
    evaluative judgment.  It must be considered whether  an  individual  is
    enough of an insider in terms of understanding how life in the  society
    in the country of return is carried on.  The individual must  have  the
    capacity to participate in life in that country and have  a  reasonable
    opportunity to be accepted there and operate  on  a  day-to-day  basis.
    The individual must be able to build up  within  a  reasonable  time  a
    variety of human relationships to give substance to  their  private  or
    family life.

42. I find the Appellant has failed to discharge the burden  of  proof  for
    the following reasons.  I accept that the  Appellant  has  been  absent
    from Algeria for a substantial period of time but he remains a  citizen
    of that country.  He has spent the greater part of his life in Algeria.
     He would have no language or cultural difficulties if he returned.  He
    would not be at risk if returned.

43. I find that there would be family support.

44. The Appellant is in touch  with  his  family  in  Algeria.   There  are
    numerous family members.  He confirmed that some  of  his  family  have
    employment although not in  well  paid  jobs.   I  do  not  accept  the
    Appellant would be unable  to  find  employment.   He  entered  the  UK
    without leave and has remained without leave but has  managed  to  have
    employment, on his own evidence, since his arrival.  He  has  therefore
    obtained employment in a country where he does not speak  English,  and
    he had no permission to  work.   The  Appellant  maintained  employment
    without medication up until 2015.  He still has employment.

45. The Appellant has confirmed that he can speak English.  This may be  of
    some  assistance  to  him  in  seeking  employment  in  the  hotel  and
    hospitality industry in Algeria.  The unemployment  rate  described  by
    Professor Joffe, does not in my view indicate that the Appellant  would
    be  unable  to  find  employment.   The  Appellant   has   considerable
    experience in employment.

46. The Appellant has not made any enquiries  as  to  the  availability  of
    employment.  I therefore do not accept his evidence that  he  would  be
    unable  to  find  employment.   The  Appellant  would   be   prescribed
    medication that he can take to Algeria with him.   I  find  that  there
    would be some family support in  relation  to  accommodation,  and  the
    Appellant would be able to find his own accommodation once he has found
    employment, and would be able initially to pay for medication.   I  see
    no reason why, once he has been in employment for a while, he would not
    be able to access the state medical services, which would mean that  he
    would then be reimbursed for outpatient treatment and medication.

47. With reference to suicide, there is no reference to this in the medical
    notes from Algeria.  There has been no attempt at suicide while in  the
    UK.  The Appellant in his latest  witness  statement  at  paragraph  11
    states "I would again think of ending my life unfortunately.  I do  not
    want to live in Algeria in a hopeless situation".  I  have  taken  into
    account the guidance in J [2005] EWCA Civ 629 and  Y  [2009]  EWCA  Civ
    362.  I do not find that the  evidence  demonstrates  a  real  risk  of
    suicide.  The Appellant does not have a genuine fear  of  ill-treatment
    in Algeria.  He is concerned that he will not have the same standard of
    living in Algeria as in the UK, but my finding is that there  would  be
    some family support, and there is no satisfactory reason why  he  would
    not be able to find employment in Algeria, where it is  accepted  there
    is mental health care.

48. I conclude, for the above  reasons,  the  Appellant  does  not  satisfy
    paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi).   I  therefore  conclude  that  the  Appellant
    cannot satisfy  the  Immigration  Rules.   This  is  relevant  but  not
    determinative.  This does not mean that his appeal must fail.   I  must
    consider whether there are any exceptional  circumstances  which  would
    result in unjustifiably harsh consequences  if  the  Appellant  had  to
    return to Algeria.

49. I have regard to the considerations in section 117B of the Nationality,
    Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002.   The  maintenance  of   effective
    immigration controls is in the public interest.  I  place  weight  upon
    the fact that the Appellant cannot satisfy the Immigration  Rules,  and
    has been in the UK without leave since his arrival.

50. It is in the public interest that a person seeking leave to remain  can
    speak English and  is  financially  independent.   I  accept  that  the
    Appellant can speak English and is financially  independent  and  these
    are neutral factors in the balancing exercise.

51. Little weight should be placed upon a private life  established  by  an
    individual when in the UK  with  a  precarious  immigration  status  or
    without leave.  This does not mean no weight must be attached, but I do
    find it appropriate  to  attach  little  weight  to  the  private  life
    established  by  the  Appellant.  The  Appellant  made  no  attempt  to
    regularise his immigration status for approximately eleven years  after
    his arrival.

52. In my view the weight that must  be  attached  to  the  maintenance  of
    effective immigration controls outweighs the weight to be  attached  to
    the wishes of the Appellant to remain in the UK.  I do  not  find  that
    the  Appellant  has  demonstrated  that  there  are   any   exceptional
    circumstances which would lead to unjustifiably harsh  consequences  if
    he was refused leave to remain in the UK.  I fully appreciate that  the
    Appellant wishes to remain in this country, and that he has lived  here
    for a substantial period of time.  He has not  however  lived  in  this
    country for twenty years which is  the  period  required  in  order  to
    satisfy paragraph 276ADE(1)(iii).  In my view the medical evidence does
    not indicate that there is a real risk of  suicide.   The  Respondent's
    decision,  in  all  the  circumstances,  is  proportionate,   and   the
    Appellant's removal from the UK would not breach Article 8.


Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  on
a point of law and is set aside.  I substitute a fresh decision.

I dismiss the Appellant's appeal on asylum grounds.

I dismiss the appeal on humanitarian protection grounds.

I dismiss the appeal on human rights grounds.

An anonymity direction is made.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed                              Date         17th May 2019


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal is dismissed.  There is no fee award.



Signed                              Date         17th May 2019


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall
