
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12282/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 23 May 2019                       |On 05 June 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON


                                   Between

                                     Rm
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S McKeeve, Solicitor, McGlashan MacKay Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A Govan, Senior Presenting Officer


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008
Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, who is a national of the Philippines, has  been  granted
    permission to appeal the decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  David
    Clapham.  For reasons given in his decision dated 15 January  2019  the
    judge dismissed the appellant's appeal against the Secretary of State's
    decision dated 9 October 2018 refusing her protection and human  rights
    claim.

 2. The claim has some complexity.  In summary, the appellant was raised as
    a Roman Catholic in Manila.  A child was born to her relationship  with
    the individual who has disappeared.  In 2000 she obtained employment in
    the UAE and left her son behind with her  family  in  the  Philippines.
    She met her  husband  [AS]  in  the  UAE  who  was  studying  at  Ajman
    University.  On marriage she converted to Islam, and  thereafter  lived
    with her husband.  A son was born in 2009 and a daughter in 2011.   Her
    husband and his family are of Sudanese origin.

 3. In a family meeting in December 2017, the  appellant's  mother  in  law
    announced her intention to impose on her daughter FGM  in  April  2018.
    The appellant and her husband, together with the two children, came  on
    holiday to the United Kingdom on 1 April 2018, during which she  sought
    to dissuade her husband from FGM being carried out.  She resisted  when
    he had said the family would have to return home and he walked out when
    the appellant threatened to call the police.  He has not returned.  The
    appellant apprehends that family connections of her husband would  lead
    to her whereabouts in the Philippines being discovered and  they  would
    find someone to kill her.  The  police  in  the  Philippines  would  be
    bribed to take the children away.

 4. The judge had found the appellant to be a broadly credible witness  and
    accepted her account that she claimed asylum after her husband left her
    and the children in Birmingham.  He accepted that his family wanted  to
    impose FGM on their daughter.  The judge  concluded  that  neither  the
    appellant nor the children would be at risk in the Philippines.

 5. The grounds of challenge argue a failure by the judge to  consider  the
    human rights  grounds.   Specifically  there  had  been  a  failure  to
    consider paragraph 276ADE(vi) or the position outside the  Rules.   The
    obstacles to her integration are identified as:

    (i)  Her absence for approximately thirteen years.

    (ii) The risk, even if remote, that her  husband's  family  might  find
         her.

    (iii)    The death threat.

    (iv) Her conversion to Islam.

    (v)  The risk that her children might be removed from her custody.

    (vi) The children being nationals of Sudan and there was  an  increased
         risk of their removal.

 6. In granting permission  to  appeal,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Keane
    observed that there had been  no  permission  to  appeal  the  decision
    dismissing the appeal on asylum grounds.  In respect of  Article  8  it
    was incumbent upon the judge to arrive  at  findings  of  fact  and  to
    determine this aspect.

 7. Mr Govan accepted at the outset of  the  hearing  that  the  judge  had
    failed to consider the case under paragraph  276ADE(vi)  or  Article  8
    outside the rules and acknowledged that this amounted to  an  error  of
    law.  I consider he was correct to do so.  The judge's  decision  which
    is careful and detailed comes to a halt with the  conclusion  that  the
    asylum claim had not been made out to the necessary standard  and  that
    the appeal was dismissed.  Whilst the grounds of appeal to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal relied on protection grounds including Articles 2 and  3,
    I accept that there was argument before the judge on the impact on  the
    appellant's private and family life which required  consideration,  not
    least because of the presence of two children whose best interests were
    required to be considered under Section 55 of the Borders,  Citizenship
    and Immigration Act 2009.

 8. The extent of further findings will require further evidence for which,
    in accordance with the Practice Statement, the appropriate venue is the
    First-tier Tribunal.  I therefore set aside the decision and remit  the
    case for a reconstituted Tribunal to re-decide the matter.

 9. The parties have agreed the following issues for the scope of  the  re-
    hearing as follows:

      i) The findings on asylum and Article 3 risk are preserved.

     ii) The best interests pursuant  to  Section  55  are  required  to  be
         assessed.

    iii) Consideration of the case with reference  to  paragraph  276ADE(vi)
         will  be  needed.   This  will  entail  further  findings  of  fact
         including  those  factors  that  did  not  amount  to  a  risk   of
         persecution or a breach of Article 3  for  the  appellant  and  the
         children.

     iv) Consideration whether if the appellant is unable to  succeed  under
         paragraph 276ADE the interference  with  her  private  life  taking
         account of the best interests of the children is proportionate.


Signed                                  Date 31 May 2019

UTJ Dawson
Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson

