
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12442/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 11th October 2017                     |On 23rd October 2017                |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J G MACDONALD


                                   Between

                                     ah
                           (ANONYMITY order made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Mahmood, Counsel instructed by Nova Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Z Ahmad, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh whose appeal was dismissed  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge O'Garro in a  decision  promulgated  on  21st
    February 2017.

 2. Grounds of application were lodged and it was said that the  judge  had
    been wrong to conclude that  the  answers  provided  in  the  screening
    interview were materially different to the answers in  the  substantive
    interview.  As such the finding at paragraph 52 of the decision, namely
    that the Appellant did not disclose that he feared the  authorities  in
    Bangladesh in his screening interview was  unsound  and  simply  wrong.
    Other grounds are put forward.

 3. Permission to appeal was granted.

 4. Thus the matter came before me on the above date.

 5. Mr Mahmood appeared for the Appellant and relied  on  the  grounds  and
    also lodged a skeleton argument which expanded on the grounds.   It  is
    not necessary to go further into this because it  was  accepted  by  Ms
    Ahmad for the Home Office that the grounds were  well-founded  and  the
    decision would have to be set aside and the case heard again.

 6. The concession was well-made in my view because it is  clear  that  the
    judge has  misunderstood  the  Appellant's  answers  in  the  screening
    interview when comparing those in the substantive  interview.   He  was
    wrong to conclude that they were different.  Perhaps the answer in  the
    screening  interview  could  have  been  clearer  but   there   is   no
    inconsistency as found by the judge and therefore the  whole  reasoning
    for dismissing the case therefore  cannot  stand.   In  particular  the
    conclusion at paragraph 52 that the Appellant did not disclose that  he
    feared the  authorities  in  Bangladesh  is  clearly  wrong.  On  these
    findings alone the decision cannot be allowed to stand. There are other
    problems in the decision which it is not necessary to elaborate on.

 7. Because the findings are not safe and because further  fact-finding  is
    required the appeal is going to have to be heard again  by  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.

 8. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is therefore set aside  in  its
    entirety.  No findings of the First-tier Tribunal are to stand.   Under
    Section 12(2)(b)(i) of the 2007 Act and of Practice Statement  7.2  the
    nature and extent  of  the  judicial  fact-finding  necessary  for  the
    decision to be re-made is such that it is appropriate to remit the case
    to the First-tier Tribunal.  In the meantime the anonymity  order  will
    be continued.

Notice of Decision

 9. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

10. I set aside the decision.

11. I remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.

Order Regarding Anonymity  -  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any member of their family.  This  order  applies
both to the Appellant and to the Respondent.  Failure to  comply  with  this
order could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed    JG Macdonald                           Date   20th October 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J G Macdonald

