
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12554/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester CJC              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 4th April 2019                    |On 29th April 2019                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                  mr A H J
                         (ANONYMITY direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr G Madubuike (Solicitor)
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates (Senior HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against a determination of First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Shergill,  promulgated  on  6th  July  2018,  following  a  hearing  at
    Manchester  on  22nd  June  2018.   In  the  determination,  the  judge
    dismissed  the  appeal  of  the  Appellant,  whereupon  the   Appellant
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Iraq, and was born on 5th  August
    1989.  He appealed against the decision of  the  Respondent  dated  9th
    March  2018,  refusing  his  claim  for  asylum  and  for  humanitarian
    protection, pursuant to paragraph 339C of HC 395.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The essence of the Appellant's claim is that he fears Daesh, and cannot
    relocate to the IKR.  He has no identification documentation.  He  left
    this back at home when he fled away  from  his  village  as  the  Daesh
    attacked.  His village is, moreover, in a "contested"  area.   He  left
    his family behind.  He has not been able to find them.  He  has  stayed
    in Erbil illegally for a year and was then arrested.  He was  released,
    but was told he must present with a Sponsor or be removed, and this  he
    has been unable to do.

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge had two expert reports before him.  He had a large bundle  of
    documents.  He noted that the Appellant claimed  to  be  from  a  small
    village in a district (Karaj part of Makhmur)  which  comes  under  the
    Nineveh Province (Mosul), which is a contested area.  The  judge  found
    the expert reports by Dr  Fatah  and  by  Mr  Sarmemy  to  be  entirely
    credible (see paragraphs 13 to 14).  Both of the expert reports  before
    the judge set out in detail the  account  given  by  the  Appellant  as
    coming from the Makhmur District.  This  district  is  subdivided  into
    three subdistricts.  The Appellant referenced various smaller  villages
    and his own village as being located there.  The judge  recorded  that,
    "I am therefore satisfied that the Appellant does come from the village
    he claims to, and that this in the Makhmur  District"  (paragraph  15).
    Indeed, the Makhmur District was  "part  of  the  disputed  territories
    bordering the KRG and the rest of Iraq; and  it  has  ethnically  mixed
    populations"  (paragraph  16).   The  judge  also  accepted  that   the
    Appellant's village was attacked by Daesh (paragraph  21).   The  issue
    now, was whether the Appellant could return to the IKR.

 5. The judge observed that the  Karaj  subdistrict  and  Erbil  city  were
    places  where   there   was   "close   proximity   geographically   and
    linguistically".  The Appellant claimed only ever to have visited Erbil
    once previously.  The judge held that this was not credible given  that
    "he is capable of driving and the city is  less  than  an  hour  away."
    (Paragraph 26).  The judge accordingly  concluded  that  the  Appellant
    must have spent quite a bit of time in Erbil city.

 6. Second, the judge also found that the Appellant gave a "curious account
    of how he fled his village and how he managed to enter the  IKR."   The
    judge felt that "the Appellant was not being truthful  about  how  much
    time he has actually spent in Erbil city itself.  My conclusion is that
    you  only  pick  up  an  accent  after   spending   considerable   time
    somewhere...",  and  that  the  Appellant's  situation  "leaves  me  to
    conclude that the Appellant was fabricating that part of  his  account"
    and "that he was actually most recently  from  Erbil  city"  (paragraph
    27).  That said, the judge concluded that  "there  are  no  other  risk
    factors now that Daesh are a spent  force  and  the  IKR  is  virtually
    violence free" (paragraph 28).

 7. That left the question of whether the Appellant could now return on the
    basis of his documentation.  The Appellant claimed that he had left his
    CSID card back at home.  The judge did not find this  to  be  credible.
    The judge referred to the recent decision in  AAH.   This  was  a  case
    where, although the appeal was heard by Judge  Shergill  on  22nd  June
    2018, a few days later on  26th  June  2018,  the  Upper  Tribunal  had
    promulgated the new country guidance case of AAH, and Judge  Shergill's
    decision was then promulgated after  that  on  6th  July  2018.   Judge
    Shergill, however, did not invite during  this  time  submissions  from
    both sides as to the import of the latest country guidance case on  his
    deliberations.

 8. Even so, the judge was not satisfied that the Appellant  had  lost  his
    CSID card (paragraph 32).  If he had lost it, the judge concluded,

         "I see no reason why the Appellant could not  approach  the  United
         Kingdom  base  Iraqi  or  IKR  authorities  (including  the   Iraqi
         Consulate in Manchester) to try to trace his family  and/or  obtain
         the necessary details to obtain a replacement CSID" (paragraph 33).



 9. The appeal was dismissed.

Grounds of Application

10. The grounds of application state that the judge had erred in law  in  a
    number of important respects.   First,  the  judge  had  concluded  (at
    paragraph 20) in a manner that was contrary to the country  and  expert
    reports, when stating that the Appellant was from  Erbil.   Second,  he
    had misrepresented the expert and country guidance evidence.  Third, he
    had  contradicted  himself  (at  paragraph  12)  in  finding  that  the
    Appellant is credible in claiming he is wrong a contested area but then
    concluding (at paragraph 20) that he is from Erbil.  Fourth, the  judge
    failed to give adequate reasons for finding against the  Appellant  (at
    paragraph 21) for not having a CSID card with him when his village  was
    attacked.  Fifth, the judge was wrong in finding that the Appellant had
    not returned back to his village to check on his family  where  it  was
    accepted by the Secretary of State and the judge (at paragraph 20) that
    the attack took place.  Sixth, that the judge's assessment  as  to  the
    possibility of entry to the KRG by the Appellant  was  tainted  by  his
    erroneous conclusion that the Appellant was from Erbil and  not  Mosul.
    Finally, the judge failed to take account of the country guidance  case
    of AAH which was promulgated prior to  his  decision  and  the  reasons
    impacted on his conclusions in respect of the CSID, and this undermined
    the safety of his conclusions as to the return of the Appellant to  the
    KRG, and the viability of internal relocation.

11. On 12th November 2018, permission to appeal was granted  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal with the following observations.  First, it was stated that it
    was contradictory for the judge to have stated both that  there  was  a
    geographical and linguistic proximity between Erbil city and Mosul, and
    to have also stated that the Appellant must have come from  Erbil  city
    given the dialect that he spoke.  If there was  proximity  between  the
    two, then this did not require the Appellant to  have  lived  in  Erbil
    city to have had the same linguistic dialect as in Erbil city.  Second,
    that the judge referred to the country guidance case of AAH in a manner
    that was unfair to the Appellant because he did so absent relisting the
    appeal in order to hear submissions from both parties as to the  impact
    of AAH on the extant appeal, and  in  particular  with  regard  to  the
    Appellant's ability to obtain a CSID, and his ability to travel to  the
    IKR, given that he would be returned to Baghdad.

Submissions

12. At the hearing before me, Mr  Madubuike  relied  upon  his  grounds  of
    application.  He submitted that the judge  had  misapplied  the  expert
    reports, having found that the Appellant was from Mosul.  Mr  Madubuike
    also stated that the judge should have invited submissions on the  case
    of AAH before promulgating his determination.  Moreover, it  was  wrong
    for the judge to simply assume that the Appellant must  have  kept  the
    CSID card on his person, when his village  was  attacked,  rather  than
    leave it behind in his village, so that it was lost  thereafter,  which
    would make it now impossible for him to procure a new one,  given  what
    has been said in AAH.

13. For his part, Mr Bates submitted that the nub of the  decision  by  the
    judge lies at paragraph 32.  Here the judge states that  the  Appellant
    claimed that his CSID was left at home but the judge did not find  this
    credible.  The matters referenced at paragraph 105 of AAH

         "Are either within his knowledge, required the input from the Iraqi
         authorities here or in Iraq, or input from the Red Cross or others.
          It is the  Appellant's  obligation  to  engage  with  those  three
         strands and it is inconceivable he has sat idly by for nearly three
         years" (paragraph 32).

14. Secondly, in any event, the judge  then  also  considers  the  scenario
    whereby the Appellant may have lost his CSID card and has  lost  family
    ties.  In that situation (see paragraph 33) the  judge  concluded  that
    there was no reason why the Appellant could not approach  the  relevant
    authorities in the UK, including the Iraqi Consulate in Manchester,  to
    try and trace his family, or to obtain  the  necessary  details  for  a
    replacement CSID.




15. Third, submitted Mr Bates, given that the Appellant will be returned to
    Baghdad, and given that the judge's finding was that he had resided  in
    the IKR, there was no reason  why  he  could  not  then  find  internal
    relocation from Baghdad on to the IKR again.  He would be treated as  a
    person from the local population.

No Error of Law

16. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA 2007) such that I should set aside the  decision  and  remake  the
    decision.  My reasons are as follows.  First, I accept that unnecessary
    confusion was caused by the Tribunal decision below,  in  both  stating
    that  there  was  between  Karaj  subdistrict  and  Erbil  city  "close
    proximity geographically and linguistically" (paragraph 26),  and  also
    asserting that the Appellant must have spent a  significant  period  of
    time in Erbil city, to acquire an Erbil accent because "you  only  pick
    up an accent after spending  considerable  time  somewhere"  (paragraph
    27).  The fact remains, that the Appellant is from the KRG.  Second, it
    is accepted that the Appellant's village was attacked by Daesh.  Third,
    it is also accepted that the Daesh are now a spent force and the IKR is
    virtually violence free (see paragraph 28 of the  determination).   The
    remaining  issue,  therefore,  is  that  to  do  with  the  Appellant's
    possession of the requisite documents to enable him to  return  to  the
    IKR via Baghdad.  The Appellant claims that, as he was not  travelling,
    he had left his CSID in his home in the village,  when  Daesh  attacked
    it, and the practise of Daesh is to destroy all  documentation  in  any
    attack.  The consequences that he is now without a  CSID.   This  means
    that he cannot return.

17. If one looks at the latest country guidance case now of AAH (Iraq Kurds
    - internal relocation) Iraq CG [2018] UKUT 00212, the headnote of  this
    makes it clear at paragraph 1(i) that what will be significant will be,



         "Whether P has any other  form  of  documentation,  or  information
         about the location of his entry in  the  civil  register.   An  INC
         passport, birth/marriage certificates or an expired CSID would  all
         be of substantial assistance.  For someone in possession of one  or
         more of those documents the process should be straightforward....".



18. It has also made clear in headnote 1(iii) that it is relevant  to  ask,
    "are there male family members who will able and willing to attend  the
    civil registry with P?" and in this case, because the Appellant  has  a
    brother who is in the  Peshmerga  forces,  then,  as  the  judge  below
    concludes, "the office of the Peshmerga will have his details including
    his CSID information.  That could be cross-referenced for the  relevant
    book entry  details  for  the  Appellant  to  obtain  his  replacement"
    (paragraph 33).

19. It is not the case, as has been submitted before  me,  that  the  judge
    misapplied the case of AAH.  The judge had found that the Appellant had
    not been credible in his evidence in relation to his CSID  and  contact
    with his family.  He concluded that the Appellant could relocate to the
    IKR.  On the evidence before him, that conclusion was open to the judge
    to come to.



Decision

20. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    an error on a point of law.  The decision shall stand.

21. An anonymity order is made.

22. The appeal is dismissed.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Dated

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 25th April 2019



