
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12189/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8 January 2020                    |On 15 January 2020                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

                                     TH
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Raza of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan.

 2. Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
    Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  Appellant
    is granted anonymity. No report of these proceedings shall directly  or
    indirectly identify him, his partner or child. This  direction  applies
    both to the Appellant and to the Respondent.

 3. In a determination promulgated on the  26th  February  2019,  the  FtTJ
    (Judge Hanbury) dismissed  his  appeal  against  the  decision  of  the
    Respondent made on the 9th August 2018 to  refuse  his  protection  and
    human rights claim.

 4. Grounds of appeal were submitted  on  behalf  of  the  appellant  which
    principally challenged the FtTJ's  assessment  of  the  nature  of  the
    relationship between the appellant and his partner and the  failure  to
    make findings on material evidence which went to the  issue  of  family
    life, some of which had been unchallenged evidence.

 5. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Beach  on
    the 2nd April 2019.

 6. At the hearing before the Upper Tribunal on the 30th October  2019  the
    advocates agreed that the decision of the FtTJ involved the  making  of
    an  error  on  a  point  of  law.  Ms  Petterson,  in  her  submissions
    highlighted the inconsistent evidence given by the parties and set  out
    at paragraph 19 of the decision but accepted that the issue of  whether
    the appellant  and  his  partner  were  in  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship was not a point taken in  the  decision  letter  and  that
    there was other evidence available relevant to  that  issue  which  the
    FtTJ had not taken into account and that this was a material error.

 7. I set out in my decision the reasons why there was an error of  law  in
    the decision of FtTJ Hanbury as follows:

         "20. It is plain from the decision  letter  that  the  respondent's
         decision was based on the  acceptance  that  the  appellant  had  a
         genuine and subsisting relationship with his partner and  expressly
         made reference to their Islamic marriage and that the  relationship
         could continue in Pakistan. It is right to observe that  there  had
         been no consideration of family life and no real  analysis  of  the
         issue of insurmountable obstacles beyond the reference made to  the
         Islamic marriage at paragraph 87.

         21.  Whilst it was open to the judge to find that the appellant and
         his  partner  has  given  inconsistent  evidence  about  when   the
         relationship began and made reference to the  lack  of  documentary
         evidence concerning cohabitation, to reach the  overall  conclusion
         that this was not a genuine relationship and a "manufactured"  one,
         it is necessary to take account and analyse  all  of  the  material
         evidence that was before the Tribunal.

         22.  As the grounds set out, there  was  no  reference  within  the
         decision to the evidence presented to the Tribunal which related to
         C's pregnancy. There was evidence before the Tribunal demonstrating
         that the appellant's partner was in the later stages  of  pregnancy
         as set out in the pregnancy notes (page 81 onwards, the  ultrasound
         scans and the correspondence of the hospital). There was  reference
         to her due date of delivery being 10 March  2019,  a  date  shortly
         after the hearing itself. That written material  was  supported  by
         further written evidence in  the  witness  statements  produced  on
         behalf of the appellant and C that she was  eight  months  pregnant
         with her first child. None of that evidence was referred to in  the
         assessment of whether the parties were in a genuine relationship or
         the strength of that relationship rather than a "manufactured one".
         This evidence went to the strength of family life.

         23.  It is correct to observe  that  the  pregnancy  notes  do  not
         expressly refer to the appellant by name but as the  FtTJ  appeared
         to  accept  that  they  were  living  together,  this  was   strong
         inferential evidence that he was the father when seen in the  light
         of  the  evidence  the  parties,  the  written  documentation,  the
         evidence of C 's mother and the evidence of the social worker.

         24.  The grounds also identify other relevant  evidence  which  was
         not taken into account in the form of C's mother.  She  provided  a
         witness statement and also gave oral evidence before the  Tribunal.
         It is recorded at [10] that she did give oral  evidence  which  was
         unchallenged  and  set  out  some  of  that  evidence.  Beyond  the
         reference made at [10] there is no analysis of her evidence in  the
         context of  the  issue  of  the  relationship.  This  evidence  was
         arguably corroborative of C's evidence that they were  in  a  long-
         term relationship, that C was pregnant, and the father of her child
         was the appellant (see witness statement filed). It is  right  that
         the witness statement does not give great detail, but the important
         aspects  related  to  the  genuineness  of  the  relationship,  her
         daughter's pregnancy, the appellant being the father of  the  child
         and also that this was unchallenged evidence. Consequently, it  was
         incumbent upon the FtTJ to make some assessment  of  that  evidence
         alongside the evidence as a whole when reaching a conclusion on the
         issue of the relationship of family life.

         25.  There was also evidence of a social worker  relevant  to  this
         issue which the judge gave little or no weight to. The grounds make
         reference to this as a "mischaracterisation" of  the  evidence  and
         challenges the assessment of that evidence.

         26.  I would agree that the weight  given  to  a  letter  when  the
         author is not present would not be as great for the obvious  reason
         that there is no opportunity for  the  other  party  to  test  that
         evidence and to deal with points that  may  require  clarification.
         However, the contents of the letter did deserve to be given greater
         weight in the overall assessment of the issue of the nature of  the
         relationship. I accept the submission made  that  contrary  to  the
         assessment made, the contents of the letter  demonstrate  that  the
         social worker was expressing a professional opinion  when  she  set
         out her knowledge of the parties and particularly C.  The  contents
         of that letter sets out that she had undertaken  direct  work  with
         both C and her partner and that the work undertaken as expressed in
         that document was clearly material in reaching an overall  decision
         on the genuineness of the relationship  and  the  strength  of  the
         family life.

         27.  Drawing together those  issues,  in  my  judgement  there  was
         material evidence which is either not taken into account  or  given
         any weight in the overall conclusion reached as to the  genuineness
         of the relationship and consequently the strength of  family  life.
         As a result and having found that there was no sufficiently  strong
         family life, there  was  no  further  assessment  of  the  relevant
         Article 8 issues.

 8. For those reasons, the Tribunal was satisfied that the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal judge involved the making of an error  of  law  and
    therefore the decision reached on the Article 8 (human rights  grounds)
    could not stand and was set aside.

 9. Having heard the submissions of the advocates, both  agreed  that  this
    was an appeal which would require further evidence  and  findings  made
    upon that evidence and that as the circumstances  had  changed  in  the
    interim, I therefore reached the decision that the  appropriate  course
    to take was for the appeal to remain in the Upper Tribunal  to  be  re-
    made in accordance with the directions accompanying the  error  of  law
    decision.

10. The grounds do not challenge the findings made by the FtTJ relating  to
    the protection claim and the decision to dismiss the protection  appeal
    and I preserved those findings and decision made  upon  his  protection
    claim which was dismissed.

The remaking of the appeal before the Upper Tribunal:

11. The background  to  the  appeal  can  be  summarised  as  follows.  The
    Appellant entered the United Kingdom on the 17th  September  2010  with
    leave as a student and following an extension, his visa  was  curtailed
    to expire on the 16th November 2011.  It is claimed that he left the UK
    voluntarily in or about June 2014.  When  in  Pakistan,  the  appellant
    became engaged in an argument with a preacher. It was  stated  that  he
    had been accused of blasphemy by the preacher and that a fatwa had been
    pronounced against him. On various occasions he stated that he had been
    followed and subject to threats and had been beaten and later arrested.

12. He left Pakistan in or about June  2015  using  his  own  passport  and
    arrived in Cyprus with a valid visit visa  where  he  stayed  for  four
    months and then travelled to the UK via Ireland arriving  in  or  about
    October 2015. He remained in the UK illegally and married his  partner,
    C, on the 4 November 2017. After being encountered by the  authorities,
    he made a claim for asylum on the 9th February 2018. He is in a genuine
    and subsisting relationship with his partner  and  they  have  a  child
    born, A, in 2019.

13. Hi protection and human rights claim was refused in  a  decision  dated
    9th August 2018. The protection claim was addressed at paragraphs 26-53
    with the respondent rejecting the appellant's claim that  he  had  been
    blasphemous  and  had  been  attacked.  In  the  alternative,  it   was
    considered that there was sufficiency of protection for him or that  he
    could internally relocate (see paragraphs 60-68).

14. As to Article 8, there was no assessment under Appendix  FM  or  as  to
    family life under the Rules.

15. As to private life under  Paragraph  276ADE,  he  could  not  meet  the
    requirements given his length of residence since September 2010. As  to
    whether there were any very significant obstacles  to  his  integration
    into Pakistan, it was not accepted that there would be such significant
    obstacles given that he had spent his  earlier  life  in  Pakistan  and
    would be able to find and sustain work by using the  qualifications  he
    had obtained in the UK.

16. At paragraphs 84-87 the decision letter made reference to whether there
    were any "exceptional circumstances" for a grant  of  leave  to  remain
    outside of the Rules, taking into account  his  relationship  with  his
    partner and that they had  been  married  in  an  Islamic  marriage  in
    November 2017. In the light of the marriage,  it  was  considered  that
    there were no reasons to suggest he could not maintain his marriage  in
    Pakistan and that there was no evidence that there would be any form of
    persecutory harm to them based on that marriage.

The evidence:

17. I have a bundle of documents submitted on behalf of the appellant which
    includes witness statements from the appellant, his partner and  family
    members and friends. There is also evidence from  the  local  authority
    pages 25-29 that relates to work undertaken previously and recently.

18. Both parties filed witness statements which stood is their evidence  in
    chief. No further questions were asked  of  the  appellant.  There  was
    limited cross examination and the appellant was asked if there was  any
    reason why his partner could not relocate to  Pakistan?  The  appellant
    stated that she could not live in Pakistan due to cultural  differences
    and being unable to speak the language as well as the environment. When
    asked  to  be  more  specific,  he  made  reference  to   the   general
    circumstances including the people and that she would  be  a  focus  of
    interest. He  confirmed  that  he  had  taken  part  in  the  parenting
    assessment and that  he  knew  the  reason  for  such  work,  which  he
    articulated as being the  problems  that  C  had  in  relation  to  her
    upbringing. Similarly  the  appellant's  partner,  C,  adopted  her  to
    witness statements dated 1/2 19 and 5/11/19 as her evidence  in  chief.
    She was not asked any additional questions. The only question that  she
    was asked in cross-examination was whether there were any  reasons  why
    she and her baby could not relocate Pakistan.  She  stated  by  way  of
    reply that she did not think it was safe there and that they should  be
    in the United Kingdom. She said she had concerns  as  to  her  children
    being raised and that she had all her family in the United Kingdom. She
    said in her evidence that she could not cope without support  that  she
    has in the United Kingdom.

The submissions:

19. At the conclusion of the evidence I heard submissions from each of  the
    advocates. Mr Diwnycz on behalf of the respondent accepted  that  there
    was a genuine and subsisting relationship between the appellant and his
    partner C and that there was a child born of that relationship who  was
    a qualifying child as a British citizen. He accepted also that the  DNA
    evidence demonstrated that the appellant was the father of child A.  He
    also did not challenge the evidence which  demonstrated  that  she  was
    pregnant with a second child. He submitted that it was a matter for the
    appellant to argue that  there  were  no  insurmountable  obstacles  to
    relocation or that it would be unreasonable for child a  to  leave  the
    United Kingdom. No further submissions were made.

20. Mr Raza on behalf of the appellant relied  upon  the  decision  of  the
    Upper Tribunal in JG (s  117B(6):  "reasonable  to  leave"  UK)  Turkey
    [2019] UKUT 72 (IAC)in addition to the policy guidance set out at  page
    9 of the appellant's witness statement  that the starting point  for  a
    qualifying child would be that it would be unreasonable  to  leave  the
    United Kingdom. He submitted that there  were  no  strong  or  powerful
    reasons which would indicate that the  starting  point  should  not  be
    applied. When it was pointed out that the guidance relied upon  in  the
    witness statement had been updated, he was able to  make  reference  to
    the latest guidance published on 10 December 2019. By reference to page
    48 of the guidance, he submitted that it again  set  out  the  starting
    point and that the decision of the Supreme Court had been referenced in
    the guidance.

21. He submitted that the decision in JG made reference to the  requirement
    of powerful and strong reasons to rebut the starting point and no  such
    reasons had been advanced by the Secretary of State. The factual matrix
    concerned a British citizen child and that the relationship was genuine
    and subsisting.  When  looking  at  the  specific  considerations,  the
    marriage between the  appellant  and  his  partner  was  an  interfaith
    marriage and her witness statement  made  reference  to  her  being  an
    atheist and under Pakistani law the marriage would  likely  to  not  be
    accepted (see page 153 - 154 of the bundle at 2.21 and 3.1.4). Even  if
    the marriage would be accepted,  he  submitted  that  the  respondent's
    guidance made  reference  to  mixed  marriages  being  the  subject  of
    harassment. Furthermore, as  the  appellant  set  out  in  his  witness
    statement there were issues with his family  who  did  not  accept  the
    marriage and that it was likely  that  the  appellant's  partner  would
    experience practical day-to-day issues as a result and that this  would
    not be in the best interests of the child.

22. Mr Reza placed weight and reliance upon the evidence  from  the  social
    worker that was in the bundle at pages 25  -  29  and  highlighted  the
    benefit and support that the appellant provided for the  appellant  but
    also the support for his partner and the child that had  been  provided
    in the UK. He submitted that it was significant as set out at  page  26
    that child A would lose the benefit of the safeguards in place  if  she
    were to leave the United Kingdom and this was an issue relevant to  her
    best  interests.  He  therefore  submitted  that   removal   would   be
    disproportionate  on  the  particular  factual  circumstances  of   the
    appellant, his partner and child.

23. As to the issue of insurmountable  obstacles,  he  submitted  that  the
    practical issues should be considered as outlined in  the  most  recent
    decision of the Court of Appeal in Lal v SSHD  [2019]  EWCA  Civ  1925.
    There was no dispute that the appellant had no connections to Pakistan,
    that she did not know the culture and was  not  a  Muslim.  There  were
    concerns about the legality of the marriage, she was not able to  speak
    the language and that she would be likely to attract  attention.  These
    were the very clear practical issues identified on the  factual  matrix
    in addition to the fact that she would be without the  support  of  her
    family and friends and importantly the social  services  support  which
    was relevant given the history. He supported that  all  of  those  when
    taken together cumulatively demonstrated that there were insurmountable
    obstacles for family life continuing outside of the UK.





Findings of fact and analysis:

24. There is no dispute between the parties that the appellant married  his
    partner in an Islamic ceremony on the 4th November 2017 and that  there
    is a genuine subsisting relationship  between  the  appellant  and  his
    partner and that they live together as a functioning family unit. There
    is also no dispute that the appellant is the father of A, born in  2019
    in the light of the DNA evidence and that his partner is  due  to  give
    birth in March 2020.

25. I heard little oral evidence from the  appellant  and  his  partner  as
    there was little cross-examination of them and I  therefore  rely  upon
    the  written  documentation   provided   including   the   accompanying
    statements  which  were  unchallenged.  The  written  evidence  of  the
    appellant's partner which was adopted as her evidence was that  she  is
    in a genuine relationship with the appellant and that she would not  go
    to Pakistan to live with him and therefore his removal would split  the
    family. It has not been challenged by the respondent that  his  partner
    has lived in the UK all of her life and this is where  her  family  is.
    She has never been  to  Pakistan  indeed  she  has  never  left  United
    Kingdom, nor does she speak any other language.

26. In her witness statement she  makes  reference  to  how  she  would  be
    perceived in Pakistan. Mr Raza on behalf of the appellant places weight
    and reliance upon this evidence and that as  she  is  a  white  atheist
    female she would be viewed as an outsider and that in the light of  the
    objective material, there would  be  obstacles  to  their  marriage  in
    Pakistan.  In  addition,  both  the  appellant  and  her  partner  make
    reference  to  the  disapproval  of  the  appellant's  family  of   the
    relationship. The appellant's partner also makes reference to the state
    of affairs in Pakistan and its relatively lack of safety  for  her  and
    their child. Given the lack of challenge to that evidence, I proceed on
    the basis of this factual matrix.

27. There is also evidence  in  the  appellant's  bundle  relating  to  the
    appellant's partners early years. It is not necessary for me to set out
    the contents of the letter from the social worker at  page  25  or  the
    child/young person in need review and its contents which is set out  at
    page 26. Those documents have been in the possession of the  respondent
    and they have not been the subject of any challenge by  the  respondent
    or during the hearing. It indicates that there  has  been  social  work
    input with the appellant's partner during her life and that as a result
    when her pregnancy was known, a child in need plan has been formulated.
    The letter at page 25 is supportive of  the  relationship  between  the
    appellant and his partner and that it has had a significant  impact  on
    her in a positive way and he has provided a protective factor for  her.
    At pages 26 - 31 the review plan makes reference to the plan  being  in
    place to support them with parenting and carry  out  further  parenting
    assessment work. The concerns set out at page 28 have all said to  have
    been achieved. At page 29 of that document there is reference to  post-
    birth parenting support for the appellant's partner and the  completion
    of work done with other agencies. I would accept the submission made by
    Mr Raza that this evidence demonstrates that she has had the benefit of
    safeguarding support and that that also extends to child  A  to  ensure
    that she is safely cared for and that this would not  be  available  to
    her if she left United Kingdom.

28. By virtue of section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act
    2009, in making decisions on removal, the Secretary of State must  have
    regard to the need to safeguard and promote the welfare of children who
    are in the UK.

29. The House of Lords, in ZH (Tanzania) v Home Secretary [2011]2 AC 166  ,
    held that, in the application of  article  8(2),  the  children's  best
    interests should be treated  as  "a  primary  consideration",  to  give
    effect to article 3.1 of the UN Convention on the Rights of the  Child.
    Nationality and the rights of citizenship are of particular  importance
    in assessing the best interests of any child. Thus, the  decision-maker
    must ask whether it is reasonable  to  expect  the  child  to  live  in
    another country, and to be deprived of the opportunity to exercise  the
    rights of a British citizen. However, even if it is found to be in  the
    best interests of the child to remain in the UK,  that  factor  can  be
    outweighed by the strength of "countervailing considerations" in favour
    of removal (per Lady Hale at [29] - [33]).

30.  In Zoumbas v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2013]  UKSC
    74, Lord Hodge, delivering the judgment of the  Court,  summarised  the
    principles to be applied, at [10]:

         "(1) The best interests of a child are  an  integral  part  of  the
         proportionality assessment under article 8 ECHR;

         (2)  In making that assessment, the best interests of a child  must
         be a primary consideration, although not always  the  only  primary
         consideration; and the child's best interests do not of  themselves
         have the status of the paramount consideration;

         (3)  Although the best interests of a child can  be  outweighed  by
         the  cumulative  effect   of   other   considerations,   no   other
         consideration can be treated as inherently more significant;

         (4)  While different judges might approach the question of the best
         interests of a child in different ways,  it  is  important  to  ask
         oneself the right questions in an orderly manner in order to  avoid
         the risk that the best interests of a child  might  be  undervalued
         when other important considerations were in play;

         (5)   It  is  important  to  have  a  clear  idea  of   a   child's
         circumstances and of what is in a child's best interests before one
         asks oneself whether those interests are outweighed by the force of
         other considerations;

         (6)  To that end there is no substitute for a  careful  examination
         of all relevant factors when the interests of a child are  involved
         in an article 8 assessment; and

         (7)  A child must not be blamed for matters for which he or she  is
         not responsible, such as the conduct of a parent."

31. I have carried out an assessment of the best interests of the  child  A
    based on the evidence and in accordance with Section  55  of  the  2009
    Act. There is  no  dispute  that  the  best  interests  of  A  must  be
    considered and assessed  in  isolation  from  other  factors,  such  as
    parental  misconduct  (see  Kaur  (children's   best   interests/public
    interface) [2017] UKUT00014 (IAC).

32. In the light  of  my  assessment  that  appellant  has  a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship with his child, it would plainly be in the best
    interests of the child A for their current stable environment, in which
    both parents are present playing their respective parts, to continue. I
    take her best interests into account as  a  primary  consideration.  It
    would not be in her best interests for the child to be parted from  the
    appellant, either on a temporary basis or on a  permanent  basis  given
    the difficulties outlined in  the  documentation  that  refers  to  the
    previous social work involvement with his partner and the support  that
    he is currently providing. It would also not be in her  best  interests
    to not have the safeguarding support that is available to  her  in  the
    United Kingdom.

Discussion:

33. There is no dispute that the appellant cannot not meet the requirements
    under Paragraph 276ADE concerning his private life.  The  appellant  is
    over 18 years of age and has not continuously  resided  in  the  United
    Kingdom for 20 years given his arrival in the UK  unlawfully  in  2015.
    Therefore, he cannot meet paragraph 276 ADE (1)(i)-(v).

34.  As  to  whether  there  were  very  significant   obstacles   to   his
    reintegration to Pakistan, the appellant had spent the majority of  his
    life in Pakistan where he has family.  It has not been  suggested  that
    he has lost any connection to his country of origin that would  suggest
    any significant obstacle to his integration there; he continues to have
    linguistic, cultural and family ties to Pakistan.

35. The appellant cannot meet the  requirements  under  Appendix  FM  as  a
    parent as he is not the sole care of the qualifying child concerned. Mr
    Raza advances the appellant's case based on his family  life  with  his
    partner and child under Appendix FM and EX1(a) and  Article  8  of  the
    ECHR.

36. There is no right of appeal to the Tribunal  on  the  ground  that  the
    Secretary  of  State's  decision  was  not  in  accordance   with   the
    Immigration Rules. The only relevant  right  of  appeal  under  section
    82(1)(b) of the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  (as
    amended by the Immigration Act 2014) in a case of this kind is from the
    decision of the Secretary of State to refuse a "human rights  claim"  -
    defined in section 113 of the 2002 Act as a claim made by a  person  to
    the Secretary of State that to remove the person from or require him to
    leave the United Kingdom would be unlawful under section 6 of the Human
    Rights Act 1998.  Nonetheless  the  Immigration  Rules  and  associated
    guidance are highly  relevant  to  the  tribunal's  task  because  they
    reflect  the  responsible  Minister's  general   assessment   of   when
    interference with the right to respect for private and family  life  is
    justified  under  article  8(2)  on  the  basis  of  legitimate  public
    interests. As explained by the Supreme Court in R (Ali) v Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2016] UKSC 60; [2016] 1 WLR 4799,  paras
    44-46, 50 and 53, and R (Agyarko) v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2017] UKSC 11; [2017] 1 WLR 823, paras 46-47, the  European
    Court has acknowledged that national authorities have a wide margin  of
    appreciation  in   relation   to   immigration   control;   under   the
    constitutional  arrangements  of  the  UK,  the  national   authorities
    responsible for determining policy in relation to  immigration,  within
    the limits of this margin of appreciation, are the Secretary  of  State
    and  Parliament;  and  courts  and  tribunals  in  dealing  with  cases
    therefore have to bear in mind the Secretary of State's  constitutional
    responsibility for policy in this area,  and  the  endorsement  of  the
    rules by Parliament, and have to take the Secretary of  State's  policy
    into account and to attach considerable  weight  to  it  at  a  general
    level, as well as considering all the factors which are relevant to the
    particular case.

37. Applying the test set out in Razgar [2004] UKHL 54,  I  find  that  the
    appellant has formed a family life with his  partner  and  his  British
    child.  His removal to Pakistan  would  be  an  interference  with  the
    family life they share, but would be in accordance with the law,  given
    that the appellant is in the UK unlawfully. The issue  is  whether  his
    removal would be proportionate.

38. Part 5A applies where a court or  tribunal  is  required  to  determine
    whether a decision made under the Immigration Acts breaches  article  8
    and as a result would be unlawful under section 6 of the  Human  Rights
    Act  1998.  Section  117A(2)  requires  the  court  or   tribunal,   in
    considering whether an interference with a person's  right  to  respect
    for private and family life is justified under article  8(2),  to  have
    regard in all cases to  the  considerations  listed  in  section  117B.
    Sections 117A - D NIAA 2002.

39. Sections 117A-D NIAA 2002 have set out public  interest  considerations
    which a court or tribunal must take into account  in  an  appeal  based
    upon article 8:

         "117A Application of this Part

         (1)  This Part applies where a court or  tribunal  is  required  to
         determine whether a decision made under the Immigration Acts-"

             (a)  breaches a person's right  to  respect  for  private  and
             family life under Article 8, and

             (b)  as a result would be unlawful  under  section  6  of  the
             Human Rights Act 1998.

         (2)  In considering the public  interest  question,  the  court  or
         tribunal must (in particular) have regard-"

             (a)  in all cases, to the  considerations  listed  in  section
             117B, and

             (b)  in cases concerning the deportation of foreign criminals,
             to the considerations listed in section 117C.

         (3)  In subsection (2), "the public interest  question"  means  the
         question of whether  an  interference  with  a  person's  right  to
         respect for private and family  life  is  justified  under  Article
         8(2).

         117B Article 8: public interest considerations  applicable  in  all
         cases

         (1)  The maintenance of effective immigration controls  is  in  the
         public interest.

         (2)  It is in  the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
         interests of the economic well-being of the  United  Kingdom,  that
         persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom are  able
         to speak English, because persons who can speak English-"

             (a)  are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

             (b)  are better able to integrate into society.

         (3)  It is in  the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
         interests of the economic well-being of the  United  Kingdom,  that
         persons who seek to enter or  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  are
         financially independent, because such persons-"

             (a)  are not a burden on taxpayers, and

             (b)  are better able to integrate into society.

         (4)  Little weight should be given to-"

             (a)  a private life, or

             (b)  a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,

         that is established by a person at a time when the person is in the
         United Kingdom unlawfully.

         (5)  Little weight should be given to a private life established by
         a person  at  a  time  when  the  person's  immigration  status  is
         precarious.

         (6)  In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation,  the
         public interest does not require the person's removal where-"

             (a)   the  person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting   parental
             relationship with a qualifying child, and

             (b)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave
             the United Kingdom.

40. 117D Interpretation of this Part

         (1)  In this Part-"

         "Article 8" means Article 8 of the  European  Convention  on  Human
         Rights;

         "qualifying child" means a person who is under the age  of  18  and
         who-

             (a)  is a British citizen, or

             (b)  has lived in the United Kingdom for a  continuous  period
             of seven years or more;

         "qualifying partner" means a partner who-"

             (a)  is a British citizen, or

             (b)  who is settled in the United Kingdom (within the  meaning
             of the Immigration Act 1971 - see section 33(2A) of that Act).

41. Both advocates agree that the issue that I have to  decide  relates  to
    the issue of reasonableness, either under EX1 or  s.117B(6)(b)  of  the
    2002  Act  is  satisfied,  i.e.  whether  it  is  reasonable  for   the
    appellant's child to leave the United Kingdom. If it  is  satisfied,  I
    would allow the appeal on  human  rights  grounds  on  the  basis  that
    s.117B(6)(b) is satisfied. If not, I would be required to consider  the
    overall proportionality balance.

42. I have therefore considered the decisions relevant to the consideration
    of EX1 (a) and S 117B (6).

43.  Mr Raza has referred me to the decision of  JG (s 117B(6): "reasonable
    to leave" UK) Turkey [2019] UKUT 72 (IAC) where a Presidential panel of
    the Upper Tribunal held inter alia:

         "33. We have seen how, in  KO  (Nigeria),  the  Supreme  Court  had
         regard to the respondent's IDI in its examination of  section  117B
         (6). In his submissions, Mr Malik drew our attention to the  latest
         relevant publication of the respondent; namely  "Family  Migration:
         Appendix FM Section 1.0b"...

         36.  There are a number of things to say about this IDI. First,  it
         cannot override ordinary principles of statutory construction.  If,
         applying those principles, a court or tribunal  determines  that  a
         statutory provision falls to be interpreted in  a  particular  way,
         the fact that the IDI may take a different view is irrelevant.

         37.  Second, the IDI does not cite KO (Nigeria) in support  of  the
         proposition that it is only where the child would  be  required  to
         leave the United Kingdom that EX.1. (b) or section 117B  (6)  falls
         to be considered. The citation of KO  (Nigeria)  merely  recognises
         that, in deciding what would be reasonable, one must have regard to
         the fact that one or  both  parents  is  liable  to  removal  under
         immigration powers (see paragraph 27 above).

         38.  Third (and relatedly), a previous version  of  the  IDI,  pre-
         dating KO (Nigeria), contained statements to the effect that if the
         departure of a parent would not result in the child being  required
         to leave the  United  Kingdom,  the  question  of  whether  it  was
         reasonable to expect the child to leave would not arise.  This  was
         noted by Upper Tribunal Judge Plimmer in  SR  (subsisting  parental
         relationship - s117B(6))  Pakistan  [2018]  UKUT  334  (IAC)  .  At
         paragraph 50 of her decision, Judge Plimmer said that "This  aspect
         of the 2018 IDI provides an untenable construction of the plain and
         ordinary meaning of EX.1. and section 117B (6)". At  paragraph  51,
         she held that "Self-evidently, section 117B (6) is engaged  whether
         the child will or will not in fact or practice leave the  UK".  For
         the reasons we have given, nothing  in  KO  (Nigeria)  affects  the
         correctness of her conclusion.

         39.  We do not consider our construction of section 117B(6) can  be
         affected by the respondent's submission that, in cases where  -  on
         his interpretation - the subsection does not  have  purchase  (i.e.
         because the child would not in practice leave the United  Kingdom),
         there would nevertheless need to be  a  full-blown  proportionality
         assessment, compatibly with the other provisions of Part 5A of  the
         2002  Act,  with  the  result   that   a   person   with   parental
         responsibility  who  could  not   invoke   section   117B(6)   may,
         nevertheless, succeed in a human rights appeal.

         40.  Such an assessment would, however, have to take account of the
         immigration history of the person  subject  to  removal;  so  there
         could well be a very real difference between the  outcome  of  that
         exercise, and one conducted under section 117B (6).  But  the  real
         point is that this submission does not begin to  affect  the  plain
         meaning of subsection (6). If, as we  have  found,  Parliament  has
         decreed a particular outcome by enacting  section  117B  (6),  then
         that is the end of the matter.

         41.   We  accept  that  this  interpretation  may  result   in   an
         underserving individual or family remaining in the United  Kingdom.
         However, the fact that Parliament  has  mandated  such  an  outcome
         merely means that, in such cases, Parliament has decided to be more
         generous than is strictly required by the Human Rights Act 1998. It
         can be regarded as a necessary consequence of the aim of Part 5A of
         imposing greater consistency in decision-making  in  this  area  by
         courts and tribunals. The fact that section 117B (6)  has  such  an
         aim was expressly recognised by Elias LJ  at  paragraph  44  of  MA
         (Pakistan) ...

         80.  Our assessment of the appellant is that she is both  dishonest
         and unscrupulous, each to a high degree. She has flagrantly  defied
         the law of the United Kingdom by overstaying her leave for a  large
         number of years,  without  bothering  to  seek  to  regularise  her
         status; by making entry clearance applications that she  knew  full
         well were predicated on an entirely false  basis;  and  in  gaining
         access to the United Kingdom ...

         96.  We therefore conclude that, on the  facts  of  this  case,  it
         would not be reasonable to expect the appellant's children to leave
         the United Kingdom, in the event of her  removal.  This  means  the
         appellant's appeal succeeds. It  does  so  because  Parliament  has
         stated, in terms, that the public interest  does  not  require  her
         removal, in these circumstances. It does so despite the fact  that,
         absent  section  117B  (6),  the  appellant's  removal   would   be
         proportionate in terms of Article 8 of the ECHR."

44. I have not been provided with the guidance by either of  the  advocates
    but when asked to provide details, Mr Raza was able to confirm that the
    most up to date  guidance  entitled:  "Family  Migration:  Appendix  FM
    Section 1.0b Family Life (as a Partner or Parent) and Private Life: 10-
    Year Routes", version 4.0, published 10th December 2019.  The  relevant
    part of the guidance states as follows:

         "Is it reasonable for the child to leave the UK?

         Where you decide that the answer to this first stage is yes - there
         is a genuine and subsisting relationship to a child, then they must
         go on to  consider  secondly,  whether,  taking  into  account  the
         child's best interests as a primary consideration, it is reasonable
         to expect the child to leave the UK. In doing so you must carefully
         consider all the information provided by  the  applicant,  together
         with any other relevant factor and information  of  which  you  are
         aware.

         In  accordance  with  the  findings  in  the  case  of  AB  Jamaica
         (Secretary of State for the Home Department v AB (Jamaica)  &  Anor
         [2019] EWCA Civ 661), consideration of whether it is reasonable  to
         expect a child to leave the UK must  be  undertaken  regardless  of
         whether the child is actually expected to leave the UK.

         The  starting  point  is  that  we  would  not  normally  expect  a
         qualifying child to leave the UK. It is normally in a child's  best
         interest for the whole family to remain together,  which  means  if
         the child is not expected to leave, then the parent or  parents  or
         primary carer of the child will also not be expected to  leave  the
         UK.

         In the caselaw of  KO  and  Others  2018  UKSC53,  with  particular
         reference to the case of NS (Sri Lanka), the  Supreme  Court  found
         that "reasonableness" is to be considered in the real-world context
         in which the  child  finds  themselves.  The  parents'  immigration
         status  is  a  relevant  fact  to  establish  that   context.   The
         determination sets out that if a child's parents are both  expected
         to leave the UK, the child is normally expected to leave with them,
         unless there is evidence that that it would not be reasonable.

         This assessment must take into account the child's  best  interests
         as a primary consideration.

         You must carefully consider all the relevant points raised  in  the
         application and carefully assess any evidence  provided.  Decisions
         must not  be  taken  simply  on  the  basis  of  the  application's
         assertions  about  the  child,  but  rather  on  the  basis  of  an
         examination of all the evidence provided. All relevant factors need
         to be assessed in the round.

         There  may  be  some  specific  circumstances  where  it  would  be
         reasonable to expect the qualifying child to leave the UK with  the
         parent(s). In deciding  such  cases  you  must  consider  the  best
         interests of the child and the facts relating to the  family  as  a
         whole. You should also consider any specific issues raised  by  the
         family or by, or on behalf of the child (or other children  in  the
         family).

         It may be reasonable for a qualifying child to leave  the  UK  with
         the parent or primary carer where for example:

         .    the parent or parents, or child, are a citizen of the  country
           and so able to enjoy the full rights of being a citizen in  that
           country

         .     there  is  nothing  in  any  country  specific   information,
           including as contained in  relevant  country  information  which
           suggests that relocation would be unreasonable

         .    the parent or parents or child have existing  family,  social,
           or cultural ties with the country and if there are wider  family
           or relationships with friends or  community  overseas  that  can
           provide support:

           o you must consider the extent to which the child  is  dependent
             on or requires support from wider family members in the UK  in
             important areas of their life and how a transition to  similar
             support overseas would affect them

           o a person who has extended family or a network  of  friends  in
             the country should be able to rely on them for support to help
             (re)integrate there

           o parent or parents or a child who have lived in or visited  the
             country before for periods of more than a few weeks. should be
             better able to adapt, or the parent or parents would  be  able
             to support the child in adapting, to life in the country o you
             must consider any evidence of exposure to, and  the  level  of
             understanding of, the cultural norms  of  the  country  o  for
             example, a period of time spent living amongst a diaspora from
             the country may give a child an awareness of  the  culture  of
             the country

           o the parents or child can speak, read and write in  a  language
             of that country, or  are  likely  to  achieve  this  within  a
             reasonable time period

           o  fluency  is  not  required  -  an  ability   to   communicate
             competently  with  sympathetic  interlocutors  would  normally
             suffice

         .    removal would not give rise  to  a  significant  risk  to  the
           child's health

         .    there are no other specific factors raised by or on behalf  of
           the child

         The parents' situation is a relevant fact to consider  in  deciding
         whether they themselves and therefore, their child is  expected  to
         leave the UK. Where both parents are expected to leave the UK,  the
         natural expectation is that the child would go with them and  leave
         the UK, and that expectation would be reasonable unless  there  are
         factors or evidence that means it would not be reasonable.

45. Therefore, I determine the Appellant's appeal on the basis of the facts
    set out at above, the guidance in KO and JG, the guidance and the  best
    interests of the Appellant's child, who is a "qualifying  child"  as  a
    British Citizen. My assessment of the best interests of the children is
    set out earlier in the decision. They are a primary  consideration  and
    not a "trump card".

46. The relevant jurisprudence relied upon by Mr Raza makes it  plain  that
    the Tribunal should consider the "real world analysis". At paras  18-19
    of KO (Nigeria) the following is set out:

         "18. On the other hand, as the IDI guidance acknowledges, it  seems
         to me inevitably relevant in both contexts to  consider  where  the
         parents, apart from the relevant provision,  are  expected  to  be,
         since it will normally be reasonable for the child to be with them.
         To that extent the record of  the  parents  may  become  indirectly
         material, if it leads to their ceasing to have a  right  to  remain
         here and having to leave. It is only if, even on  that  hypothesis,
         it would not  be  reasonable  for  the  child  to  leave  that  the
         provision may give the parents a right to  remain.  The  point  was
         well-expressed by Lord Boyd in SA (Bangladesh) v Secretary of State
         for the Home Department 2017 SLT 1245:

             "22. In my opinion before one  embarks  on  an  assessment  of
             whether it is reasonable to expect the child to leave  the  UK
             one has to address the  question,  'Why  would  the  child  be
             expected to leave the United Kingdom?' In a case such as  this
             there can only be one answer: 'because  the  parents  have  no
             right to remain in the UK'. To approach the  question  in  any
             other way strips away the context in which the  assessment  of
             reasonableness is being made ..."

         19.  He noted at (para 21) that Lewison LJ had made a similar point
         in considering the "best interests" of children in the  context  of
         section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009  in
         EV (Philippines) v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
         [2014] EWCA Civ 874, para 58:

             "58. In my judgment, therefore, the  assessment  of  the  best
             interests of the children must be made on the basis  that  the
             facts are as they are in the real world. If one parent has  no
             right to remain, but  the  other  parent  does,  that  is  the
             background against  which  the  assessment  is  conducted.  If
             neither parent has the right  to  remain,  then  that  is  the
             background against which the assessment is conducted. Thus the
             ultimate question will be: is  it  reasonable  to  expect  the
             child to follow the parent with no  right  to  remain  to  the
             country of origin?"

         To the extent that Elias LJ may  have  suggested  otherwise  in  MA
         (Pakistan) para 40, I would respectfully disagree. There is nothing
         in the section to suggest that "reasonableness" is to be considered
         otherwise than in  the  real  world  in  which  the  children  find
         themselves."

47. Para 19 of the judgment in KO (Nigeria) approves  of  para  58  of  the
    Court of Appeal's judgment in EV (Philippines) where  Lewison  LJ  said
    that "the best interests of a child must be assessed on the basis  that
    the facts are as they are in the real world" and that  "If  one  parent
    has no right to  remain,  but  the  other  parent  does,  that  is  the
    background against which the assessment is conducted".

48. I therefore conclude that any assessment of the facts "as they  are  in
    the real world" must include consideration of whether it is  reasonable
    for the parent who is entitled to remain in the United Kingdom to leave
    the United Kingdom with the parent facing removal.  This is  likely  to
    include an assessment as whether it would be reasonable for  a  British
    citizen parent of a qualifying child to  enjoy  family  life  with  the
    child and the parent facing  removal  outside  the  United  Kingdom  in
    reaching  its  conclusion  whether  it  would  be  reasonable  for  the
    qualifying child to leave  the  United  Kingdom  for  the  purposes  of
    s.117B(6)(b) of the 2002 Act.

49. In his  submissions  Mr  Raza  has  reminded  the  Tribunal  that  when
    considering the circumstances of A, the fact she is a  British  citizen
    which is an important factor.

50. I have already made reference to the  decision  of  ZH  (Tanzania)  and
    remind myself of paragraph 30  of  that  decision  which  I  take  into
    account and which reads as follows:

         "30. Although nationality is not a "trump card" it is of particular
         importance in assessing the best interests of any child. The  UNCRC
         recognises the right of every child to be registered and acquire  a
         nationality (Article 7) and to preserve her identity, including her
         nationality (Article 8). In Wan, the Federal  Court  of  Australia,
         pointed out at para 30 that, when considering  the  possibility  of
         the children accompanying their father to China, the  tribunal  had
         not considered any  of  the  following  matters,  which  the  Court
         clearly regarded as important:

             "(a) the fact that the children,  as  citizens  of  Australia,
             would be deprived of  the  country  of  their  own  and  their
             mother's citizenship, 'and  of  its  protection  and  support,
             socially, culturally and medically, and  in  many  other  ways
             evoked  by,  but  not  confined  to,  the  broad  concept   of
             lifestyle' ( Vaitaiki v Minister for  Immigration  and  Ethnic
             Affairs [1998] FCA 5 , (1998) 150 ALR 608, 614);

             (b)  the resultant social and linguistic disruption  of  their
             childhood as well as the loss of their homeland;

             (c)  the loss of educational opportunities  available  to  the
             children in Australia; and

             (d)  their resultant isolation from  the  normal  contacts  of
             children with their mother and their mother's family."

51. Whilst child A is of tender years presently, if she were to  leave  the
    UK and live in Pakistan, she would  lose  out  on  the  opportunity  of
    growing up in the United Kingdom, the country of her  nationality,  the
    loss of educational opportunities and any  medical  services  available
    and importantly the safeguarding and support  provided  in  the  United
    Kingdom.

52. Whilst the guidance makes reference to the starting  point  being  that
    the respondent would not normally expect a qualifying  child  to  leave
    the United Kingdom, this is only a starting point. In any assessment it
    is important to consider  the  specific  circumstances  of  the  family
    members as a whole and in the light of the best interests of the  child
    concerned. I have set out that assessment earlier in this decision.

53. There has been no challenge to the evidence that the appellant and  his
    partner will be unlikely to have the support of his wider  family.  The
    appellant's family are said to have not accepted the relationship. This
    is underscored by her circumstances as  an  atheist  and  the  material
    relied upon by Mr Raza is that it is unlikely that their marriage would
    therefore be accepted in Pakistan.

54. The appellant's partner has not experienced life out of the UK and as a
    result of her previous life experiences has required  the  support  and
    assistance of the social services. The sources  of  support  that  have
    been identified as necessary for the appellant's partner would  not  be
    available in Pakistan nor would it be likely that she could access such
    support even if it were available  given  the  difficulties  with  both
    language and culture. She has not lived in the UK nor has she ever left
    the country and whilst I recognise that she would have  the  assistance
    and support of the appellant, she would be away from all of the sources
    of support that she currently has in the United Kingdom  which  provide
    for the ongoing safeguarding for the appellant's partner and also child
    A.

55. It is  accepted  that  the  appellant  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship with both his partner and child A and that his partner  is
    pregnant with their second child.  The  specific  issue  that  requires
    determination, however, is whether it would be reasonable to expect the
    appellant's child to leave the UK: s117B (6) of the NIAA 2002.  I  find
    that JG requires a hypothesis that she would leave.  I  find,  for  the
    reasons set out in JG and  KO  (Nigeria)  that  the  issue  has  to  be
    determined separately from any conduct of the  appellant.  As  Mr  Raza
    points out, whilst his  immigration  history  is  a  poor  one,  having
    entered the UK unlawfully and  having  remained,  there  are  no  other
    aspects of his conduct which is adverse, or any such conduct identified
    by the respondent or like that of the appellant in JG.

56. It has not  been  submitted  on  behalf  of  the  respondent  that  the
    appellant could leave the United Kingdom and apply for entry  clearance
    from abroad or suggested in cross examination  or  otherwise  that  the
    appellant's partner could travel with the appellant  along  with  their
    child to live in Pakistan on a temporary basis. Given the  difficulties
    faced by the appellant's partner relocating  to  a  country  where  she
    would have no support other than her partner and in the context of  the
    unchallenged evidence of her partner's family who do  not  support  the
    relationship, I do not consider that it would be reasonable  to  expect
    child A to leave the UK .

57. Taking account of the assessment made, I find that on balance  that  it
    would be contrary to the best interests of A but I also  find  that  it
    would be unreasonable to expect her to leave the UK.

58. It follows, therefore, that the public interest does  not  require  the
    appellant's removal as set out in the decision of JG at paragraphs [39-
    41]:

         "39. We do not consider our construction of section 117B(6) can  be
         affected by the respondent's submission that, in cases where  -  on
         his interpretation - the subsection does not  have  purchase  (i.e.
         because the child would not in practice leave the United  Kingdom),
         there would nevertheless need to be  a  full-blown  proportionality
         assessment, compatibly with the other provisions of Part 5A of  the
         2002  Act,  with  the  result   that   a   person   with   parental
         responsibility  who  could  not   invoke   section   117B(6)   may,
         nevertheless, succeed in a human rights appeal.

         40.  Such an assessment would, however, have to take account of the
         immigration history of the person subject  to  removal;  so,  there
         could well be a very real difference between the  outcome  of  that
         exercise, and one conducted under section 117B (6).  But  the  real
         point is that this submission does not begin to  affect  the  plain
         meaning of subsection (6). If, as we  have  found,  Parliament  has
         decreed a particular outcome by enacting  section  117B  (6),  then
         that is the end of the matter.

         41.   We  accept  that  this  interpretation  may  result   in   an
         underserving individual or family remaining in the United  Kingdom.
         However, the fact that Parliament  has  mandated  such  an  outcome
         merely means that, in such cases, Parliament has decided to be more
         generous than is strictly required by the Human Rights Act 1998. It
         can be regarded as a necessary consequence of the aim of Part 5A of
         imposing greater consistency in decision-making  in  this  area  by
         courts and tribunals. The fact that section 117B (6)  has  such  an
         aim was expressly recognised by Elias LJ  at  paragraph  44  of  MA
         (Pakistan)."

59. In the light of my assessment, then paragraph EX.1. applies without the
    need to show insurmountable obstacles to continuing family life outside
    the UK. However on the basis of my assessment and in the light  of  the
    relevant jurisprudence, I would be satisfied  that  on  the  particular
    facts of the appellant's partner that  there  would  be  insurmountable
    obstacles to family life continuing in Pakistan. For  the  purposes  of
    paragraph  EX.1.(b)   'insurmountable   obstacles'   means   the   very
    significant difficulties which would be faced by the applicant or their
    partner in continuing their family life together  outside  the  UK  and
    which could not be overcome or would entail very serious  hardship  for
    the  applicant  or  their  partner."  The  Supreme   Court   considered
    insurmountable obstacles and Article 8 in the decision of R (Agyarko) v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2017] UKSC 11.

60. At paragraph 43 the court considered  the  European  jurisprudence  and
    that the "words  "insurmountable  obstacles"  to  be  understood  in  a
    practical and realistic sense,  rather  than  as  referring  solely  to
    obstacles which make it literally impossible for  the  family  to  live
    together in the country of origin of the  non-national  concerned".  In
    the light of the factual circumstances of  the  family,  the  obstacles
    here  when  realistically  viewed  properly  seen   as   insurmountable
    obstacles. They include the lack of family support and the lack of  any
    other support that has been identified as necessary for the appellant's
    partner and child, which even if available, would  be  unlikely  to  be
    accessible due to language and cultural differences.

61. I therefore conclude that it is unreasonable to  expect  the  child  to
    leave the UK and I am therefore satisfied that the decision  to  refuse
    his human rights claim would  be  disproportionate  with  reference  to
    Article 8(2) of the European Convention and  therefore  unlawful  under
    Section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998.

Decision:

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the  making  of  an
    error on a point, the decision to  dismiss  the  appeal  on  Article  8
    grounds is set aside and is re-made as follows: the appeal is allowed.


Signed   Date: 9 January 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds

