
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12546/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                       |Decision and Reasons promulgated |
|On 16 January 2018                        |On 27 February 2018              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                     FMM
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Singh instructed by Greater Manchester
                    Immigration Aid Unit
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.




                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS


     1. This is an appeal against a decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
        Devlin who in a decision promulgated on 5 June 2017  dismissed  the
        appellant's protection and human rights claims.






Background


     2. The appellant is a female national of Libya born on [ ]  1990.  The
        Judge sets out her immigration history at [3 - 9] of  the  decision
        under challenge.
     3. The Judge considered the evidence  in  support  of  the  appellants
        claim to face a real  risk  on  return  from  her  family  who  she
        suspected had discovered she had a relationship with a  Libyan  man
        and the general risk based upon country  conditions  on  return  to
        Libya.
     4. The Judge sets out findings of fact  from  [121]  of  the  decision
        under  challenge.  At  [133]  the  Judge  concludes  that  although
        satisfied one part of  the  appellants  claim  was,  to  the  lower
        standard, likely to be true the Judge could not accept  that  other
        aspects of the account were true as set out at [133 (i)  -  (vii)].
        At [147] the Judge therefore concludes he could  not  be  satisfied
        there was a real risk that refusing the  appellant's  appeal  would
        result in her being required to return to Libya in  breach  of  the
        Refugee Convention.
     5. The Judge thereafter  considered  an  entitlement  to  Humanitarian
        protection setting out the relevant paragraphs of the  Home  Office
        country information guidance for Libya dated January  2017.  Having
        done so the Judge concluded he was not satisfied there are no areas
        of Libya to which the appellant could be safely  returned  or  that
        she cannot travel  to  without  real  risk  of  serious  harm  from
        indiscriminate violence. The Judge records at  [153]  that  he  was
        advised by the Presenting Officer that there was  a  moratorium  on
        removals to Libya at that stage. The Judge therefore  concluded  he
        could not be  satisfied  the  appellant  met  the  requirements  of
        paragraph 399C of the  Immigration  Rules  and  was  therefore  not
        entitled to a grant of Humanitarian protection.
     6. The Judge concluded the  appellant  not  established  a  breach  of
        article 3 ECHR and by  reference  to  article  8,  both  under  the
        Immigration Rules and outside  the  Rules,  that  the  respondent's
        decision  was  proportionate  as  the  appellant   established   no
        entitlement to remain on this basis.
     7. The appellant sought permission to  appeal  which  was  granted  by
        another judge of the First-tier Tribunal on 30 October 2017.
     8. The application is opposed by the respondent in a Rule 24  response
        dated 17 November 2017.


Error of law


     9. The Judge referred to the country guidance cases of AT  and  Others
        (Libya) [2014] UKUT 00318 and FA (Libya) [2016] UKUT 413. In FA the
        Upper Tribunal found (i) the question of whether  a  person  is  at
        article 15(c) risk in Libya should, until further Country Guidance,
        be determined on the basis of the individual evidence in the  case,
        and (ii) that that decision replaced AT and Others in respect of an
        assessment of the article 15(c) risk.
    10. There is now a further country guidance case  relating  to  article
        15(c) risk in relation to Libya. In ZMM (Article 15 (c))  Libya  CG
        [2017] UKUT 263 it was held that the violence in Libya has  reached
        such a high level that substantial grounds are shown for  believing
        that a returning civilian would, solely on account of his  presence
        on the territory of that country or region  face  a  real  risk  of
        being subject to a threat to his life or person.
    11. ZMM was heard on 3 May 2017 and the decision handed  down  on  28th
        June 2017. The  material  considered  by  the  Upper  Tribunal  was
        therefore the same material available to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
        although that appeal was heard on 5 April 2017  but  did  not  hand
        down  its  decision  until  5  June  2017.  The  appellant  in  the
        application for permission to appeal criticises the Judge  for  not
        taking a proper  holistic  view  or  assessment  of  the  available
        evidence when concluded that no article 15 (c) risk arises.
    12. The appellant also criticises the Judge  for  failing  to  properly
        factor into the equation that the appellant  will  be  returned  to
        Libya as a single woman.
    13. The Judge rejected the appellant's claim to have no family in Libya
        and the October 2014 country information and guidance on  women  is
        to                  be                   found                   at
        https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data
        /file/566173/CIG_-_Libya_-_Women.pdf
    14. In AT and Others (Article 15c; risk categories) Libya  [2014]  UKUT
        318 (IAC), which although no longer a country guidance case on  the
        Article 15(c)  risk  is  still  country  guidance  so  far  as  the
        categories of those entitled to asylum are concerned, it  was  held
        that whilst Libya is a male-dominated society and there is evidence
        of discrimination and violence against women and  poor  recognition
        of women's rights, being female does not per se establish a risk on
        return.  However,  taking  into  account  all  the   circumstances,
        including a woman's age, health, level of  education  and  economic
        status, one or more of the following characteristics or factors are
        likely, depending  on  the  circumstances,  to  be  significant  in
        relation to the assessment of risk  on  return  for  a  woman:  (i)
        African  ethnicity;  (ii)  Being  a  victim  of  sexual   violence,
        including having been raped by soldiers loyal to the Qadhafi regime
        or by other combatants; or (iii) Being a woman accused or suspected
        of sexual misdemeanours or offences against family honour.
    15. The key  finding  made  by  the  Judge  in  which  aspects  of  the
        appellants claim were accepted or rejected is [133] where the Judge
        writes:

             133.      I  find  that  although  I  am  satisfied  that  the
                  Appellant was sexually active in October 2013, I cannot be
                  satisfied, even to the lower standard of proof,  that  any
                  other aspect of her account  is  true.  In  particular,  I
                  cannot be satisfied that:


                   i) the  Appellant  had  a  relationship  with  a  Libyan
                      national called Ahmed Omar;


                  ii) the person with whom she had sexual relations  around
                      October 2013, was a Libyan national, or  returned  to
                      Libya, in December 2013;


                 iii)  the  Appellant's  cousin  Mumtaz  Mohamed  told  the
                      Appellant's brother Fisel that the  Appellant  had  a
                      relationship  with  Ahmed  Mohamed  in   the   United
                      Kingdom;


                  iv) the brother Feras had told her that their parents had
                      told him that Fisel had told them that the  Appellant
                      had a relationship with a man called  Ahmed  Omar  in
                      the United Kingdom, or that Feras denied the claim;


                   v) the Appellants mother  and  father  insisted  on  her
                      returning to Libya, so that  he  could  question  her
                      about her relationship with Ahmed Omar;


                  vi) the Appellant's sister, Farah, asked  her  why  their
                      father was angry at her; or,


                 vii) she no longer has regular contact with her family.

    16. The Judge recognised that there remains a possibility the appellant
        may be questioned about her activities in the UK by her  family  on
        return to Libya but was not satisfied that  lying  about  what  may
        have happened breached the HJ (Iran) principles. Although the Judge
        makes no specific finding  it  does  not  appear  that  a  person's
        personal sexual activities fall into  a  characteristic  or  status
        that they could or should not be expected to deny because it was so
        closely linked with their identity  or  were  an  expression  of  a
        fundamental right, in order to avoid persecution.  This  is  not  a
        sexual orientation case.
    17. The Judge it [137] finds "however, there seems to me to be  a  more
        fundamental objection to the Appellants claim - that  is  that  the
        Appellant has been comprehensively disbelieved, and seeks  to  rely
        on  general  evidence,  which  is  not  sufficiently  solid  as  to
        establish her claim".
    18. The adverse credibility findings and rejection of the core  of  the
        appellants claim have not been shown to be  outside  the  range  of
        findings reasonably open to the Judge on the  evidence.  The  Judge
        clearly considered the evidence with the required degree of anxious
        scrutiny and has given adequate reasons for the findings made.  The
        appellant in her claim did  not  express  a  fear  of  gender-based
        violence and indeed returned to Libya in 2013 of her own  volition.
        There is no evidence before the Judge to show the appellant  was  a
        victim of gender-based violence. Mr McVeety referred  the  tribunal
        to the fact there was no mention of problems regarding  her  family
        until after the appellant's first submissions  had  been  rejected.
        The finding by the Judge that the appellants claim that the  family
        wanted her dead through an honour killing was not accepted  and  no
        arguable legal error sufficient to interfere with  this  aspect  of
        the claim or the adverse credibility findings has been made out.
    19. What is  accepted  is  that  following  the  decision  in  ZMM  the
        situation in Libya has deteriorated to an extent that the appellant
        would, solely on account of her presence in Libya, face a real risk
        of being subject to a threat to her life or  person  and  therefore
        entitled to a grant of humanitarian protection.



Discussion



    20. Whilst the rejection of the asylum claim has not been shown  to  be
        infected by arguable legal error material to  that  aspect  of  the
        decision,  I  find  the  decision  in  relation   to   Humanitarian
        protection is affected by legal  error  to  the  extent  that  that
        aspect of the decision must be set aside. The factual findings made
        by the Judge are preserved
    21. The Upper Tribunal is in  a  position  to  proceed  to  remake  the
        decision which, in light of ZMM, is that the appeal is  allowed  on
        humanitarian protection grounds only.


Decision

    22. The First-tier Tribunal Judge materially erred in law. I set  aside
        the decision of the  original  Judge.  I  remake  the  decision  as
        follows. This appeal is allowed.




   Anonymity.


    23. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)  of
        the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


        I make such order pursuant to rule 14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
        (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.




Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Hanson

Dated the 22 February 2018












