
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12626/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 6th September 2018                   |On 12th October 2018                |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE R C CAMPBELL

                                   Between

                                  mr A S S
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms B Smith (Counsel), Leonard Cannings Solicitors
LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)

                          DECISION ON ERROR OF LAW

1.   The appellant's appeal against a  decision  to  refuse  his  protection
    claim was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Abebrese ("the judge")
    in a decision promulgated on 30th January 2018.  Permission  to  appeal
    was granted by a First-tier Tribunal Judge on 10th July  2018,  on  the
    basis that it was arguable that the judge's assessment  of  credibility
    and  the  documentary  evidence  was  flawed.   Mr  Jarvis  made   some
    preliminary observations.  While the Secretary of State did  not  agree
    with all the grounds in support of the application  for  permission  to
    appeal, there was force in the second of them, regarding relocation  to
    Kabul and the proper assessment of the  appellant's  case.   There  was
    considerable guidance in the case law, and indeed from the Home  Office
    on the correct approach to assessing risk on return in cases concerning
    minors.  It  was  clear  that  the  judge  was  required  to  take  the
    appellant's age properly into account.  Although it was clear from  the
    decision that the judge was aware of the appellant's age, the  decision
    showed little engagement with this aspect of the case.

2.    Having  read  the  decision  carefully,  I  agreed  with  Mr   Jarvis'
    observations and did not need to hear from Ms Smith.  Paragraph  43  of
    the decision is of particular importance.  It is here  that  the  judge
    found that the appellant may relocate to Kabul and  that  the  evidence
    did not show that he would be targeted or at risk, following return  as
    an adult.  Ground 2 is made out in this context.  The  judge  mentioned
    AK Afghanistan CG [2012] UKUT 00163, a case which  does  not  in  terms
    concern minor claimants.  The proper date of assessment was the date of
    the hearing and guidance given by  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  ST  (Child
    asylum seekers) Sri Lanka [2013] UKUT  00292  fell  to  be  taken  into
    account.  The judge made  no  express  findings  regarding  any  family
    support in  Kabul,  the  adequacy  of  reception  facilities  or  other
    relevant matters.  In these  circumstances,  the  decision  contains  a
    material error of law and must be set aside and remade.

3.   Ms Smith said that the appropriate venue was  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    as the error of law bore on the judge's adverse  credibility  findings.
    Remaking the decision would require full fact-finding.   The  appellant
    would have his 18th birthday in January 2019 and would welcome an early
    hearing date.  Mr Jarvis did not disagree with Ms Smith's submission on
    the appropriate venue.

4.   The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  is  set  aside.   It  will  be
    remade in the First-tier Tribunal at Hatton Cross before a judge  other
    than Judge Abebrese and although case management will be a  matter  for
    the First-tier Tribunal, the first  available  date  for  remaking  the
    decision should be sought.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.  It will be remade  in
the First-tier Tribunal at Hatton Cross before  a  judge  other  than  Judge
Abebrese.  A Pushtu  interpreter  will  be  required  and  a  suitable  time
estimate is three hours.



Signed                                  Date 08 October 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell


Anonymity

The judge did not make an anonymity direction.  As the appellant's claim  is
based on risk on return to  Afghanistan  and  he  is  a  minor,  I  make  an
anonymity  direction  under  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure   (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008, prohibiting  the  disclosure  or  publication  of  any
matter likely to lead members of  the  public  to  identify  the  appellant.
That order will continue until set aside or varied by another Tribunal.


Signed                                  Date 08 October 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell
