
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12648/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 2 April 2019                      |On 9 April 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between

                                  mr M A L
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr G Dolan, counsel instructed by Sriharans
solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Pakistan born  on  14  March  1982.   He
    first entered the UK as  a  Tier  4  (General)  Migrant  Student  on  9
    November 2009 and made subsequent applications to extend his leave  and
    for leave to remain on the basis  of  his  human  rights.  He  made  an
    application for asylum on 16 June 2016 on the basis of  his  conversion
    to Christianity.  This application was refused in a decision  dated  19
    October 2018.  The Appellant appealed against  that  decision  and  his
    appeal came before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Fox for hearing  on
    30 November 2018.

 2. In a decision and reasons promulgated on  3  January  2019,  the  judge
    dismissed the appeal, rejecting the Appellant's claim to be  a  genuine
    convert to Christianity and  also  rejecting  the  credibility  of  his
    pastor and a witness who had also attended and  given  evidence  before
    him.

 3. Permission to appeal was sought, in time, on the basis that  the  judge
    had erred materially in law: firstly, in failing  to  consider  whether
    the Appellant would be at  risk  on  return  to  Pakistan  as  somebody
    perceived to be a Christian in light of the  principles  in  HJ  (Iran)
    [2010] UKSC and RT (Zimbabwe) [2012] UKSC 28; and  secondly,  that  the
    judge had erred in his  assessment  of  the  Appellant's  evidence  and
    credibility and had failed in so doing to utilise a structured approach
    and had taken into account immaterial considerations.

 4. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam in a
    decision dated 7 March 2019, on the basis that it was arguable that the
    judge did not make a clear  finding  whether  the  Appellant  had  been
    baptised and therefore it was arguable the judge should have considered
    imputed political opinion.  Permission  was  granted  on  all  grounds,
    subject to the caveat that if the record of the  Judge's  evidence  was
    being challenged, Ms Sriharan would  be  unable  to  continue  as  both
    advocate and witness and would need  to  provide  a  witness  statement
    exhibiting her notes.

    Hearing

 5. At the hearing before the Upper Tribunal, Mr Dolan appeared  on  behalf
    of  the  Appellant.  He  addressed  the  issue  of  credibility  first,
    submitting that the judge focused  on  individual  inconsistencies  and
    failed to adopt the approach required both by the Secretary of  State's
    own Asylum Policy Instruction but also that set out in  SM  (Iran).  He
    submitted  that  there  was  a  detailed  witness  statement  from  the
    Appellant which provided dates and an account of how he came to convert
    to Christianity.  However, what the  judge  had  done  with  regard  to
    baptism is  to  focus  on  supposed  inconsistencies  as  to  when  the
    Appellant would be baptised and what discussion  led  up  to  that,  as
    opposed to looking at the issue in the round.  The judge further  erred
    in  failing  to  consider  the  claim  in  terms  of  plausibility,  in
    particular, the factors set out in  four  of  the  Appellant's  witness
    statements, the fact that his father was strongly opposed to conversion
    and was  committed  to  the  Islamic  faith.   He  submitted  that  the
    credibility assessment had been carried  out  in  a  piecemeal  fashion
    rather than in the round and that one must be aware of  the  danger  of
    attempting to peer into a convert's mind cf. R (On the  application  of
    SA (Iran)) v Secretary of State [2012] EWHC 2575 (Admin) per His Honour
    Mr Justice Gilbart QC.

 6. Secondly, Mr Dolan argued that the  judge  had  erroneously  failed  to
    consider, at the very least, whether it was  possible  given  that  the
    Appellant was someone of a relatively high profile, that he would be at
    risk on return on account of his baptism.  Mr Dolan  acknowledged  that
    there was no clear finding as to whether or not the judge accepted that
    the Appellant had been baptised, but that this was implicit  by  virtue
    of the fact there was a baptism certificate.

 7. Mr Dolan sought to rely on the Appellant's evidence as set out  in  his
    witness statement at [10] where he referred  to  arguing  with  friends
    about their belief in Islam whilst he still lived in Pakistan and  that
    they  would  say  that  he  was  speaking  in  a  blasphemous   manner.
    Consequently, any failure by the Appellant  to  practise  his  religion
    would at least in part be due to his fear of the consequences if he did
    so.  Mr Dolan submitted that the judge has not  dealt  with  this.   At
    [80] the judge found  the  Appellant  was  not  a  genuine  convert  to
    Christianity  and  thus  the  baptism  certificate  was  of  a  limited
    probative value.  He submitted that this still leaves open the question
    of imputed Christianity and it was not clear whether or not  the  judge
    accepts that the Appellant had been baptised but considered it was  not
    genuine.

 8. In her submissions, Ms Everett noted there was a Rule 24 response where
    the Respondent's position was that the Appellant would be  discreet  on
    return because he has been discreet about his Christianity in  the  UK,
    however that she intended to defend the decision on a different  basis,
    which was that  the  judge  did  not  accept  that  the  Appellant  has
    converted to Christianity.  She submitted that the assertion the  judge
    had made factual errors was  in  fact  a  question  of  interpretation.
    During his asylum interview the Appellant was asked about Christmas but
    not about Easter.  However notably he did not know about  Christmas  or
    Easter.  The judge was clearly concerned  with  the  narrative  of  the
    Appellant's baptism and  was  entitled  to  take  account  of  internal
    discrepancies between the evidence of the Appellant and the pastor. She
    submitted  the  judge  gave  cogent  reasons  for  not  accepting   the
    Appellant's claim.

 9. In relation to the second point,  Ms  Everett  submitted  that  if  the
    judge's  findings  were  sufficiently  satisfactory  and  cogent,  then
    ultimately the Appellant  on  his  findings  is  not  a  Christian  and
    therefore would not seek to  practise  as  a  Christian  on  return  to
    Pakistan.  Consequently, the issue of  having  to  live  discreetly  or
    conceal his religion does not arise.  She  also  took  issue  with  the
    suggestion the Appellant was high profile but rather on  the  basis  of
    his evidence that his father was a diplomat that  simply  they  were  a
    family that had access to wealth.

10. She further submitted that, if indeed the Appellant were disingenuously
    practising his faith, then his baptism would not be significant in  any
    event.  If asked on  return  to  Pakistan  whether  or  not  he  was  a
    Christian he  could  simply  say  the  truth,  which  is  that  he  was
    pretending to be a Christian in order to stay in the UK.

11. She  concluded  by  submitting  that  if  the  judge's  reasons  as  to
    credibility were accepted then the appeal fails.

12. I then gave the parties the  opportunity  to  comment  on  the  judge's
    rejection of the evidence of the Appellant's pastor and his reasons for
    that.  This evidence is set out at [68], [73] and [81] of the decision.
     Ms Everett submitted that it is clear from the finding  at  [68]  that
    the pastor was unable to recall the day of the week  or  who  else  was
    present when the Appellant was baptised and that was the basis  of  the
    finding that his evidence was vague and evasive.  She submitted it  was
    a key event and the pastor had been able to add very little  to  it  by
    way of evidence.  She submitted that the reasons  given  by  the  judge
    were not inadequate or perverse.

13. At [70] the judge fairly assessed the evidence of the pastor as to when
    the decision was made and by whom in respect of the Appellant's baptism
    and that his finding at [73] rejecting the evidence of the  pastor  was
    neither perverse nor biased.  Ms Everett submitted the judge had  given
    reasons for finding that the Appellant's baptism was not  coherent  and
    was lacking in detail.  She submitted the decision and  reasons  should
    stand.  It  is  clear  from  the  Appellant's  answers  in  the  Asylum
    Interview Record at questions 109 to 113, that the Appellant  does  not
    know what  Christmas  is  yet  he  claims  to  be  a  firmly  committed
    Christian.  Moreover Christmas is not a difficult concept to grasp e.g.
    it is not the Pentecost.

14. In reply, Mr Dolan denied that he was making any assertion of  bias  on
    behalf  of  the  Appellant.   He  reiterated,   as   Ms   Everett   had
    acknowledged, that it is notoriously difficult to peer into the mind of
    a convert.  He submitted in respect of the Appellant's answers as given
    in the Asylum Interview Record that at question 114  he  was  asked  to
    tell the  interviewing  officer  about  the  rights  and  rituals  that
    Christians practise and it was unfair to rely  on  this  to  support  a
    finding that the Appellant does not know what Easter  is.   As  regards
    Christmas, in  response  to  question  111  where  the  Appellant  made
    reference to getting food and eating together and  question  112  where
    the Appellant states that he is a new convert and  still  learning,  it
    was clear he had not yet been taught about  celebrating  Christmas  but
    the focus had been on the teachings of Jesus Christ.   In  relation  to
    baptism, Mr Dolan submitted it was very important in this church, which
    is  a  Baptist  church.   The  judge,  in  rejecting  the   Appellant's
    credibility, failed to consider this in the context of  the  background
    evidence as to the treatment of Christian converts in Pakistan and  the
    fact that many were charged with blasphemy.  He also drew attention  to
    the fact at [6] of his witness  statement,  the  Appellant  stated  his
    father is connected to government authorities,  politicians,  religious
    groups as well as the ISI.  Thus his father is  clearly  connected  and
    influential.

15. Mr Dolan submitted that the judge's  findings  as  to  the  Appellant's
    credibility were unsafe and the crucial issue is whether  other  people
    would consider the Appellant  to  be  an  apostate.   There  was  ample
    objective evidence as to how he would be  treated.   He  submitted  the
    decision was unsafe and should be set aside.

16. I reserved my decision, which I now give with my reasons.

    Findings and reasons

17.  I find no error of law in respect of the first ground of  appeal,  that
    the Judge erred in failing to consider whether the Appellant  would  be
    at risk on return as a perceived Christian. This is because at [80] the
    Judge held as follows:

         "For all the  reasons  stated  above  I  do  not  accept  that  the
         appellant has converted to Christianity and the baptism certificate
         is of limited probative value accordingly; Tanveer  Ahmed  applied.
         In the alternative the  appellant  is  not  a  genuine  convert  to
         Christianity for the same reasons."

18.  Thus it is tolerably clear that the Judge did find that  the  Appellant
    had been baptised but that he was not a genuine Christian  convert.  In
    these circumstances,  I  accept  the  submission  of  Ms  Everett  that
    ultimately the Appellant  on  his  findings  is  not  a  Christian  and
    therefore would not seek to  practise  as  a  Christian  on  return  to
    Pakistan.  Consequently, the issue of  having  to  live  discreetly  or
    conceal his religion does not arise and if indeed  the  Appellant  were
    disingenuously practising his faith, then  his  baptism  would  not  be
    significant in any event.

19.  However, I do find there is merit in the second ground of appeal,  with
    regard to the Judge's treatment of the credibility of the Appellant and
    his  failure  to  take  a  structured  approach,  as  set  out  in  the
    Respondent's Asylum Policy Instruction, i.e. whether  the  evidence  is
    sufficiently detailed and specific; internally consistent and coherent;
    consistent with specific and general  country  of  origin  information;
    consistent with other evidence and plausible.

20.   The basis of the Judge's negative credibility finding is primarily  in
    relation to the Appellant's baptism, finding at [65] that "despite  his
    claim to have received religious instruction for approximately 3  years
    he had no meaningful knowledge of spiritually significant  decision  to
    proceed to the sacrement of baptism." I find that it  is  unclear  what
    exactly is meant by this statement. The  Appellant  had  not  yet  been
    baptised at the date of the refusal decision, although he  was  shortly
    thereafter, nor was the Appellant was cross-examined by the  Presenting
    Office about  his  baptism.  Thus  the  credibility  issue  arose  from
    questions asked by the Judge for clarification.  Caution  in  so  doing
    must be exercised, when the Respondent is represented cf.  Secretary of
    State for the Home Department v Maheshwaran [2002] EWCA Civ 173  where
    the Court of Appeal held at [3]: 'Adjudicators will in general  rightly
    be cautious about intervening lest it be said  that  they  have  leaped
    into the forensic arena and lest  an  appearance  of  bias  is  given."
    However, no allegation of bias has been made in this  case,  albeit  it
    was envisaged by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  McWilliam  in  the  grant  of
    permission to appeal. At [35] what is recorded by the Judge in terms of
    the Appellant's evidence  is  "No  explanation  was  provided  for  the
    Pastor's decision that the appellant was ready  for  baptism,  and  the
    appellant was not asked any questions about his  faith  on  that  day."
    However, the decision was surely one for the Pastor,  rather  than  the
    Appellant.

21.  The Pastor's evidence  was  that  the  Appellant  had  been  a  regular
    attendee at services and Bible studies on Wednesday and baptism classes
    every third Sunday since 2015 [38]. He was certain of  the  Appellant's
    religious conviction as he is inquisitive, proactive and consistent  in
    his attendance [39]; that he has many asylum seekers who have converted
    to Christianity though he has never supported an appeal before [40]; he
    believed that the decision to baptise took place on a Sunday as baptism
    classes are every third Sunday and it is  at  those  classes  that  the
    Pastor discusses who may be ready for baptism and those who  are  ready
    come forward at the end [42]. The Pastor's evidence, recorded  at  [43]
    is that "the appellant took 3 years  to  prepare  for  baptism  as  the
    church is strict about ensuring that those who  are  baptised  make  an
    informed decision. The Pastor looks for attendance, study and any other
    evidence as signs of commitment to the Christian faith." And at [44] in
    re-examination that he had asked the Appellant  if  he  was  ready  for
    baptism during baptism class and the Appellant confirmed he was  ready.
    I find that there is consistency between the evidence of the  Appellant
    and the  Sponsor  that  the  Pastor  approached  the  Appellant  as  he
    considered he was ready for baptism and the Appellant agreed. The  only
    inconsistency is whether this took place on  Sunday  at  baptism  class
    [Pastor] or a Wednesday during a  Bible  studies  meeting  [Appellant].
    When the Appellant's answer was put to the Pastor he stated that he may
    have spoken to the Appellant at the beginning of the meeting [43].

22.  A further witness was also called to give evidence when he stated  that
    he has known the Appellant for 3 years since he began attending  Church
    [46]; that he was the Appellant's  mentor  and  assisted  him  to  find
    scriptures and explore the Bible; that  the  Appellant  sends  him  SMS
    message asking religious questions and also telephones him for the same
    reason  [47].  In  response  to  questions  asked  by  the  Judge   for
    clarification, the witness stated that  the  decision  to  baptise  the
    Appellant had been taken approximately two months ago and the Appellant
    had informed him by telephone. He did not  know  when  the  Pastor  had
    approached the Appellant but assumed it was a Wednesday and the  Pastor
    was satisfied the Appellant was ready for baptism and so the  Appellant
    should consider this [48]. He stated  that  the  baptism  ceremony  was
    originally  scheduled  to  take  place  in  September  2018   but   was
    rescheduled for unknown reasons [49].

23.  The Judge's findings in respect of the credibility  of  the  Appellant,
    the Pastor and the Appellant's mentor are damning. Both  the  Appellant
    and the Pastor were described as "vague and evasive" [65]; [68] in  the
    context of when and why it was decided  that  the  Appellant  would  be
    baptised. In fact the majority of the Judge's findings were in relation
    to this issue only, from  [65]-[79].  The  question  is  whether  those
    findings are justified.

24.   At [71] the Judge find that "by  the  appellant's  own  evidence"  the
    decision to baptise was taken in isolation of all other  activities  at
    the Church and that it was significant that the Appellant fails to make
    any reference to baptism classes, distinguishable from  bible  studies.
    The difficulty with this finding is that the decision  to  baptise  the
    Appellant was taken by the Pastor rather than the Appellant and  it  is
    clear from the summary of his evidence set out at [21] above  that  the
    decision was not taken  in  isolation  of  all  the  Appellant's  other
    activities at the church but in the context of his  attendance,  thirst
    for knowledge and other activities. These are described in the Pastor's
    statement as the Appellant  being  "very  keen  to  help  in  cleaning,
    setting up chairs and helping in different ways at the church" and that
    "he is very honest and caring towards elderly." I find the Judge failed
    to take account of material considerations in that  he  has  failed  to
    consider the Pastor's evidence as a whole. Further, it was  clear  from
    the Pastors evidence that baptism classes take place every third Sunday
    after the service, as distinct from  Bible  classes  which  take  place
    every Wednesday. The key  issue  here,  I  find,  is  that  the  Pastor
    confirmed that the Appellant had attended not only Sunday services  but
    the baptism classes which took  place  every  third  Sunday  after  the
    service and Bible classes, thus  twice  weekly  attendance  over  three
    years.

25.  The Judge at [77]-[79] held against the Appellant, the Pastor  and  the
    witness, the Appellant's  mentor,  that  his  mentor  stated  that  the
    Appellant's baptism was supposed to take place in  September  2018  but
    had to be deferred, when this was inconsistent with the evidence of the
    Appellant and the Pastor. However, this fails to take into account  the
    Appellant's evidence given in response to questions asked by the  Judge
    at [34] that "the Pastor informed  the  appellant  that  he  should  be
    baptised in approximately October 2018. This was amended to state  that
    the Pastor informed the appellant of the decision to  baptise  him  one
    month before the actual event or maybe 2 months prior to the event" and
    at [36] "the Pastor stated that there  would  be  a  delay  while  they
    waitedfor another woman  to  be  baptised  with  the  Appellant."  This
    evidence does not support the Judge's finding at [79] that "Nor  is  it
    credible that the witness would be aware of an unsuccessful attempt  to
    baptise the appellant when the appellant and Pastor expressly confirmed
    that  the  baptism  took  place  on  11  November  2018  as  originally
    intended."

26.   I have concluded that the Judge's adverse finding are  not  justified,
    both for the reasons set out above and in light of the recent  judgment
    in TF & MA v SSHD [2018] CSIH 58, where Lord Glennie held inter alia as
    follows at [44]:

         "[44] The only direct evidence as to  the  state  of  mind  of  the
         person claiming to have undergone a  religious  conversion  is  the
         evidence of that person himself.  But  that  evidence  may  not  be
         available or, if it is, its truthfulness may be challenged.  It  is
         now recognised that it is not possible to "open windows into  men's
         souls" (an expression usually attributed to Elizabeth 1 of England)
         to test the  sincerity  of  his  belief.  Juries  in  Scotland  are
         habitually directed that intention or belief is a state of mind, to
         be inferred or deduced from what has been proved to have been  said
         or done by the person whose state of mind is in issue. That applies
         equally to a case such as the present. This point was well made  by
         HH Judge Gilbart QC, sitting as a deputy High  Court  Judge  in  SA
         (Iran) v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  [2012]  EWHC
         2575 (Admin) at paragraph 24:

             "... What appears to have impressed the immigration judge, and
             then the Home Secretary, is that the Claimant's conversion  to
             Christianity was not regarded by him as genuine, and had  been
             manufactured to assist her asylum claim.  It  is  a  dangerous
             thing for anyone, and perhaps especially a judge, to peer into
             what some call a man or  woman's  soul  to  assess  whether  a
             professed faith is genuinely held, and especially not when  it
             was and is agreed that she was and is a  frequent  participant
             in church services. It is a type  of  judicial  exercise  very
             popular some centuries ago in some  fora,  but  rather  rarely
             exercised today. I am also uneasy when a judge, even with  the
             knowledge one  gains  judicially  in  a  city  as  diverse  as
             Manchester, is bold enough to seek to reach  firm  conclusions
             about a professed  conversion,  made  by  a  woman  raised  in
             another culture, from the version of Islam practised  therein,
             to an evangelical  church  in  Bolton  within  one  strand  of
             Christianity. I am at a loss to understand how that is  to  be
             tested by anything other than considering whether  she  is  an
             active participant in the new church."

         In Dorodian (Ali) v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home  Department
         (2001) 01/TH/01537 (unreported)  the  Immigration  Appeal  Tribunal
         (IAT) referred to a letter from the pastor of the  relevant  church
         confirming the fact that for the previous  six  months  the  asylum
         seeker "has been regularly attending the activities of the  Iranian
         Christian Fellowship and is in the process of  being  prepared  for
         baptism"; and commented that since that letter was  accepted  (i.e.
         as truthful) "we take the appellant as a committed  Christian".  In
         SJ (Christian Apostates - Evidence) Iran [2003] UKIAT 00158 at para
         22 the IAT stressed the importance to be attached  to  evidence  of
         the appellant's continuous adherence  to  the  church's  principles
         during the relevant period in order that the tribunal can  "satisfy
         himself that the claim to adhere to the Christian faith  is  not  a
         transient claim brought into existence purely for the  purposes  of
         pursuing an asylum claim". The important point is that evidence  of
         how the appellant has  engaged  with  the  church  is  regarded  as
         critical to this exercise. Mr John Taylor of the  Tron  Church  was
         making the same point in his letters in support of both  appellants
         when he said that "it is not possible to look into a person's heart
         to ascertain whether or not a conversion to  Christianity  is  more
         than just words", implying that all he could do was  to  judge  the
         genuineness of  their  conversion  by  their  actions.  We  do  not
         understand Judge Gilbart or the IAT, in the passages quoted  above,
         to be saying that active participation in  a  Christian  church  is
         conclusive evidence of the genuineness of  a  conversion.  If  they
         were meaning to say that,  we  respectfully  disagree.  But  it  is
         likely  to  be  a  very  powerful  consideration,  to  be  assessed
         alongside any other evidence pointing to the sincerity or otherwise
         of the claimed conversion to Christianity."

27.   Whilst  the  Appellant's  answer  to  the  question  as  to  Christian
    celebrations at question 109 of the asylum  interview  record  was  not
    impressive, in that he failed to mention Easter and did  not  know  why
    Christians  celebrated  Christmas  [Q113]  he  stated  in  response  to
    question 112 that he had not been taught  about  celebrating  Christmas
    because the main focus was the teaching of Jesus Christ. The  Appellant
    was not cross-examined about these answers, however, and I  find  that,
    in themselves, particularly  when  the  Appellant's  account  to  be  a
    genuine convert to Christianity was  supported  by  his  Pastor  and  a
    mentor of three years standing from the Church, they are not sufficient
    reason to justify a finding that the Appellant is not a genuine convert
    to Christianity.

28.  For the reasons set out above, I find that First  tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Fox made material errors of law. I set that decision aside.



Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed to the extent that it is remitted to  the  First  tier
Tribunal for a hearing de novo.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Rebecca Chapman                         Date 8 April 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman
