
                                    [pic]

Upper Tier Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12466/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 22 July 2019                      |On 26 July 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup


                                   Between

                                     DA
                         [Anonymity direction made]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr A Maqsood, instructed by Marks & Marks Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269), I make an anonymity  direction.  Unless  the  Upper
    Tribunal or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings
    or any  form  of  publication  thereof  shall  directly  or  indirectly
    identify the appellant(s).

 2. This is the appellant's  appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Harris promulgated 20.5.19, dismissing  on  all  grounds
    his appeal against the  decision  of  the  Secretary  of  State,  dated
    16.10.18, to refuse his protection and human rights claims.

 3. The relevant background is that the appellant followed in his  father's
    footsteps by becoming a Shia preacher. As such, he claims to have  come
    to the adverse attention of a prescribed organisation, Saipan e Sihaba.
    He came to the UK with leave  as  a  student  in  2013.  He  became  an
    overstayer and did not make any protection claim until 2018.

 4. Judge Beg accepted that the appellant had been threatened  in  Pakistan
    by non-state actors but found that he failed to demonstrate that  there
    would not be a sufficiency of protection for him on return to  Pakistan
    so that his protection claim failed and the appeal was dismissed.

 5. The grounds complain that the  judge  applied  the  wrong  standard  of
    proof, failed to take relevant evidence into  account,  and  failed  to
    consider objective country  of  origin  evidence.  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Parkes granted permission to appeal on 17.6.19, on the basis that
    the grounds were arguable.

Error of Law

 6. For the reasons summarised below, having heard the  submissions  of  Mr
    Mansood and Mr Tufan, I find that there was an  error  of  law  in  the
    making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal such  as  to  require
    the decision to be set aside to be remade in the First-tier Tribunal.

 7. I am satisfied that at [69] of the decision the judge made  a  material
    misdirection as to the standard  of  proof.  The  first  part  of  that
    paragraph and the judge's reference to "overcome  the  doubts  arising"
    may be itself problematic but resulted in unchallenged findings in  the
    appellant's favour that:

      a) As claimed, he is a Shia preacher;

      b) Two threatening letter were sent;

      c) Someone contacted the appellant's mother by telephone  to  threaten
         the appellant;

      d) The appellant's mother had an  encounter  with  two  men  who  made
         threats against the appellant.

 8. The judge gave various reasons in the decision for finding that Sipah e
    Sihaba had not been identified as  to  the  author  or  source  of  the
    threats made against the appellant. However, the  second  part  of  the
    same paragraph [69] is clearly in error with the judge  making  adverse
    findings, stating: "there remains in my mind such weight of doubt as to
    prevent me being satisfied on the balance of  probabilities  that,"  in
    essence, the threats emanated from  Sipah  e  Sihaba,  that  they  were
    responsible for targeting a fellow Shia preacher, and  that  they  have
    come to the UK to target him. Obviously, the judge should have  applied
    the lower standard of proof, namely a reasonable likelihood and not the
    balance of probability. Mr Tufan suggested that it was no more  than  a
    slip and pointed to the  correct  standard  set  out  at  [35]  of  the
    decision. However, for the reasons set out below, I am  satisfied  that
    the error was material to a relevant issue in the  appeal.  It  follows
    that that adverse findings cannot stand.

 9. Elsewhere in the decision the judge accepted  that  the  appellant  had
    some prominence as a preacher in Pakistan and that even after coming to
    the UK he continued  as  a  preacher.  At  [60]  the  judge  found  the
    appellant had provided  a  plausible  account  for  the  provenance  of
    threatening letters, a copy of a  complaint  made  by  the  appellant's
    mother to the police about the threats made to her against him,  and  a
    newspaper report about threats made to kill him.

10. At [70] of the  decision  the  judge  returned  to  apply  the  correct
    standard of proof, accepting as a real likelihood that  the  makers  of
    the threats against the appellant were motivated by  religious  reasons
    but finding that, beyond being non-state actors, the identity of  those
    responsible had  not  been  satisfactorily  demonstrated.  It  was  the
    finding that Sipah e Sahaba had not been identified as  the  source  of
    the  threats  that  is  undermined.  However,  as  I  asked   the   two
    representatives, the issue is whether, even if the judge found  in  the
    appellant's favour on that issue, it had been demonstrated  that  there
    was an insufficiency of protection.

11. I find that the judge gave cogent reasons  open  to  the  tribunal  for
    concluding that the  expert  witness  was  no  expert  in  relation  to
    security matters, only in relation to the appellant's prominence  as  a
    Shia preacher. Mr Maqsood argued that if Sipah e Sahaba was the  source
    of the threats then the  country  background  information  demonstrated
    that the state could not provide sufficient protection. Having read the
    decision carefully, I am persuaded, just, that the finding  as  to  the
    source of the threats is  relevant  to  the  issue  of  sufficiency  of
    protection. In the circumstances, I find the error as to  the  standard
    of proof at [69] of the decision was material to  the  outcome  of  the
    appeal.

Remittal

12. When a decision of the First-tier Tribunal has been set aside,  section
    12(2) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 requires either
    that the case is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  with  directions,
    or it must be remade by the Upper Tribunal. The scheme of the Tribunals
    Court and Enforcement Act 2007 does not assign the function of  primary
    fact finding to the  Upper  Tribunal.  The  errors  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge vitiates key findings of fact and the  conclusions  from
    those facts so that there has not been a  valid  determination  of  the
    relevant issues in the appeal.

13. In all the circumstances, I relist this appeal for a fresh  hearing  in
    the First-tier Tribunal, on the basis that this is a case  which  falls
    squarely within the Senior President's Practice Statement at  paragraph
    7.2. The effect of the error has been to deprive  the  appellant  of  a
    fair hearing and that the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding
    which is necessary for the decision in the appeal to be re-made is such
    that, having regard to the overriding objective in rule 2 to deal  with
    cases fairly and justly, including with the avoidance of delay, I  find
    that it is appropriate to remit this appeal to the First-tier  Tribunal
    to determine the appeal afresh.

Decision

14. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law such that the decision  should  be
    set aside.

     I set aside the decision.

                    I remit the appeal to be decided afresh  in  the  First-
                    tier Tribunal in accordance with the directions below.

     Signed   DMW Pickup

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated



Consequential Directions

15. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal  sitting  at  Hatton
    Cross;

16. The positive findings of fact in the appellant's favour are  preserved.
    What remains at issue is the source of the threats found to  have  been
    made against the appellant and whether there will be a  sufficiency  of
    protection on return to Pakistan;

17. The ELH is 3 hours;

18. An interpreter in Urdu will be required;

19. The appeal may be listed before any First-tier Tribunal Judge, with the
    exception of Judges Harris and Parkes;

20. The appellant is to ensure  that  all  evidence  to  be  relied  on  is
    contained within a single consolidated, indexed and paginated bundle of
    all objective and  subjective  material,  together  with  any  skeleton
    argument and copies of all  case  authorities  to  be  relied  on.  The
    Tribunal will  not  accept  materials  submitted  on  the  day  of  the
    forthcoming appeal hearing;
     Signed   DMW Pickup

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated
