
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
PA/12522/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                    | Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 12 February 2019                     | On 16 April 2019                   |
|                                        |                                    |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR

                                   Between

                                     AR
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R Spurling, instructed by Barnes Harrild & Dyer
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Senior Presenting Officer


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008
Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the appellant
herein is granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly
or indirectly identify the appellant or any member of the appellant's
family.  Failure to comply with this direction could lead to contempt of
court proceedings






                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Iran, born in 1991.  He made a protection
    claim in the United Kingdom on 23 June 2017 having entered, it appears,
    in November 2015. The Secretary of State refused  this  application  by
    way of a decision dated 10 November 2017 and the subsequent  appeal  to
    the First-tier Tribunal ("FtT") was dismissed in a decision promulgated
    on 16 February 2018. Thereafter, FtT Judge Grant-Hutchinson granted the
    appellant permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal, thus  the  matter
    came before me.

 2. Having heard the parties at a hearing of 24 September 2018, I set aside
    the decision of the FtT,  for  reasons  which  are  set  out  below.  I
    directed that the decision on  the  appeal  be  re-made  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal and the matter duly came before me on  12  February  2019  for
    that task to be undertaken.

Setting aside of the First-tier Tribunal's decision

 3. Before the FtT the appellant asserted that he was at risk in  Iran  for
    four reasons:

          i) He had worked for PJAK in Iran and the Iranian authorities had
             found out about this involvement;

         ii) He had  participated  in  anti-regime  demonstrations  in  the
             United Kingdom, and photographs of his participation have been
             published on his Facebook account;

        iii) He has posted anti-Iranian regime  material  on  his  Facebook
             account, which is available for the public to view;

         iv) He is Kurdish.

 4. The FtT considered with the appellant's claimed  PJAK  involvement  and
    the consequences thereof within paragraphs 33 to 41  of  its  decision,
    rejecting the truth of the evidence given  by  the  appellant  in  this
    regard. The FtT also rejected the appellant's  assertion  that  removal
    would breach Article 8 ECHR. It is common ground, however, that the FtT
    did not consider any of those matters set out in  paragraphs  2(ii)  to
    2(iv) above.

 5. At the outset of the hearing in September 2018, Ms  Pal  (who  appeared
    for the Secretary of State on that occasion) properly accepted that the
    FtT had erred in failing to  consider  three  central  aspects  of  the
    appellant's claim to be at risk of suffering persecutory  treatment  if
    returned to Iran and accepted that the consequence of such  failure  is
    that the FtT's decision must be set aside. She submitted, however, that
    the scope of the remaking should not include matters  relating  to  the
    appellant's claimed PJAK activity, given the clear findings made by the
    FtT on this issue.

 6. Mr Khan indicated  that  the  appellant  no  longer  sought  to  pursue
    challenge to the FtT's findings made in  relation  to  the  appellant's
    claimed PJAK activities and the asserted consequences  thereof.  In  my
    view, this was an entirely proper concession given the  limited  nature
    of the pleaded challenge made in this regard. Had  Mr  Khan  maintained
    such a challenge I would, in any event, have rejected it.  When  looked
    at as a whole paragraphs 35-41 of the FtT's decision provide cogent and
    compelling reasons for the conclusions reached.  Mr Khan also  accepted
    that the appellant could not succeed on Article 8 ECHR  grounds  absent
    his Article 3/protection claim succeeding - at  least  insofar  as  the
    evidence currently stands.

 7. In these circumstances, I  set  aside  the  decision  of  the  FtT  and
    directed that the  Upper  Tribunal  would  remake  the  decision  under
    appeal. I further directed  that  the  scope  of  the  re-making  would
    include asylum, humanitarian protection, Article 3 and Article  8  ECHR
    grounds, and the  finding  of  the  FtT  rejecting  the  truth  of  the
    appellant's account of his involvement with the PJAK would stand as the
    starting point.

 8. The task of re-making could not be completed  immediately  because  the
    Upper Tribunal was, as of September 2018, in the process of considering
    evidence which was likely to lead to the issuing new  Country  Guidance
    in relation to Iran.

Remaking of Decision

 9. The proposed Country Guidance decision referred to above was ultimately
    reported as HB (Kurds) Iran CG [2018] UKUT 00430.  The headnote to that
    decision reads as follows:

         "(1)   SSH and HR (illegal exit: failed asylum seeker) Iran CG
         [2016] UKUT 308 (IAC) remains country guidance in terms of the
         country guidance offered in the headnote. For the avoidance of
         doubt, that decision is not authority for any proposition in
         relation to the risk on return for refused Kurdish asylum-seekers
         on account of their Kurdish ethnicity alone.

         (2)  Kurds in Iran face discrimination. However, the evidence does
         not support a contention that such discrimination is, in general,
         at such a level as to amount to persecution or Article 3 ill-
         treatment.

         (3)  Since 2016 the Iranian authorities have become increasingly
         suspicious of, and sensitive to, Kurdish political activity. Those
         of Kurdish ethnicity are thus regarded with even greater suspicion
         than hitherto and are reasonably likely to be subjected to
         heightened scrutiny on return to Iran.

         (4)  However, the mere fact of being a returnee of Kurdish
         ethnicity with or without a valid passport, and even if combined
         with illegal exit, does not create a risk of persecution or Article
         3 ill-treatment.

         (5)  Kurdish ethnicity is nevertheless a risk factor which, when
         combined with other factors, may create a real risk of persecution
         or Article 3 ill-treatment. Being a risk factor it means that
         Kurdish ethnicity is a factor of particular significance when
         assessing risk. Those "other factors" will include the matters
         identified in paragraphs (6)-(9) below.

         (6)  A period of residence in the KRI by a Kurdish returnee is
         reasonably likely to result in additional questioning by the
         authorities on return. However, this is a factor that will be
         highly fact-specific and the degree of interest that such residence
         will excite will depend, non-exhaustively, on matters such as the
         length of residence in the KRI, what the person concerned was doing
         there and why they left.

         (7)  Kurds involved in Kurdish political groups or activity are at
         risk of arrest, prolonged detention and physical abuse by the
         Iranian authorities. Even Kurds expressing peaceful dissent or who
         speak out about Kurdish rights also face a real risk of persecution
         or Article 3 ill-treatment.

         (8)  Activities that can be perceived to be political by the
         Iranian authorities include social welfare and charitable
         activities on behalf of Kurds. Indeed, involvement with any
         organised activity on behalf of or in support of Kurds can be
         perceived as political and thus involve a risk of adverse attention
         by the Iranian authorities with the consequent risk of persecution
         or Article 3 ill-treatment.

         (9)  Even 'low-level' political activity, or activity that is
         perceived to be political, such as, by way of example only, mere
         possession of leaflets espousing or supporting Kurdish rights, if
         discovered, involves the same risk of persecution or Article 3 ill-
         treatment. Each case however, depends on its own facts and an
         assessment will need to be made as to the nature of the material
         possessed and how it would be likely to be viewed by the Iranian
         authorities in the context of the foregoing guidance.

         (10) The Iranian authorities demonstrate what could be described as
         a 'hair-trigger' approach to those suspected of or perceived to be
         involved in Kurdish political activities or support for Kurdish
         rights. By 'hair-trigger' it means that the threshold for suspicion
         is low and the reaction of the authorities is reasonably likely to
         be extreme."

10. Turning then to the instant appeal, as identified in the error  of  law
    decision the appellant's claim now rests  on  four  features:  (i)  his
    participation in anti-regime activities in  the  United  Kingdom;  (ii)
    that photographs of  his  participation  have  been  published  on  his
    Facebook account; (iii) that he has posted other  anti-regime  material
    on his Facebook account which is available for the public to view; and,
    (iv) that he is of Kurdish origin.

11. There is no dispute as to the factual matrix which  makes  up  each  of
    these features, indeed, although the appellant was  made  available  to
    give evidence to the Upper Tribunal, Mr Wilding indicated that  he  did
    not dispute the appellant's evidence in this regard.

12. The appellant's bundle contains numerous examples of posts on  Facebook
    either authored by the  appellant  of  shared  by  the  appellant.  The
    content of these posts is, for the most part, anti-Iranian  regime.  It
    is not in dispute that the posts range in date from September  2018  to
    31 January 2019.  I need not identify with  any  more  specificity  the
    contents of these posts, because it is  accepted  by  Mr  Wilding  that
    their contents are that if they were to come to the  attention  of  the
    Iranian authorities the appellant would be at risk  of  being  detained
    and persecuted upon return.

13. To put this concession in context, the  appellant  in  HB  exhibited  a
    number of similar features to the  instant  appellant  in  that  he  is
    Kurdish, had posted or shared  anti  Iranian  regime  pictures  on  his
    Facebook page of a similar ilk to the images  and  text  found  on  the
    instant appellant's Facebook page, and he was to be  returned  to  Iran
    without a passport.  HB did also have features which the appellant does
    not share, such as the political history of his family members in Iran.



14. Given the aforementioned concession, the  issue  in  the  instant  case
    resolves to whether the information on the appellant's Facebook account
    is  reasonably  likely  to  come  to  the  attention  of  the   Iranian
    authorities.  As already indicated, the tribunal in HB  concluded  that
    it was reasonably likely that  the  information  in  relation  to  HB's
    Facebook account would come to the attention of the Iranian authorities
    at the point of return. I appreciate that each case turns  on  its  own
    facts, but it is instructive to consider  the  circumstances  that  the
    Tribunal concluded would have met by HB upon his return to Iran:

         "[114] ...it is not disputed that a returnee without a passport  is
         likely to be questioned upon return...it is  part  of  the  routine
         process to look at an internet profile, Facebook and  emails  of  a
         returnee. A person would be asked whether they had a Facebook  page
         and that would be checked. When a person  returns,  they  would  be
         asked to log onto their Facebook and email accounts. ..."

15. Mr Wilding's only submission in  support  of  a  contention  that  this
    particular appellant would not be at risk upon return was that he could
    be expected to delete his Facebook  account  or  the  offending  posts,
    prior to departing the UK.  In such  circumstances,  says  Mr  Wilding,
    there is nothing else in the evidence before the  Tribunal  that  could
    lead to the persecution of the appellant.

16. In response, Mr Spurling submits  that  the  appellant  should  not  be
    required to delete the posts because requiring him to do  so  would  be
    requiring him to suppress his genuine political views contrary  to  the
    decision of the Supreme Court in RT (Zimbabwe) SSHD [2012] UK SC38.

17. I need not determine whether Mr Spurling is correct in  his  submission
    (which would require me to determine whether the appellant has  genuine
    political views or whether the views he  has  posted  on  his  Facebook
    account are as a consequence of his desire  to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom), because I do not accept  Mr  Wilding's  submission  that  the
    appellant could simply delete his Facebook account and that this  would
    reduce the likelihood of the Iranian authorities becoming aware of  his
    views via such account, such that there would be no real  risk  of  the
    appellant being persecuted.

18. This is the first occasion in these proceedings that such a  submission
    has been made and this submission was neither made  to,  nor  addressed
    by, the country guidance Tribunal in HB.  It is to be recalled  that  a
    Country Guidance decision should be followed  unless  there  is  cogent
    evidence to lead to a conclusion that it should not.

19. The Tribunal in HB found there  to  be  a  real  risk  of  a  returnees
    Facebook account becoming available to the Iranian authorities  at  the
    point of return, particularly in the context of a  returnee  without  a
    passport who is of Kurdish origin - as the instant appellant is.  There
    is no evidence before me, let alone  cogent  evidence,  that  leads  me
    depart from such conclusion. All  that  is  before  is  the  Presenting
    Officer's assertion that a Facebook account can be  deleted,  and  this
    would alleviate the possibility of it being  accessed  by  the  Iranian
    authorities.

20. Given the terms of the Country Guidance decision, I am not prepared  to
    accept that there would be no real  risk  of  the  instant  appellant's
    account  (or  material  information  held  on  that  account)  becoming
    available to the Iranian authorities. Although the burden of  proof  is
    on the appellant, that burden is met in my view by  the  terms  of  the
    Country Guidance decision. Absent any evidence to support the Secretary
    of State's belated contention to the contrary, I conclude that there is
    a real risk to the appellant upon return. I  am  not  persuaded  to  do
    anything other than  follow  the  rationale  deployed  in  the  Country
    Guidance decision.

21. In any event, and this does not form  any  part  of  my  reasoning  for
    allowing this appeal but is included merely by way  of  observation,  I
    would take some persuading  that  simply  deleting  a  user's  Facebook
    account would leave the Iranian authorities unable to access data which
    had previously been held on that account i.e. it would remove traces of
    relevant material from internet search engines. For example,  a  number
    of the posts on the appellant's account are  shared  by  the  appellant
    from other  users'  accounts.  This  can  be  seen  from  the  evidence
    produced. It is also reasonably likely that a number of the appellant's
    posts have been shared by other users. The appellant has 211 friends on
    Facebook. The underlying posts on these  other  users'  accounts  would
    plainly not be removed by deletion of the appellant's account.

22. As I have indicated,  I  need  not  make  the  above  finding  [in  21]
    definitively because in my view  the  correct  starting  point,  absent
    anything from the Secretary of State to the contrary  other  than  mere
    assertion, is the Country Guidance decision. Applying that decision,  I
    conclude that the authorities in  Iran  would,  at  the  point  of  the
    appellant's return, have access  to  information  that  he  has  posted
    and/or shared on his Facebook account.

23. If I am wrong about the relevance and effect of the appellant  deleting
    his  Facebook  account  before  removal  then,  in  any  event,  in  my
    conclusion the questioning of the appellant upon return would also lead
    to a real risk of his detention and ill treatment.  The Tribunal in  HB
    concluded that a returnee without a passport is likely to be questioned
    [97].   The  appellant  cannot  be  expected  to  lie  upon  return  if
    questioned.  Even if it is not accepted that he has a genuine political
    belief in support of the Kurdish rights, it is true that he has  posted
    such beliefs on his Facebook account.  He cannot  be  expected  to  lie
    about this.  If asked for the credentials to access  his  account,  the
    appellant can genuinely say that his account has been  deleted.   There
    is a real risk, however, that the questioning will  then  turn  to  why
    that is the case.  At this point the appellant will, if not required to
    lie, be required to disclose that he deleted the account  in  order  to
    prevent the Iranian authorities from discovering that he had put  anti-
    regime material on it.  This is of itself sufficient, in my conclusion,
    to lead to a real risk of detention and subsequent ill treatment.

24. For all these reasons, which are not cumulative, I  am  satisfied  that
    the appellant has established to the required low standard that he  has
    a well-founded fear of persecution for convention  reason,  namely  his
    actual and perceived political opinion.  Thus, I allow  his  appeal  on
    Refugee Convention and Article 3 ECHR grounds. I  need  not  deal  with
    Article 8 in such circumstances, save to say that absent  the  features
    which lead to the appeal being allowed on the Article 3  ground,  there
    is little else which falls in the appellant's favour under  Article  8.



Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  of
law and I set it aside.

Having remade the decision, I allow the appeal  on  Refugee  Convention  and
Human Rights grounds (the latter with reference to Article 3 ECHR).


Signed:                                 Dated:
Mark O'Connor                       15 April 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor























