
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/12485/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard remotely at Field House      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|By UK Court Skype                  |                                   |
|On 4 March 2021                    |On 13 May 2021                     |
|                                   |                                   |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE OWENS


                                   Between

                                     AEC
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Unrepresented
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Hatton sent on 6 March 2020. Permission  to  appeal
    was granted on 31 July 2020 by Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson.

 2. The hearing was held remotely.  Neither party objected to  the  hearing
    being held by video link.  Both parties participated by UK court Skype.
     I am satisfied that a face-to-face hearing could not be  held  because
    it was not practicable due to the current COVID-19 situation  and  that
    all of the issues could  be  determined  fairly  by  way  of  a  remote
    hearing.  Both parties confirmed at the end of the hearing that it  had
    been conducted fairly.

    Background


 3. The appellant is a  Lebanese  national  of  Palestinian  ethnicity.  He
    claims to have last arrived in the UK on 6 February  2017.  He  claimed
    asylum on the basis that he is at risk of serious harm  from  Hezbollah
    as a result of carrying out charity activities for a Syrian charity  in
    Lebanon and opposing Hezbollah's activities in Syria.


    The decision of the respondent


 4. The respondent found the appellant to be lacking in credibility and did
    not accept his account because of discrepancies in  his  evidence,  his
    adverse immigration history and  the  inherent  implausibility  of  his
    account. The respondent also placed reliance on s8 of  the  Asylum  and
    Immigration (Treatment of Claimants Act etc) 2004.


    The hearing before the First-tier Tribunal


 5. The appellant was  unrepresented.  He  gave  his  evidence  through  an
    independent interpreter. The respondent  was  similarly  unrepresented.
    The appellant gave oral evidence, and the judge made a  typed  note  of
    the record of proceedings.


    Grounds of appeal


 6. The grounds were drafted by the unrepresented appellant and are  poorly
    particularised. In  general,  the  appellant's  grounds  amount  to  an
    allegation that the  judge  made  errors  of  fact,  misunderstood  the
    evidence, accepted the reasons for the Secretary of State's refusal and
    did not clarify matters with him. The grounds amount  to  an  assertion
    that the hearing was procedurally unfair because the appellant was  not
    given an opportunity to respond to points  taken  against  him  by  the
    judge.


    Grant of permission


 7. Permission was granted by UTJ Jackson on the basis that;

           "... there were a number of  matters  raised  by  the  appellant
           which are more substantive and which highlight  arguable  errors
           by the First-tier Tribunal. In particular it  is  arguable  that
           the First-tier Tribunal have  placed  too  much  weight  on  the
           appellant's  screening   interview   when   making   credibility
           findings; placed too much weight on what appears to be differing
           spellings  in  translation  from  Arabic  when  making   adverse
           credibility findings and placed too much weight on the fact that
           the appellant was briefly legally represented  (but  not  before
           the First-tier Tribunal) and assumed  that  this  was  competent
           representation (a matter disputed by the appellant )  such  that
           the appellant acting in person could not reasonably have  failed
           to know what was required to present his  own  appeal  and  what
           evidence he should produce. It is arguable that  the  First-tier
           Tribunal have failed to properly  take  into  account  that  the
           appellant was acting in person and held this  against  him  when
           making adverse credibility claims".


    Analysis and Discussion


 8. At the outset of the hearing, Mr Clarke for the respondent stated  that
    he accepted that all of the  reasons  given  by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Jackson for granting  permission  were  valid  grounds  of  appeal.  He
    conceded that the judge had given too much weight to  discrepancies  in
    the screening interview, too much weight to discrepancies in  spellings
    in the name of the charity referred to by the appellant  and  that  the
    judge  had  failed  to  take  into  account  that  the  appellant   was
    unrepresented when assessing credibility.


 9. Mr Clarke also pointed to another more serious 'Robinson obvious' error
    made by the judge. When making negative  credibility  findings  against
    the appellant, the judge referred to a  matter  that  was  put  to  the
    appellant in  the  asylum  interview.  In  the  asylum  interview,  the
    appellant was shown a witness statement signed by himself in  which  it
    was said that the appellant entered  the  UK  in  2014.   However,  the
    witness statement itself was not before  the  Tribunal,  there  was  no
    Presenting Officer present at the appeal and the issue was not taken in
    the respondent's  refusal  letter.  Mr  Clarke  conceded  that  it  was
    manifestly unfair to  hold  this  apparent  inconsistency  against  the
    appellant in these circumstances.

10. I am in agreement with Mr Clarke  that  the  judge  made  a  number  of
    errors.

    Inconsistencies  between  the  screening  interview   and   substantive
interview

11. When making adverse credibility findings  against  the  appellant,  the
    judge relied  on  inconsistencies  between  the  appellant's  screening
    interview and his asylum interview.

12. At [42] the judge notes that in his substantive interview the appellant
    claimed  to  fear  persecution   from   Ansar   Allah   and   that   he
    "conspicuously"  failed  to  mention  this  group  in   his   screening
    interview.

13. In JA (Afghanistan) 2014 EWCA Civ 450, Moore-Bick LJ  cautions  against
    judges placing  too  much  weight  on  inconsistencies  between  asylum
    interviews and screening interviews because "there is room for mistakes
    and misunderstandings".

14.  Where  a  judge  intends  to  give  weight  to  such  a   discrepancy,
    particularly where an appellant is unrepresented, it  is  incumbent  on
    the judge as a matter of procedural fairness to put  the  inconsistency
    to the appellant to see if there is a reasonable  explanation  for  the
    inconsistency. From the typed record of proceedings, the judge did  not
    put this inconsistency  to  the  appellant  at  any  point  during  the
    hearing. The consequence of this is that the appellant was not given an
    opportunity to put forward an explanation. In  these  circumstances  it
    was unfair on the judge to rely on the discrepancy to make  a  negative
    credibility finding.

15. Further, in his asylum interview, the appellant states at Question 165,

           "On the screening interview at Question 4 they asked me why  did
           I leave Lebanon [sic]. I did explain because of Hezbollah and my
           life was in danger. They stopped me and said I  can  explain  it
           later at the interview. She said you  don't  need  to  carry  on
           now".


16. This statement if it had been taken into account by the judge may  have
    provided an explanation as to why the appellant did not  mention  Ansar
    Allah at the outset.

17.  The appellant clearly explained in his  substantive  asylum  interview
    that Ansar Allah is connected to  Hezbollah  and  works  on  behalf  of
    Hezbollah in the camps because Hezbollah are  not  able  to  enter  the
    camps. At questions 62 and 63 of his interview, he states;

           "They [Hezbollah] have a group that it  actually  part  of  them
           [sic] which is called Ansar Allah. They are in  our  camp.  They
           are in every PSE camp. Ansar Allah is a PSE group that  is  with
           Hezbollah".


18. The judge appears to ignore this evidence which  in  turn  indicates  a
    lack of anxious scrutiny.

Differences in spellings


19. Secondly, the judge gave great weight to the fact that  the  name  that
    the charity tat the appellant  had  worked  for  has  been  spelled  in
    several different ways in the evidence, including Nabih at  [43],  Nabi
    at [44] and Nabea and Nirba at [68].


20. At [68] the judge states;

       "The appellant's lack of consistency in this regard is striking".

21. At no point during the  hearing,  according  to  the  typed  record  of
    proceedings did the judge put these  spelling  inconsistencies  to  the
    appellant  so  that  he  could  provide  an   explanation.   This   was
    procedurally unfair because the appellant had no opportunity to give an
    explanation for the  discrepancies.   In  his  grounds  of  appeal,  he
    explains that the original name of the charity is in Arabic  which  can
    be  translated  into  English  with  different  spellings.  This  is  a
    feasible explanation, particularly in circumstances when the  different
    spellings sound similar when pronounced phonetically  in  English.  Had
    the appellant been given an opportunity to explain, the judge  may  not
    have  given  the  discrepancies  between  the  spellings  weight   when
    assessing credibility.


22. In circumstances where there is no representative for the Secretary  of
    State, it i for the judge to put adverse points or issues of concern to
    the appellant to seek his explanation in order to ensure  fairness  and
    in this appeal the judge plainly did not do so.

    Weight given to lack of supporting evidence


23. Further, the judge gave considerable weight to the  lack  of  witnesses
    who atended court to support the appellant.  At [80], [81], [82], [83],
    [84], [87], [88] and [90], the judge comments  on  the  fact  that  the
    appellant did not bring additional witnesses to  the  appeal  including
    his uncle, wife and nephew despite the appellant explaining  repeatedly
    that he was not aware that he needed to do so.

24. The appellant is recorded as stating in the record of proceedings which
    is replicated at [89];

            "I didn't know otherwise I would have brought a  lot  of  people
           forward to support me to help my case. The solicitor told me you
           need to be personally there in  court,  you  don't  need  anyone
           else".


25. The judge rejects this explanation finding  it  incredible.  The  judge
    states that it is;


           "beyond the realms of credibility  that  a  reasonably  diligent
           legal representative would advise  a  client  that  it  was  not
           necessary to obtain supporting evidence or a  witness  statement
           from such an individual".


26. This appears to ignore the appellant's evidence at the  outset  of  his
    hearing that he had been unhappy with his representative  and  that  he
    had tried to seek other representation.  The  appellant  explained  his
    representatives had messed him about in terms of funding, had failed to
    take calls from him and hidden documents from him.  The appellant  said
    he  was  not  informed  about  the  deadline  and  did  not  trust  his
    representative. Although the appellant  confirmed  that  he  wanted  to
    continue with the hearing, it is not clear why the judge  assumes  that
    his representative was reasonably competent in light of the appellant's
    evidence.


27. According to the Equal Treatment Bench Book, the  principles  of  which
    are reiterated in  AM  (Afghanistan)  v  SSHD  [2017]  ECWA  Civ  1123,
    considerable care should be taken when a litigant is unrepresented, and
    the judge must take  into  account  that  an  individual  may  find  it
    difficult to present his  case  and  will  not  necessarily  know  what
    evidence he has to adduce nor in what format.  In  circumstances  where
    this appellant was unrepresented the judge did not give  enough  leeway
    to the fact that the appellant may not have been aware what evidence he
    was supposed to present.

    'Robinson Obvious' error  - Reliance on material not placed before the
    judge/ not relied on by respondent.  - Findings on appellant's presence
    in the UK in 2014 inadequately reasoned/irrational

28. Mr Clarke drew my attention to a significant error on the part  of  the
    judge. his error was not raised by the  appellant  in  his  grounds  of
    appeal, however in line  with  AZ  (error  of  law:  jurisdiction;  PTA
    practice (Iran) [2018] UKUT 245, I  find  this  error  to  be  obvious,
    serious and relate to the appellant's claim for protection. I find that
    the error is material to the outcome of the appeal.

29. At question 153 of the asylum interview, the interviewer states;

            "I have a witness  statement  dated  20/3/17  submitted  by  you
           stating that you entered the  UK  in  2014  and  that  when  you
           claimed asylum in 2017 you tried to cover up the real  date.  Is
           this correct?".

30. The appellant replies;

           "This is not correct there must be a mistake".

31. The appellant is shown a witness statement. He said the  statement  was
    taken over the phone with his solicitor. It is not correct and that  he
    was present in Lebanon when the events took place which  gave  rise  to
    his fear of persecution which was after 2014.

32. At [95] the judge states;

            "I find that the Appellant entered  this  country  clandestinely
           later that same year [2014] and has  resided  here  continuously
           ever  since.  In  so  finding,  I  note  that  the   appellant's
           substantive asylum interview reveals the existence of a  witness
           statement signed and dated by the appellant on 20 March 2017  in
           which he confirmed that he entered  the  UK  in  2014  and  that
           thereafter when he claimed asylum in 2017 he tried to  cover  up
           his actual entry".

33. At [97] he continues;

           "Whilst I note that the appellant has subsequently rejected  the
           contents of this statement, I find that the information provided
           by the appellant to the respondent therein is true and accurate.
           In so finding, I can find no credible reason why  the  appellant
           would have sought to fabricate such an assertion".

34. In the refusal letter it is stated that the appellant  was  encountered
    on a train by Border Enforcement in Paris in  possession  of  a  Danish
    passport. It is next said that he travelled to  Beirut  on  25  January
    2017, that he flew to Belgium on 28 January 2017 and entered the UK  on
    6 February 2017. The implication from this is that the  appellant  left
    Lebanon on 25 January 2017 to travel to Beirut before  travelling  onto
    the UK.


35. At no point is it asserted in the refusal  letter  that  the  appellant
    entered the UK in 2014 and has remained in the UK since then. Nor is it
    asserted that the appellant's credibility is undermined by the  earlier
    witness statement. This is not a reason relied on by the respondent  in
    the refusal letter. The witness statement dated 20 March 2017  was  not
    produced in the respondent's bundle, so the judge did not have sight of
    it, nor was the Border Enforcement document. The judge therefore relied
    on unsubstantiated evidence to undermine the  appellant's  credibility,
    going far beyond the reasons given by  the  respondent.  There  was  no
    Presenting Officer at the appeal to make this assertion or  to  produce
    this evidence and the judge did not put this matter to the appellant so
    that he could provide an  explanation  in  his  oral  evidence.  It  is
    unclear why the judge has taken  it  upon  himself  to  go  behind  the
    reasons  given  by  the  respondent,  made  findings  of  fact   wholly
    unsupported by the evidence in  the  bundle  without  even  giving  the
    appellant an opportunity to respond. This error on its own  amounts  to
    procedural unfairness.


36. This error informs the judge's finding at [100] that;

           "I also note that the substance of the appellant's asylum  claim
           relies on events which purportedly took place in 2016-2017. As I
           have found that the appellant had been continuously  in  the  UK
           since  2014,  I  consider  the  substance  of  the   appellant's
           protection claim to be a total fabrication".

37. This error is manifestly material to the outcome of the appeal.

38. I am satisfied for all the above reasons that  the  appellant  did  not
    have a fair hearing and that the findings in respect of the appellant's
    credibility are flawed. I am satisfied that had  the  appellant  had  a
    fair hearing, the judge  may  have  formed  a  different  view  of  the
    appellant's credibility and may have come to a different conclusion  on
    the risk to the appellant on return.


39. It is agreed by both parties that given the extent  of  the  errors  in
    relation to  the  credibility  findings  that  no  findings  should  be
    preserved, and that the decision should be set aside in  its  entirety.
    While mindful  of  statement  7  of  the  Senior  President's  Practice
    Statements of 10 February 2010, it is the case that the  appellant  has
    yet to have an adequate consideration of his asylum appeal at the First-
    tier  Tribunal  and  it  would  be  unfair  to  deprive  him  of   such
    consideration. I am therefore in agreement with this course of action.

40. The appellant indicated that he was trying to obtain permission to  get
    married in a Registry Office and I indicated that he could  seek  legal
    advice in respect of this and that, if possible, he should seek  to  be
    represented at the next appeal hearing, so  that  he  can  prepare  his
    appeal properly and ensure that he brings the  necessary  evidence  and
    witnesses to the appeal.

41. The fact that the appellant now has a British citizen partner and child
    are potentially 'new matters'. It will be for  the  appellant  to  take
    advice on how this information should be communicated to the respondent
    and whether he will be able to rely on these new matters  at  the  next
    appeal hearing. It is for the appellant to complete any  relevant  s120
    notices and witness statements in relation to these new facts.

Notice of Decision

42. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law and is set aside in its entirety.

43. I remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for a  fresh  hearing  de
    novo in front of a  different  judge  than  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Hatton.

Anonymity Order

44. This appeal concerns a claim made under the Refugee Convention.  Having
    had regard to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 and the Presidential Guidance Note No 1 of 2013: Anonymity Orders,
    I therefore consider it appropriate to make an order in  the  following
    terms:


         "Unless and until a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
        Appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
        shall directly or indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her
        family.  This  direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  both  the
        Appellant  and  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply  with   this
        direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings"


      Signed                       Date:11 March 2021


      R J Owens
      Upper Tribunal Judge Owens


