
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12211/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 5 April 2018                         |On 12 April 2018                    |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT


                                   Between

                                     MS
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr F Magennis, Counsel instructed by Wilson
Solicitors LLP
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against the decision dated 2 January 2018  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge  Bowler  which  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal
    against the refusal of his asylum and human rights claim, made  in  the
    context of a deportation order.

 2. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I continue the anonymity order made  by  the  First-
    tier Tribunal. Unless the Upper Tribunal or a Court directs  otherwise,
    no report of these proceedings or any form of publication thereof shall
    directly or indirectly identify the original appellant. This  direction
    applies to, amongst others, all parties. Any  failure  to  comply  with
    this direction could give rise to contempt of court proceedings.  I  do
    so in order to avoid a  likelihood  of  serious  harm  arising  to  the
    appellant from the contents of the protection claim.

 3. The background to this matter is that the appellant is  a  national  of
    Algeria who claims to have arrived illegally in 2004. He claimed asylum
    on the basis of a risk from  his  cousin  and  his  gang  whom  he  had
    reported to the authorities. This claim  was  refused  on  9  September
    2004. He appealed the refusal of an asylum claim but absconded and  his
    appeal was dismissed in his absence, his legal  representatives  having
    withdrawn.

 4. In 2010 the appellant applied for leave under  the  "legacy"  programme
    but the application was refused in 2011.

 5. On 9 November 2012 the appellant was convicted of conspiring to  supply
    Class A drugs and sentenced on 16 April 2013 to 6  years  imprisonment.
    He failed to return a questionnaire accompanying a notice dated 29  May
    2013 of his liability to automatic  deportation.  He  again  failed  to
    return a questionnaire sent to him on 10 September 2010. He  was  asked
    on 12 December 2013 whether he considered that he fell into one of  the
    exceptions to automatic deportation but did not respond. On  19  August
    2014 a deportation order was signed and then served on the appellant on
    20 August 2014.

 6. On 25 August 2014 the appellant provided one of the questionnaires that
    had been sent, maintaining that his life would be in danger in  Algeria
    from traffickers who had brought him to the UK. On 15 September 2015 he
    made a human  trafficking  claim  and  was  referred  to  the  National
    Referral Mechanism. He received a negative reasonable grounds  decision
    on 21 September 2015. The applicant was granted bail  on  26  September
    2016. He was re-detained on 30 January 2017 pending deportation.

 7. On 4  May  2017,  with  the  assistance  of  Thompsons  Solicitors  the
    appellant made further representations on the basis that he would be at
    risk of mistreatment in Algeria from traffickers to whom he owes money.
    Those further submissions included a witness statement dated  22  April
    2017 and two videos purporting to show the traffickers looking for  the
    appellant at his home and seriously mistreating  others  who  had  come
    within their control; see AA2 of the respondent's bundle.

 8. On 1 June 2017 the respondent refused leave and found that the  further
    submissions did not amount to a fresh claim.  The  applicant  lodged  a
    judicial review which included a further basis for a protection  claim,
    that he was at risk  from  the  Algerian  authorities  because  of  his
    religious conversion.

 9. Following  judicial  review  proceedings,  the  respondent  provided  a
    further decision dated 13 November 2017 which again  refused  to  grant
    leave but accepted that a fresh claim arose. That decision led  to  the
    appeal here, the appellant lodging an appeal on 16 November  2017  with
    the assistance of Wilson Solicitors LLP.  The appeal was listed for  14
    December 2017, exactly 4 weeks after the appeal was lodged.

10. The Tribunal file shows that the respondent was directed in the  notice
    of hearing dated 23 November 2017 to provide a bundle of all  documents
    on which she sought to rely to the  appellant  no  later  than  5  days
    before the full hearing. It is not disputed that the respondent did not
    comply with that direction, the respondent's bundle being  served  only
    on 13 December 2018, the day before the hearing.

11. When the 5-day time  limit  for  service  of  the  respondent's  bundle
    passed,  the  appellant's  legal   representatives   applied   for   an
    adjournment on 11 December 2017. They applied on  the  basis  that  the
    respondent's bundle had not been provided so they could not take proper
    instructions. They had also been instructed by the  appellant  that  he
    required a medical report. That application was refused on 12  December
    2017 as it was found that there had been enough  time  to  prepare  the
    appeal and no reason given why a medical report was required.

12. On 12 December 2017 the legal  representatives  again  applied  for  an
    adjournment as the respondent's bundle  had  not  been  received.  That
    application was refused on 12 December 2017, the reasoning  being  that
    the appellant had delayed 13 years before making the current protection
    claim and that there was no evidence  that  the  appellant  had  sought
    treatment for any mental health problems, the need for a medical report
    therefore being speculative.

13.  On  13  December  2017  the  legal  representatives  again  sought  an
    adjournment as the respondent's bundle had only been served  that  day.
    They submitted that:

         "Proceeding with the appeal at this stage,  where  our  client  has
         been provided with the Respondent's documents only the day  before,
         would effectively prevent him from responding to the  case  against
         him. This would be manifestly  unfair  and  would  result  in  this
         appeal being unjustly decided."

14. As shown at [32] to [47] of the First-tier Tribunal  decision,  further
    applications for an adjournment were made at the hearing. At [33],  the
    First-tier Tribunal found that the appellant had all the documents that
    were in the respondent's bundle so could have  provided  these  to  his
    legal  advisers  and  provided  instructions  on  them  such  that   an
    adjournment was not appropriate.

15. It was also argued that an adjournment should be granted as  the  legal
    advisers had not been able to see the appellant to obtain  instructions
    and had not been able to produce a witness statement; see [34]. At [35]
    the First-tier Tribunal refused an adjournment on that basis  as  there
    had been time to obtain a witness statement and that one dated 22 April
    2017 already existed, provided with the further submissions  of  4  May
    2017.

16. The application for an adjournment in order to obtain a medical  report
    was also pursued; see [36]. The First-tier  Tribunal  judge  considered
    that it was unlikely that a medical report could assist  materially  in
    an Article 8 ECHR application so refused the adjournment; see [37]. The
    Tribunal indicated that the appellant would nonetheless be treated as a
    vulnerable witness.

17. An adjournment was also sought as a bundle of country evidence had  not
    been prepared; see [38]. The First-tier Tribunal found that the refusal
    letter provided sufficient information for the legal advisers  to  have
    prepared a country evidence  bundle  in  response  and  also  that  the
    respondent's Country of Origin report was sufficient; see [44].

18. During  the  hearing,  presumably  because  they  had  learned  of  the
    existence of the videos in the respondent's  bundle  provided  the  day
    before, the appellant's legal advisers also sought  an  adjournment  in
    order to obtain the videos referred to in the further submissions of  4
    May 2017. This application  was  refused  as  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    decided that the appellant could describe what was in the videos and  a
    decision reached on whether they had probative value made.

19. I am satisfied that an error of law arose here in all the circumstances
    of this  case.  There  is  a  reason  why  the  Tribunal  directed  the
    respondent to provide her materials 5 days prior to the hearing. It was
    in order for him to have adequate time to prepare his case in response.
    The bundle was received only the day before the hearing and  there  was
    therefore insufficient time for preparation. The appellant did not have
    a fair hearing as a result.

20. That is so notwithstanding the very serious drugs offence for which  he
    was convicted and, using as neutral a term as possible,  his  chequered
    immigration history.

21. The reasons given for refusing to adjourn include the view that it  was
    appropriate to proceed as, in the past, the appellant had seen or  been
    given the documents in the respondent's bundle  and  so  could  provide
    instructions.

22. That reasoning is not correct.   At  best,  the  appellant  could  only
    surmise what might be in the respondent's bundle. He  could  only  know
    for certain if it contained only materials he already knew about  after
    seeing the bundle which was not possible until the day of  the  hearing
    itself. Both he and his legal advisers would inevitably  have  remained
    in the dark to some extent up until the service of the bundle  the  day
    before the hearing.

23. Further, that reasoning assumes that a detained  appellant  either  has
    all the relevant materials with him in detention from  his  immigration
    history or that he recalls his past dealings  with  the  respondent  in
    such detail that he is able to instruct his legal  advisers  adequately
    for a new appeal. Neither assumption is sustainable in my view.

24. I should add that there is no dispute  here  that  the  legal  advisers
    tried to obtain material from  the  previous  firm  instructed  by  the
    appellant but they had not responded even up  until  the  date  of  the
    hearing before me.

25. The case of Nwaigwe (adjournment: fairness)  [2014]  UKUT  00418  (IAC)
    states:

         "Where an adjournment refusal is challenged on fairness grounds, it
         is important to recognise that the question for the Upper  Tribunal
         is not whether the FTT acted reasonably.  Rather, the  test  to  be
         applied is that of fairness;  was  there  any  deprivation  of  the
         affected party's right to a fair hearing?  See SH  (Afghanistan)  v
         Civ [2011] Civ 1284."

26. My conclusion is that for the reasons set out above the appellant  here
    did not receive a fair hearing  and  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal must be set aside to  be  re-made.  Where  the  error  of  law
    concerns procedural fairness, it is appropriate for the appeal to be re-
    made in the First-tier Tribunal.

27. I should stress, however, that this decision  is  not  in  any  way  an
    indication that the appellant's appeal cannot be heard fairly without a
    further witness statement, country materials, a report  on  trafficking
    or a medical report. It is merely a  finding  that  in  the  particular
    circumstances of the hearing on 14 December 2017,  in  particular  very
    late service of the respondent's bundle, a fair hearing  did  not  take
    place. The respondent's bundle has been  available  since  13  December
    2017, four months  has  passed  since  then  and,  absent  any  further
    indication from either party, there does  not  appear  to  be  anything
    preventing the First-tier Tribunal from re-hearing the  appeal  at  the
    earliest opportunity.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal discloses an error  on  a  point  of
law and is set aside to be re-made in the First-tier Tribunal.

Signed   [pic]                          Date 9 April 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt


