
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/12847/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Kings Court, North Shields|Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|                                   |On: 28 May 2019                    |
|Decision delivered orally & typed  |                                   |
|On: 3 May 2019                     |                                   |
|                                   |                                   |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAHMOOD


                                   Between

                                     FAK
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs Brakaj of Iris Law Firm (Gateshead)
For the Respondent:    Miss Young, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    The Appellant's protection claim was heard  and  dismissed  by  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Bircher. Permission to appeal against that decision
    was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge L Murray by way of a  decision
    dated 5 February 2019.

2.    At  the  hearing  before  me  today,  Miss  Young  on  behalf  of  the
    Respondent conceded that there had been a procedural error. The grounds
    of appeal had identified that there were a large  number  of  documents
    supporting the Appellant's claim, but that those  documents  were  only
    considered once the  Judge  had  already  found  the  Appellant  to  be
    incredible in his account. When granting permission to appeal, Judge  L
    Murray had said that the  Judge  had  arguably  fallen  into  the  trap
    identified by the Court of Appeal in Ex parte Virjon B [2002] EWHC 1469

3.    Both parties submitted that  because  there  needed  to  complete  new
    findings then the matter should be remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal
    for re-hearing.

4.    In view of the concession, properly made on behalf of the  Respondent,
    I allow the appeal. There will be a re-hearing of  the  matter  at  the
    First-tier Tribunal (not before Judge Bircher).  None  of  the  current
    findings shall stand.



Notice of Decision

      1) There is a material error of law  in  the  decision  of  First-tier
         Tribunal Judge Bircher and  that  decision  is  set  aside  in  its
         entirety.

      2) The First-tier Tribunal shall provide the further directions.



Anonymity

    I make an anonymity order.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him. This direction applies both to  the  Appellant  and
to the Respondent.  Failure to comply with  this  direction  could  lead  to
contempt of court proceedings.


Signed: A Mahmood                                        Date: 3 May 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mahmood
