
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                               Appeal
Number: PA/12379/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Manchester                  |              Decision and Reasons    |
|                                      |Promulgated                           |
|On: 20th December 2017                |              On: 22nd December 2017  |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

                                     SH
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:           Ms G. Patel, Counsel instructed by the Greater
Manchester
                       Immigration Aid Unit
For the Respondent:    Mr G. Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Iran born  in  1990.   He  appeals  with
    permission[1] the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Tully),
    who on the 4th April 2017 dismissed his protection claim.


 2. The basis of the Appellant's claim is that he  faces  a  real  risk  of
    serious harm in Iran for reasons of his imputed political  opinion.  He
    fears arrest by the Iranian authorities because  they  believe  him  to
    have employed/accommodated two members of Jaish Ul Adl, a banned  Sunni
    extremist group.  The Respondent disbelieved  the  Appellant's  account
    and so did  the  First-tier  Tribunal  who  respectively  rejected  the
    protection claim and dismissed his appeal. The central  point raised in
    this appeal is whether the First-tier Tribunal acted  unfairly  in  its
    disposal of the claim, taking as it did several new credibility  points
    against the Appellant that were not made by the Respondent.  The second
    ground is that in the remainder of its reasoning the Tribunal failed to
    weigh in the balance the evidence of the Appellant.


 3. It is accepted that if the Tribunal did indeed take points against  the
    Appellant of which he had no notice, this would be  an  error  of  law,
    since the Appellant would be deprived of an opportunity to  respond  to
    the forensic challenge made, a fundamental component of the  common-law
    right to a fair hearing. See for instance: HA  &  Anr  v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home  Department  [2010]  ScotCS  CSIH  28.  Mr  Harrison
    further agreed that it would be an error if the Tribunal had failed  to
    take material evidence into account.




    Discussion and Findings


 4. The reasons for refusal letter is dated 25th October 2016. Therein  the
    Respondent makes the following adverse comments about  the  Appellant's
    version of events:

              i) He said at  his  interview  that  his  employee  had  never
                 expressed any opinions about  Jaish  Ul  Adl  but  this  is
                 inconsistent with the Appellant's alternative evidence that
                 he did not spend any time with the man outside of work: "it
                 is therefore unclear how you would know if he expressed any
                 such views";


             ii) The Appellant claims that his  father  was  arrested  after
                 going to check on the Appellant's factory. This is found to
                 be inconsistent  with  the  Appellant's  evidence  that  he
                 trusted his employee to  look  after  the  company  in  his
                 absence;

            iii) The Appellant states that when he heard that his father and
                 others had been arrested he decided not to  return  to  the
                 factory but instead dispatched another employee to  go  and
                 see what was happening. The Respondent  does  not  consider
                 that behaviour to be  reasonable  or  consistent  with  the
                 Appellant's evidence that  he  regarded  himself  as  being
                 responsible for the running of the factory;

             iv) It is not considered reasonable that the Appellant's father
                 would tell the authorities that it was  the  Appellant  who
                 was responsible for recruiting staff;

              v) It is unclear  why  the  authorities  did  not  search  the
                 Appellant's uncle's house where he was hiding;

             vi) The Appellant was unable to give much detail about what had
                 happened to his father after his arrest;

            vii) The evidence was inconsistent and vague in respect  of  why
                 the Appellant was advised to leave Iran.


 5. At the hearing the Appellant gave oral evidence and both  parties  were
    represented.  The  Tribunal  considered  the  reasons  given   by   the
    Respondent for rejecting the claim, summarised above. It found no merit
    in points (i) or (ii). As to point (vi) it agreed with the  Respondent.
    The Tribunal made no findings either way about  the  remaining  points.
    The determination sets out three more reasons why the account is not to
    be believed:


              i) It is not credible that the Appellant would not know a  man
                 was living at his factory, given that there were only a few
                 employees;


             ii) The Appellant had not explained how he  came  to  know  the
                 reason that the authorities searched  his  factory,  namely
                 that when they arrived one of the  Jaish  Ul  Adl  men  ran
                 away;

            iii) The Appellant was unable to explain how it was  so  quickly
                 discovered that one of the men arrested was his  employee's
                 brother.

 6. In her written grounds Ms Patel submits that in taking these new points
    a fundamental unfairness arose. She points out that the  Appellant  was
    cross-examined by an experienced HOPO who did  not  put  any  of  these
    points to him. He was further asked 15 questions in 'clarification'  by
    the Tribunal. At no point was he asked about these three matters. As to
    the forensic challenges that were  made  in  the  refusal  letter,  the
    Appellant had given a detailed statement in  rebuttal,  none  of  which
    appears to have been considered by the Tribunal.


 7. Although neither party was able to provide  me  with  copies  of  their
    notes from the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal I have had regard
    to the judge's note and I can see no reference to the new matters being
    raised.  I bear in mind that there  was  a  general  challenge  to  the
    Appellant's credibility as a witness in this case and he can have  been
    under no illusion about whether any of his account was  accepted.    It
    remains the case, however, that perfectly reasonable explanations might
    have been available for the concerns held by the Tribunal and in  those
    circumstances it must have been unfair for the  points  to  be  weighed
    against him without hearing from him first. As  to  the  second  ground
    Harrison was unable to direct me to any part of the determination where
    the Tribunal had considered the matters  set  out  in  the  Appellant's
    statement. It follows that the appeal must succeed.

 8. The parties agreed that  in  the  circumstances  the  most  appropriate
    disposal would be to remit the matter for hearing afresh in the  First-
    tier Tribunal. I agree.



    Anonymity Order

 9. This appeal concerns a claim for protection. Having had regard to  Rule
    14 of the Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008  and  the
    Presidential Guidance Note No 1 of 2013: Anonymity Orders  I  therefore
    consider it appropriate to make an order in the following terms:


         "Unless and until a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
        Appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
        shall directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his
        family.  This  direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  both  the
        Appellant  and  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply  with   this
        direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings"




    Decisions

10. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.


11. The decision in the appeal is to be re-made in the First-tier Tribunal


12. There is an order for anonymity.

                                                   [pic]


                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                          21st December 2017


                           -----------------------
[1] Permission was granted by Designated Judge of the First-tier Tribunal
MacDonald on the 17th August 2017


