
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
PA/12637/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Newport                          | Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 8 November 2017                        | On 15 November 2017              |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

                                   Between

                                     K M
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr O'Dair, Counsel, instructed by OTS Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge A E Walker promulgated on 26 April 2017, dismissing
    his appeal against the decision of the respondent made  on  8  November
    2016  to  remove  him  from  the  United  Kingdom  having  refused  his
    protection claim.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Iraq and an ethnic Kurd from Mosul.   His
    claim was based on a feud with the Sorchi tribe and he asserted that he
    would not be safe anywhere in Iraq.  The respondent did not accept  his
    case and concluded that he could safely be returned to Iraq.

 3. The appellant stated during the hearing that he had problems  with  his
    memory, something which he said had also occurred during his  interview
    on 4 November 2016 (see decision at [15] and [32]).   The  judge  noted
    also that the quality of  the  evidence  was  poor  [43]  and  at  [50]
    attributed the failure to give detailed answers because he  simply  did
    not remember what he had written.  She noted that there was no  medical
    evidence to support the contention that the appellant was not  able  to
    work [53] though it was  noted  that  he  was  taking  a  low  dose  of
    antidepressants [53].

 4. The appellant sought permission to appeal on the grounds that:-

      i) the  judge  had  failed  to  take  into  account  the  unchallenged
         psychiatric report  by  Professor  Ikkos  that  the  appellant  was
         suffering from post-traumatic stress disorder which he described as
         impairing the appellant to narrate details of his ordeal; and, that
         the failure to address this undermined the credibility findings;

     ii) the judge had erred in taking over cross-examination on  behalf  of
         the Home Office;

    iii) the judge had failed to direct himself in accordance with Chiver.

 5. After some discussion between the representatives, it became clear that
    an additional bundle had been served on 9 December 2016  prior  to  the
    hearing.  The psychiatric report from Professor Ikkos contained in that
    bundle is referred to expressly  in  Mr  O'Dair's  written  submissions
    which were served after the close of the hearing in accordance with the
    directions given by the judge.

 6. Given the length of time that  elapsed  between  the  hearing  and  the
    signing of the judgment, it may well be the  case  that  parts  of  the
    material placed before the judge became detached from the file  as  the
    only document from  the  additional  bundle  on  file  is  the  witness
    statement of the appellant.   I have no reason  to  doubt  Mr  O'Dair's
    submissions which refer directly to the report or  to  doubt  that  the
    letter enclosing additional bundle was  received  by  the  court  on  9
    December.  It is not at all clear what happened but for  reasons  which
    may not have been the fault of the judge a relevant psychiatric  report
    which expressly addressed the appellant's difficulty to recall and that
    this was not taken into account in assessing credibility.

 7. I am satisfied an error occurred in this case whereby relevant evidence
    was not put before the judge and was not  taken  into  account.   I  am
    therefore satisfied that the decision reached was unsafe as regards the
    findings on credibility as relevant evidence could not have been  taken
    into account and that accordingly the decision involved the  making  of
    an error of law.

 8. In the circumstances, given that the appeal will need to be reheard,  I
    am satisfied that it would be appropriate to remit the decision to  the
    First-tier Tribunal for a full hearing on all the issues.   The  matter
    must not be listed before Judge A E Walker.

Summary of Conclusions

 1) The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law.

 2) I set aside the decision and I remit it to the First-tier Tribunal  for
    a full hearing on all issues.

 3) The appeal must not be listed before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  A  E
    Walker.

 4) I maintain the anonymity order made by the First-tier Tribunal.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date:  14 November 2017

[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul







