
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
PA/12017/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                           |Decision Promulgated       |
|On 5 October 2018                          |On 17 October 2018         |
|                                           |                           |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE


                                   Between

                                     N J
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr R Gibb of D Duheric & Co, solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr A Govan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. I make an anonymity order under Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008, precluding publication of  any  information  regarding
the proceedings which would be likely to  lead  members  of  the  public  to
identify the appellant  because  this  decision  discusses  the  appellant's
health concerns.

2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  the  decision  of  First-tier
Tribunal  Judge  Fox  promulgated  on  19/10/2017,   which   dismissed   the
Appellant's appeal on all grounds.

Background


3. The Appellant was born on 6 February 1980 and is a  national  of  Gambia.
The appellant arrived in the UK on 20 September 2012 and claimed asylum.  On
17 October  2012  that  application  was  refused  by  the  respondent.  The
appellant appealed unsuccessfully, and her appeal rights were  exhausted  by
March 2013. On 4 April 2016 the appellant submitted further  representations
claiming to  have  a  well-founded  fear  of  persecution  because  she  had
converted to Christianity. The respondent refused  the  appellant's  renewed
application on 19 October 2016.


The Judge's Decision

4. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge Fox ("the  Judge")  dismissed  the  appeal  against  the  Respondent's
decision. Grounds of appeal were lodged and on 09  March  2018  Judge  Scott
Baker gave permission to appeal stating inter alia

      3. The respondent had accepted that the  appellant  had  converted  to
      Christianity from Islam and that she evangelised outside her church in
      the refusal letter dated 19 October 2016 at  page  6.  The  FTT  judge
      noted this at [16] and [18] of the decision but at [20] found that she
      did not  evangelise  on  the  evidence  before  him.  Given  that  the
      evangelising by the appellant has been accepted by the respondent this
      finding amount to an arguable error of law; if the Judge had reason to
      reject the agreed facts the  appellant  should  have  been  placed  on
      notice which he failed to do.


      4. As a result of this error it is considered that the findings as  to
      risk  on  return  are  arguably  tainted  as  the  appellant  was  not
      considered credible by the Judge and the  risk  to  the  appellant  on
      return was arguably incorrectly assessed.

The Hearing

5. In a rule 24 note dated 23 March 2018, the respondent  accepts  that  the
Judge's decision contains a material error of law. Parties agents joined  in
inviting me to set the  decision  aside  because  the  reasons  for  refusal
letter accepts that the appellant is a Christian who evangelises in  public,
yet the Judge found that the appellant is not an evangelising Christian.

Error of Law

6. In SS v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2010]  CSIH  72  the
Secretary of State considered that it was credible  that  the  Claimant  had
been involved in film  production.   The  Judge  did  not  accept  that  the
Claimant was a filmmaker.  The Court of Session noted  that  the  Judge  had
before him, as a starting  point  as  to  the  veracity  of  the  Claimant's
version of events,  an  acceptance  by  the  Secretary  of  State  that  the
Claimant was a filmmaker. Although the Judge was not bound  to  accept  that
conclusion, any departure from  a  position  established  as  true  by  both
parties  would  require  explanation.   In  its  absence,   the   reasonable
inference was that the Judge had misunderstood or  left  the  evidence  out.
The error was therefore properly categorised as one of law.

7. In YHY (China) AP Petition for JR 2014 CSOH 11 it  was  held  that  there
was procedural unfairness amounting to an error of  law  where  points  were
taken against the appellant that were  not  in  the  original  decision  and
notice of the additional  points  had  not  been  given  to  the  appellant.
Specifically, it had never been suggested that the  appellant  was  not  the
father of a child but the Judge found that to be the position.

8. At [20], [26], [31] and [32] the Judge finds  that  the  appellant  is  a
Christian who does not evangelise. He assessed the risk on return simply  on
the basis that the appellant has converted from Islam  to  Christianity.  He
did not consider the risk on return to a Christian convert who is driven  to
publicly evangelise. The  Judge  departed  from  the  respondent's  position
(which accepts a significant part of the  appellant's  claim).  Because  the
Judge did not put the parties on  notice  that  he  was  departing  from  an
accepted part of  the  appellant's  account,  the  decision  is  tainted  by
material error of law. The error of law  is  material  because  the  Judge's
mistake infected the assessment of risk on return.

9. I set the decision promulgated on 19 October 2017 aside. I am invited  to
substitute my own decision by assessing the risk on return on  the  accepted
facts that

      (i) The appellant was born into a Muslim  family  and  converted  from
      Islam to Christianity.
      (ii) The appellant is an evangelical Christian who wants to evangelise
      publicly wherever she goes.
      (iii) The appellant's family of  origin  are  a  conservative  Islamic
      family
      (iv) The appellant's  mental  health  is  fragile.  She  suffers  from
      depression which is treated with oral medication.  She  has  expressed
      suicidal ideation. Since 2017 she has received treatment from  her  GP
      for low mood. She sleeps poorly and has a poor memory and struggles to
      concentrate. Although she was referred to the community mental  health
      team, she decided not to engage with them. The  appellant  has  a  one
      year  history  of  low  mood  and  fluctuating   thoughts   of   self-
      harm/suicide. Her doctor's initial diagnosis is of either a depressive
      episode or an adjustment reaction.

Submissions

10. I heard submissions from both Mr Gibb and Mr  Govan.  Mr  Gibb  took  me
through the background materials and relied heavily on the two reports  from
Dr P Kea. He told me that the Gambia is a predominantly Islamic country  and
the risks to the appellant are  enhanced  because  she  willingly  converted
from Islam to Christianity,  because  her  family  are  devout  Muslims  who
stridently disapprove of her conversion, and  because  the  appellant  is  a
vulnerable young woman. He took me through various strands of  evidence  and
told me that the appellant is driven to evangelise.  He  told  me  that  the
expert report and the background materials indicate that a woman  viewed  as
an  apostate  in  a  predominantly  Islamic  country  will   inevitably   be
persecuted for publicly evangelising. He told me that the  appellant's  acts
of voluntary conversion to Christianity  was  itself  enough  to  raise  the
spectre of persecution.

11. For the respondent Mr Govan told me that there is a dearth  of  reliable
evidence that there is any risk to either Christian converts or  evangelical
Christians in the Gambia. He took me through the same  background  materials
and told  me  that  there  is  no  reliable  evidence  of  a  real  risk  of
persecution. He was critical of the expert's opinions. He told me  that  the
appellant can safely return to the Gambia.

The background materials
12. (a) The Gambia is one of Africa's smallest countries  and,  unlike  many
of its west Africa neighbours, has enjoyed long spells  of  stability  since
independence. President Yahya Jammeh ruled the country  with  an  iron  fist
after seizing power in a bloodless coup in 1994. His 22-year  rule  came  to
an end in 2016, when he was defeated in a shock election result by the  main
opposition candidate,  Adama  Barrow.  Mr  Jammeh  only  left  office  after
mediation by neighbouring countries and the threat of armed intervention.
(b) Stability has not translated into prosperity. Despite  the  presence  of
the Gambia River, which runs through the middle of the  country,  only  one-
sixth of  the  land  is  arable  and  poor  soil  quality  has  led  to  the
predominance of one crop -  peanuts.  Tourism  is  an  important  source  of
foreign exchange, as is the money sent home by Gambians living abroad.  Most
visitors are drawn to the resorts that occupy  a  stretch  of  the  Atlantic
coast.
(c) Adama Barrow defeated long-serving President Yahya  Jammeh  in  a  shock
election victory in December 2016. Presidential  elections  on  December  1,
2016, resulted in a prolonged  political  transition  after  the  incumbent,
President Yahya Jammeh,  was  defeated  by  businessman  Adama  Barrow,  who
garnered 43.3% of the vote. Jammeh had led the country for 22  years  after
taking power in  a  military  coup  in  1994,  surviving  four  presidential
elections (in 1996, 2001, 2006, and 2011), but in 2016 he  lost  with  39.6%
of the vote. Parliamentary elections in April led to  an  absolute  majority
for Barrow's United Democratic Party with 31 seats (not including the 5  MPs
appointed directly by the President) in the 53-seat National  Assembly.  The
parliamentary  presence  of  the  former  ruling  Alliance   for   Patriotic
Reorientation and Construction Party was reduced to five seats.
(d) On 14 February 2017, The Gambia began the process of  returning  to  its
membership of the Commonwealth and formally presented its application to re-
join to Secretary-General  Patricia  Scotland  on  22  January  2018.  Boris
Johnson,  as the first British Foreign Secretary to visit The  Gambia  since
the  country  gained  independence  in  1965,  announced  that  the  British
government welcomed The Gambia's return to the Commonwealth.
(e) Christians in the Gambia  constitute  approximately  8  percent  of  the
country's population. There  is  no  state  religion,  but  the  predominant
religion  is  Islam,  practised  by  approximately  90%  of  the   country's
population. Article 25 of the Constitution protects the rights  of  citizens
to practise  any  religion  that  they  choose.   The  Christian  community,
situated mostly in the west and  south  of  the  country,  is  predominantly
Roman  Catholic;  there  are  also  several  Protestant   groups   including
Anglicans, Methodists, Baptists, Seventh-day Adventists, and  various  small
evangelical denominations. In 1963 the Gambia Christian Council  was  formed
as an ecumenical association of  Roman  Catholic,  Anglican,  and  Methodist
churches.
(f) Intermarriage between Muslims and Christians is common. In  some  areas,
Islam and Christianity are amalgamated with animism. Articles  17,  25,  32,
33, and 212 of the Constitution  guarantees  and  protects  the  freedom  of
religion.  Article  60  of  the  constitution  prohibits  forming  political
parties that are formed on a religious basis.
(g) The Supreme Islamic Council is an  independent  body  that  advises  the
government on religious issues. Although not  represented  on  the  council,
the government provides the council with substantial funding. The  country's
president serves as the  minister  of  religious  affairs  and  maintains  a
formal  relationship  with  the  council.  Government  meetings  and  events
typically commenced with two prayers, one Islamic  and  one  Christian.  The
government often invited senior officials of both religious groups  to  open
major government events with prayers. The president, a  Muslim,  delivers  a
Christmas message to the nation each year and  also  delivers  messages  for
major Muslim feasts.
(h) The constitution establishes Qadi courts, with Muslim judges trained  in
the Islamic legal tradition,  in  specific  areas  that  the  chief  justice
determines. The Qadi courts are located  in  each  of  the  country's  seven
regions and apply sharia law. Their jurisdiction applies only  to  marriage,
divorce, custody over  children,  and  inheritance  questions  for  Muslims.
Sharia also applies to interfaith couples where there is one Muslim  spouse.
Non-Qadi district tribunals, which deal with issues under the customary  and
traditional law,  apply  sharia,  if  relevant  when  presiding  over  cases
involving Muslims.  A  five-member  Qadi  panel  has  purview  over  appeals
regarding decisions of the  Qadi  courts  and  non-Qadi  district  tribunals
relating to sharia.
(i) Foreign missionary groups operate in the country.  The  government  does
not  require  religious  groups  to  register.  Faith-based  nongovernmental
organizations  (NGOs)  must  meet  the  same  registration   and   licensing
requirements as other NGOs. Apostasy is not a crime  in  Gambia.  Background
materials tell me that there is  a  functioning  and  effective  police  and
criminal justice system in Gambia.

Analysis

13. In the first inventory of productions for the appellant there  are  news
articles reporting  that  (in  Gambia)  Christians  have  been  attacked  by
Islamist inspired mobs. Those documents predate the significant change  when
Mr Barrow into  power.  His  predecessor,  President  Jammeh,  had  declared
Gambia an Islamic state. One of Mr Barrow's early acts of government was  to
declare the Gambia is not an Islamic state and to reinforce  that  country's
constitutional respect for freedom of religion.

14. The respondent relies on two reports from Dr Kea. Dr Kea's first  report
is dated 7 July 2017 and was before the First-tier tribunal. Dr Kea  records
that Gambia is recognised  as  a  religiously  tolerant  country,  but  that
Islamic extremism was present there. She speaks  of  attacks  on  Christians
and restrictions on the  practice  of  Christianity,  and  then  turned  her
attention to the viability of internal relocation. The author of the  report
does not specifically say that Christians in Gambia faces  a  real  risk  of
persecution, nor does the author of the report  says  that  an  evangelising
Christian would be at a risk.

15. Dr Kea's supplementary report is dated 24 May 2018. Dr Kea  acknowledges
the changes made by Adama Barrow. She still offers the  opinion  that  there
is a risk to the appellant as an evangelising Christian. It has always  been
the appellant's position that she is not at risk from the  state,  but  that
she is at risk from nonstate  agents.  Dr  Kea,  in  both  of  her  reports,
identifies a risk from nonstate agents.

16. The appellant specific claim is that the crucial part of profile is  the
desire to evangelise. In her supplementary report Dr Kea's says

      Although I cannot provide any examples of evangelical Christians being
      ill-treated in Gambia in recent times....

She then goes on to  quote  from  the  head  of  a  missionary  organisation
working in  Banjul  who  says  that,  in  some  communities  within  Gambia,
missionaries and evangelising Christians had to  operate  "underground".  Dr
Kea founds on that one statement defining it by saying

      No doubt because of the threats of conflict that  openly  evangelising
      behaviour would generate.

17. I place little weight on Dr  Kea's  conclusion  because  of  her  candid
statement that despite her knowledge and expertise she  cannot  provide  one
single example of an evangelical Christians being ill-treated in  Gambia  in
recent times, and because her conclusion, drawn from one solitary source  of
evidence, is unexplained.

18. The background materials do not support the appellant's claim to have  a
well-founded  fear  of  persecution  as  an   evangelical   Christian.   The
background  materials  indicate  that  the  Gambian  constitution   promotes
freedom of  religion.  The  background  materials  indicate  that  there  is
religious tolerance in Gambia. The background materials indicate that  there
number of Christian missionaries working openly in Gambia and that  part  of
their work is to convert Islamic Gambians to Christianity.

19. The appellant claims that she fears her family who have  threatened  her
life because she has converted to Christianity.  In  her  witness  statement
the appellant explains that she comes from a prominent  Muslim  family,  but
deals with threats from her family in only one paragraph (paragraph 28).  On
the appellant's own evidence  her  immediate  family  have  expressed  their
disapproval, but they have not threatened her life. The  appellant  produces
no reliable evidence of her  family's  intention  to  kill  her,  nor  of  a
realistic threat to her life, nor of an enduring  interest  in  harming  the
appellant.

20. The appellant at least  implies  that  she  is  at  risk  from  Islamist
extremists  and  Gambian  society  as  a  whole.  The  weight  of   reliable
background evidence indicates that the Gambia has an  effective  police  and
criminal justice system which can  protect  the  appellant.  The  weight  of
reliable evidence  indicates  that  evangelical  Christians  operate  within
Gambia and are not the specific target for Islamic  fundamentalists  or  the
general public. The appellant's own expert cannot find  recent  evidence  of
attacks on evangelical Christians in Gambia.

21. Given these conclusions, I find that the Appellant  has  not  discharged
the burden of proof to establish that she  is  a  refugee.  I  come  to  the
conclusion that the Appellant's removal would not cause the  United  Kingdom
to be in breach of its obligations under the 2006 Regulations.

22. Therefore, I find that the appellant is not a refugee.

Humanitarian protection

23. Although the appellant is not a refugee, I  must  consider  whether  she
qualifies for humanitarian protection.

24. The background country information indicates  that  someone  in  similar
circumstances to the appellant would not face a real risk  of  serious  harm
from the State, nor would he face  serious  harm  from  a  non-state  actor.
Having found that the appellant  is  not  a  refugee  because  she  has  not
established a well-founded fear of persecution, by analogy I find that   the
appellant cannot qualify for humanitarian protection.

25. Therefore, I  find  the  appellant  is  not  eligible  for  humanitarian
protection.

Human rights

26. As I have found that the appellant has not  established  a  well-founded
fear of persecution, by analogy I  find  that  her  claim  does  not  engage
articles 2 or 3 of the Human Rights Convention because she would not face  a
real risk of torture, inhuman or degrading treatment if returned to Gambia.

27.  It is not disputed that the appellant cannot meet the  requirements  of
appendix FM. Because of her age and the length of time she has been  in  the
UK the appellant cannot meet the requirements of paragraph  276ADE(1)(i)  to
(vi) of the rules. I find that the appellant's  asylum  claim  is  not  made
out. By analogy, there are no significant obstacles to reintegration in  the
Gambia, so that the appellant cannot  meet  the  requirements  of  paragraph
276ADE(1)(vi) of the rules.

28. In Hesham Ali (Iraq)  v SSHD   [2016] UKSC 60 it  was  made  clear  that
(even in a deport case) the Rules are not a  complete  code.  Lord  Reed  at
paragraphs 47 to 50 endorsed the structured approach to proportionality  (to
be found in Razgar) and said "what has now become the established method  of
analysis can therefore continue to be followed..."

29. I have to determine the following separate questions:

     (i) Does family life,  private  life,  home  or  correspondence  exist
    within the meaning of Article 8
    (ii) If so, has the right to respect for this been interfered with
    (iii) If so, was the interference in accordance with the law
    (iv) If so, was the interference in pursuit of one  of  the  legitimate
    aims set out in Article 8(2); and
    (v) If so, is the interference proportionate  to  the  pursuit  of  the
    legitimate aim?

30. Section 117B of the 2002 Act tells me that  immigration  control  is  in
the public interest. In AM  (S  117B)  Malawi  [2015]  UKUT  260  (IAC)  the
Tribunal held that an appellant can obtain no positive right to a  grant  of
leave to remain from either s117B (2) or (3), whatever  the  degree  of  his
fluency in English, or the strength of his financial  resources.  In  Forman
(ss 117A-C considerations) [2015] UKUT 00412 (IAC)  it  was  held  that  the
public  interest  in  firm  immigration  control  is  not  diluted  by   the
consideration that a person pursuing a claim under Article 8 ECHR has at  no
time been a financial burden on  the  state  or  is  self-sufficient  or  is
likely to remain so indefinitely.  The  significance  of  these  factors  is
that where they are not present the public interest is fortified.

31. The appellant has no family in the UK so that article 8 family  life  is
not established.

32. After considering all of the evidence I still do not know  enough  about
the appellant's home,  her  habits  and  activities  of  daily  living,  her
significant  friendships,  any  integration  into   UK   society,   or   any
contribution to her local community. There is no reliable  evidence  of  the
component parts of private life within the meaning of article 8 of the  1950
convention before me. The appellant fails to establish that she has  created
article 8 private life within the UK.

33    I find that the Decision appealed against would not cause  the  United
Kingdom to be in breach of  the  law  or  its  obligations  under  the  1950
Convention.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on 19  October  2017  is
tainted by material errors of law. I set it aside.

I substitute my own decision.

The appeal is dismissed on asylum grounds.

The appeal is dismissed on Humanitarian Protection grounds


The appeal is dismissed on article 2, 3 & 8 ECHR grounds.






Signed
               Date  10 October 2018
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle



