
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12058/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Centre                               |                                     |
|On 12 February 2019                  |On 26 February 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                     AH
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Not present or represented
For the Respondent:    Mr Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, AH, was born in 1986 and  claims  to  be  a  citizen  of
    Bangladesh.  By a decision dated 5 October 2018, the Secretary of State
    refused the appellant's international protection claim.  The  appellant
    appealed to the First-tier Tribunal (Judge  Ian  Howard)  which,  in  a
    decision promulgated on 14 November 2018  dismissed  the  appeal.   The
    appellant now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The appellant did not attend the initial hearing  at  Manchester  Civil
    Justice Centre on 12 February 2019.  I am  satisfied,  having  examined
    the file, that he was served by post  at  his  last  known  address  in
    Gatley, Cheshire on 17 January 2019.  He has provided no explanation or
    excuse for his failure to attend.  In the  circumstances,  I  proceeded
    with the hearing in the absence of the appellant.

 3. The appellant claimed to fear  return  to  Bangladesh  because  he  has
    converted to Christianity and is  homosexual.   Both  claims  were  not
    believed by Judge Howard.

 4. I shall deal with the grounds of appeal in the order in which they  are
    pleaded.  First, the appellant asserts that the judge  did  not  direct
    himself to the proper burden and standard of proof.  The ground has  no
    merit.  The judge correctly identified that the burden of proof fell on
    the appellant [9].  The judge makes reference to the "criterion"  being
    that of "reasonable likelihood" [9].   At  [23],  at  the  end  of  his
    findings of fact in respect of the appellant's claim to be  homosexual,
    the judge found that "even to the lower standard ... he is [not]  gay".
    The grounds of appeal complain that it is not  clear  in  this  context
    where the "lower standard"  is  lower  than  that  of  the  balance  of
    probabilities.  The ground has no merit.  Had  the  judge  adopted  the
    standard of proof of the balance of probabilities, then I have no doubt
    that he would have said so.  Given that the judge is referring here  to
    the "lower standard" it is axiomatic that that standard is  below  that
    of the civil standard, namely the balance of probabilities.  I have  no
    doubt that the judge has applied the appropriate standard of proof.

 5. Secondly, the appellant complains that the judge had  not  referred  to
    any country guidance.  The judge found that the  appellant  was  not  a
    homosexual or a Christian.  There was no  need  for  the  judge  to  go
    further in examining risk on return given that  an  individual  who  is
    nothing more or less than a failed  returned  asylum  seeker  from  the
    United Kingdom would not be at real risk on return to Bangladesh.

 6. The grounds complain that the judge took no  account  of  vulnerability
    guidance in the light of the appellant's age and the  possibility  that
    he is  suffering  from  post-traumatic  stress  disorder  (PTSD).   The
    appellant was born in 1986 and was therefore nearly 32 years old at the
    date of the First-tier Tribunal hearing.  As such, he was not  a  young
    man.  There is no medical evidence to indicate that  the  appellant  is
    suffering from PTSD.

 7. Fourthly, the decision is  challenged  on  the  grounds  that  he  gave
    inadequate  reasons  for  rejecting  the  appellant's  credibility.   I
    acknowledge that the decision of the  judge  is  brief.   However,  the
    evidence adduced by the appellant was  equally  brief.   There  was  no
    documentary evidence or witness evidence in support of the  appellant's
    claim.   At  [21]  the  judge  identified  an  inconsistency   in   the
    appellant's evidence regarding his claim to be homosexual.   The  judge
    was also entitled to conclude that "given the religious conservatism of
    the Bangladeshi diaspora" the appellant's claimed partner and co-worker
    Rashid would not "be open about his sexuality and his gay  relationship
    with the appellant".  A judge's decision and reasons is  likely  to  be
    proportionate to the quantity of evidence provided in  an  appeal.   In
    other words, in this appeal the judge did not have much to go  on.   He
    has, however, identified a discrepancy in the appellant's evidence  and
    that evidence is, as Mr Bates submitted, nothing more or less than self-
    reporting.  Given  that  the  appellant's  own  account  was  the  only
    evidence upon which he relied the fact that it contained a  discrepancy
    entitled the judge to conclude that the appellant was  not  a  reliable
    witness.

 8. The judge also identified inconsistencies in  the  appellant's  claimed
    interest in Christianity.  Those inconsistencies are described at  [25-
    26].  It was open to the judge to find that the discrepancy was further
    damaging to the appellant's credibility.

 9. For the reasons given above, the appeal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

10. This appeal is dismissed.

11. An anonymity direction is made.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 23 February 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date 23 February 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane


