
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12513/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided without a hearing        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|                                 |On 24 September 2020             |
|                                 |                                 |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BLUNDELL


                                   Between

                                   R g t e
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                          DECISION AND REASONS (P)

 1. The appellant is a national of St Kitts and Nevis who  was  born  on  8
    November 1996.  He  appeals,  with  permission  granted  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Boyes, against a decision which was issued by First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Buckley on 9 March 2020, dismissing his  appeal  against
    the respondent's refusal of his claim for international protection.

Background

 2. The appellant arrived in the UK on 22 May 2016 but  he  did  not  claim
    asylum until 26 April 2019.   He  stated  that  he  was  at  risk  from
    dangerous gangs and that he could not turn to the police or  internally
    relocate.  The respondent refused the application on 2  December  2019,
    concluding that the appellant's claim was a fabrication but  also  that
    he had failed to exhaust avenues of  domestic  redress  before  seeking
    asylum.

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal


 3. The appellant appealed and his appeal was heard by Judge Buckley  ("the
    judge") on 4 March 2020. The appellant was represented by a  solicitor,
    the respondent was represented by a presenting officer. The judge heard
    oral  evidence  from  the   appellant   and   submissions   from   both
    representatives. After the submissions he reserved his decision.

 4. In his reserved decision,  the  judge  accepted  that  the  appellant's
    account was externally consistent  with  the  background  evidence.  He
    considered, however, that the appellant's  account  was  of  a  one-off
    incident, involving an incident at a party, and that the appellant  had
    taken no steps to report the incident to  the  authorities.  The  judge
    considered that the appellant's credibility had been undermined by  his
    failure to relocate internally immediately after the incident. He  also
    considered the appellant's credibility to be undermined by his  failure
    to claim asylum for just under three years after arriving in the United
    Kingdom.  The  judge  proceeded  to  make  detailed  findings  in   the
    alternative at paragraphs 32 - 42 and he concluded, having reviewed the
    background material in some detail, that the appellant would be able to
    avail himself of a sufficiency of protection 'to the Horvath standard'.
    At paragraphs 43 to 48 he concluded that the appellant  could  relocate
    internally, notwithstanding the size of his country of nationality,  so
    as to obviate the risk to him in his home area.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 5. Permission to appeal was sought on two grounds. The first is  that  the
    judge failed to undertake any assessment of the appellant's claim under
    Article 8 ECHR. The grounds note that the judge stated at paragraph  14
    see that the appellant is in a relationship with  Georgia  Hewitson,  a
    British national, and that  they  were  expecting  their  first  child.
    Notwithstanding that observation, the judge had failed to turn his mind
    to the appellant's private and family life under Article 8.


 6.  The  second  ground  of  appeal  is  that  the  judge  erred  in   his
    consideration  of  the  appellants  credibility  Because  he   attached
    significance to the appellants failure to claim asylum  at  an  earlier
    stage in the United Kingdom. In doing so  it  was  submitted  that  the
    judge  had  adopted  an  approach  which  contravened  the  authorities
    including SM (Iran) [2005] UKAIT 116.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted on both grounds by  Judge  Boyes.  His
    decision was sent to the parties on 8 June 2020. On 6 July  2020  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Kopieczek issued directions to the parties with  a  view
    to progressing the  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal.  Judge  Kopieczek
    directed the parties to file and serve written submissions dealing with
    the merits  of  the  appeal  and  whether,  in  accordance  with  Judge
    Kopieczek's provisional view, the appeal was suitable for resolution on
    the papers. To date there has been no compliance with those  directions
    by either party.

Discussion

 8. I consider first whether it is appropriate  to  determine  this  appeal
    without a hearing, under rule 34(1) of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008.  In considering that question  I  have  borne  in
    mind the overriding objective in the 2008 Rules, of dealing with  cases
    fairly and justly.  I have also considered what was said by the Supreme
    Court in Osborne v Parole Board [2004] 1 AC  1115.  The  scope  of  the
    issues before me is narrow. My resolution of this  case  does  not  the
    credibility of a party or a witness. Both parties  were  given  a  full
    opportunity to lodge further submissions in writing. Judge  Kopieczek's
    directions  were   sent   by   email   to   the   appellant's   current
    representatives and to the Secretary of State on 9  July  2020.  Nearly
    six weeks have passed. In all the circumstances, and in the exercise of
    my  discretion  under  rule  34  of  the  2008  rules,  I  consider  it
    appropriate and in accordance with the overriding objective to consider
    the appeal to the Upper Tribunal without a hearing.

 9. I consider the grounds of appeal in reverse order.

10. As I have noted, the second ground of appeal is that the judge erred in
    his  consideration  of  the  appellant's  credibility.  I  reject  that
    submission. The judge was fully entitled to attach significance to  the
    appellant's inaction in the face of what  was  said  to  be  a  serious
    threat  whilst  he  remained  in  his  country  of   nationality.   The
    observations he made at paragraph 30 in that  connexion  were  properly
    open to him, and he was entitled to find that the  appellants  inaction
    in 2015 to 2016 undermined his claim of an ongoing  risk.  Equally,  it
    was plainly  open  to  the  judge  to  conclude  that  the  appellant's
    significant delay in claiming asylum between his arrival  in  May  2016
    and his international protection claim in April 2019 was a matter which
    undermined his credibility still further.

11. Be that as it may, the reality of this case is that the judge's primary
    conclusions hinged not  on  the  appellant's  credibility  but  on  his
    consideration of the background evidence insofar  as  it  bore  on  the
    questions of sufficiency of protection and internal  relocation.  As  I
    have mentioned above, the judge reached cogent findings,  supported  by
    detailed  reasons,  that  the  appellant  could  avail  himself  of   a
    sufficiency of protection in Saint Kitts and Nevis and that he could in
    any event relocate internally so as to avoid any threat from  the  gang
    which was supposedly targeting him. The appellant's grounds  of  appeal
    make no challenge to these findings which are  in  any  event  cogently
    reasoned and insofar as the appellant seeks to  challenge  the  judge's
    assessment of his international protection  claim,  that  challenge  is
    wholly without merit in the absence of a challenge to these  particular
    findings.

12. That leaves the challenge based on Article 8 ECHR.  In  resolving  that
    complaint, it is necessary to examine the evidence which was before the
    respondent and the FtT. The appellant made no reference  in  his  claim
    for asylum to any relationship with an individual in the UK.  At 3.4 of
    his screening interview, the appellant listed family members in the  UK
    and any other European country. He made no reference at that stage to a
    partner in the United Kingdom. The appellant had a  substantive  asylum
    interview in Liverpool on the 6th of November 2019.  He was  asked,  at
    question 12 of that interview, what family he had in the United Kingdom
    . He responded that he had  his  'great  nan,  uncle  and  auntie,  and
    cousins'. Again, he made no reference at that point or at any stage  in
    the rest of the interview to having a partner in the United Kingdom.

13. When the respondent came  to  consider  his  protection  claim  in  the
    refusal letter, she noted at paragraphs 102 to 104, that the  appellant
    had made no reference to a partner in the United Kingdom. I can find no
    reference in the grounds of appeal which were sent  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal to the appellant having any family life in the United Kingdom.
    He was sent a pre-hearing  review  questionnaire  in  advance  of  that
    hearing.  He was asked at question 4.1 of  that  questionnaire  whether
    there were any new matters which he sought to raise at the  substantive
    hearing. He was asked specifically whether there was  anything  in  his
    personal or family circumstances in the UK or abroad that  he  had  not
    told the respondent which he wished to raise at the full  hearing.  The
    response to that question was in the negative. That was the basis  upon
    which the appeal proceeded to a full hearing, therefore.

14. At the hearing before judge Buckley the  appellant's  solicitor  relied
    upon a bundle of 14  pages.  That  bundle  contained  a  chronology,  a
    witness statement, a skeleton argument, and three items  of  background
    material. It was in the appellant's witness statement, at paragraph  6,
    that he stated that he was in a relationship with  a  British  national
    and that they were expecting their first child.  There  is  no  further
    reference to the appellant's relationship in his witness statement. Nor
    is there any reference to any Article 8 claim in the skeleton  argument
    which appears at pages 5 to 8 of the same bundle.

15. The judges Record of Proceedings is typed. It is detailed, and  clearly
    contains a full record of the submissions which were made to him. It is
    clear from those submissions that the appellant's  representative  said
    nothing at all about Article 8. In fact, it is  clear  that  the  judge
    initiated a discussion between the representatives concerning the scope
    of the issues. The appellant's then solicitor, Mr Oborn,  informed  the
    judge that the issues before him were  sufficiency  of  protection  and
    internal  relocation.  The  Presenting  Officer  who  represented   the
    Secretary of State agreed with that analysis. The judge is  then  noted
    to have asked Mr Oborn whether he was relying on Article 8 or  not.  Mr
    Oborn's response was that he was not.

16.  The  appellant's  first  ground  appeal  cannot   succeed   in   these
    circumstances.  There are three difficulties with the  submission.  The
    first is that the judge was specifically told that  the  appellant  was
    not relying on Article 8 at the hearing. There is  no  obligation  upon
    him to consider any such claim in those circumstances.

17. The second difficulty is that there was simply no adequate  foundation,
    whether in the evidence before the judge or in the submissions made  by
    the representatives, for a reasoned Article 8 ECHR assessment  to  have
    taken place. The judge had been  told  that  the  appellant  was  in  a
    relationship with a British citizen and that they were expecting  their
    first child but there was no evidence at all from the  British  citizen
    in question. There was no way in  which  the  judge  could  assess  the
    strength of that relationship, or whether it could continue in Jamaica,
    or whether the appellant's removal would be  in  breach  of  Article  8
    ECHR. In the event that the judge had embarked on any such analysis  it
    is clear that his resolution of it  would  have  been  adverse  to  the
    appellant on the evidence presented.

18. The third difficulty, which might have been apparent to the appellant's
    then solicitor, is that even if  the  appellant  had  wished  to  raise
    Article 8 ECHR in front of the judge, he would have been prevented from
    doing so without the respondent's consent, given that this  was  a  new
    matter as defined in part 5A of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum
    Act 2002.

19. In the circumstances, there can be no doubt whatsoever that  the  judge
    was lawfully entitled to find against the appellant on  his  protection
    claim. Equally, there can be no doubt whatsoever that the judge was not
    at fault in not dealing with Article 8 ECHR. Should the appellant  wish
    to rely upon an Article 8 ECHR claim, the proper route is  for  him  to
    make further submissions to the respondent.  He would be well  advised,
    given  the  events  at  the  hearing  before  Judge  Buckley,  to  make
    submissions explaining why any such claim should not be certified under
    section 96 of the 2002 Act.


Notice of Decision

There was no error of law in the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and
that decision shall stand.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


                                M.J.Blundell

                         Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                       Immigration and Asylum Chamber

                              21 September 2020
