
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
PA/12429/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                         | Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 24 April 2018                          | On 01 May 2018                   |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE

                                   Between

                           Shaida Saleem Hama Agha
                          (no ANONYMITY DIRECTION)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Gayle
For the Respondent:    Mr Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, Shaida Saleem Hama Agha, was born on 1 January 1989  and
    is a female citizen of Iraq.  She entered  the  United  Kingdom  on  30
    March 2016 and was served with a form IS97ENT as an illegal entrant  on
    the same day.  She claimed asylum on 27  April  2016.   By  a  decision
    dated 25 October 2016, the Secretary of State refused her  application.
    She appealed to the First-tier Tribunal (Judge  Monaghan)  which  in  a
    decision promulgated on  13  April  2017  dismissed  the  appeal.   The
    appellant now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. At the outset of the hearing, Mr Mills, who appeared for the  Secretary
    of State, told me that the Secretary of State now agreed that the judge
    had erred in law as regards her treatment of her Article 8  ECHR.   The
    appellant has a young child who was born on 28 January  2017  (she  has
    had a further child since the First-tier Tribunal hearing).  The  child
    and the appellant's husband were, at the date of the hearing before the
    First-tier Tribunal, British citizens.  Mr  Mills  submitted  that  the
    judge should  have  found  that  there  were  insurmountable  obstacles
    preventing the appellant and the child travelling to Iraq to live.  Her
    husband, as a refugee, would be unable  to  live  in  Iraq.   Mr  Mills
    submitted that the appeal should be allowed on Article 8 ECHR  grounds.
    Having considered the facts, I agree.

 3. Mr Gayle pursued the remaining grounds  of  appeal  which  concern  the
    dismissal by the judge of the international protection claim.  Mr Gayle
    submitted that inadequate reasons had  been  given  by  the  judge  for
    dismissing that claim.  The judge had found it  implausible  [71]  that
    the appellant would admit to the family home her cousin who then abused
    her taking a video of the abuse.  The cousin was a close family  member
    and visited the family home often; there was no reason  why  he  should
    not have entered the home on the  occasion  on  which  the  abuse  took
    place.  The judge also found [72] that  it  was  implausible  that  the
    cousin would have taken steps to set up his mobile phone  in  order  to
    video the incident.  The appellant asserts that it would not have  been
    implausible.  Finally, the judge found the most  "damaging  aspect"  of
    the appellant's account as regards her credibility had been  her  claim
    that her cousin had not taken any steps to  reveal  the  video  to  her
    family before she left Iraq, a period of 8-9 months, despite his having
    threatened to do so on many occasions.  The appellant asserts that  the
    conduct of the cousin was not incredible given that he  was  away  from
    home fighting in the civil war.

 4. I find that the challenge to the judge's dismissal of the international
    protection claim is entirely lacking in merit.  I  find  that  all  the
    findings which I have described above were properly open to  the  judge
    on  the  basis  of  the  evidence  before  her.   What  the   appellant
    characterises as faulty or inadequate reasoning is, in reality, nothing
    more than a series disagreement with findings available to the judge.

Notice of Decision

 5. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on 13 April 2017 is
    set aside.  I have remade the  decision.   The  appeal  on  asylum  and
    Article 3 ECHR grounds is dismissed.  The appeal is  allowed  on  human
    rights grounds (Article 8 ECHR).

 6. No anonymity direction is made.

Signed                                               Date 24 April 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.

Signed                                                Date 24 April 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane
