
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12219/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4th October 2018                          |On 19th October 2018          |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN


                                   Between

                                     JH
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. M. K. Islam, Taj Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms. A. Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  a  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Henderson, promulgated on  2  July  2018,  in  which  he
    dismissed the Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's  decision  to
    refuse to grant asylum.


 2. As this is an asylum appeal I make an anonymity direction.


 3. Permission to appeal was granted as follows:

         "It is arguable that the Judge has attached insufficient weight  to
         the available evidence in relation  to  the  chronology  of  events
         affecting the Appellant giving rise to the claimed  fears  and  the
         chronology in relation to reference to such fear on the part of the
         Appellant.  At paragraph 38 of the decision the Judge refers  to  a
         verification report.  It is unclear what  burden  and  standard  of
         proof has been applied in the context of paragraphs 38  and  39  of
         the decision.  At paragraph  35  of  the  decision  the  Judge  has
         referred to the waiver  by  the  Appellant  of  legal  professional
         privilege.  It is unclear whether this was a  complete  or  partial
         waiver.  At the conclusion of paragraph  35  of  the  decision  the
         Judge states that the Appellant did not explain why his  solicitors
         had advised him not to claim asylum at that stage.  In the light of
         the significance of that it is unclear whether  the  Judge,  having
         explained legal professional privilege, sought clarification as  to
         the extent of disclosures by  the  Appellant  in  relation  to  the
         extent of the  waiver  of  legal  professional  privilege.   It  is
         arguable that an analysis in relation to the existence or otherwise
         of very significant obstacles has been affected."

 4. At the hearing, following  submissions  from  both  representatives,  I
    stated that I found that the decision involved the making of a material
    error of law.  I gave brief reasons for my decision which I set out  in
    full here.  I set the decision aside and remitted  the  appeal  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal to be reheard.


Error of Law

 5. As I stated at the hearing, I will focus in my decision on  the  issues
    raised by the consideration of the documents at paragraphs [37] to [39]
    and, in association with that, on the findings at [49].


 6. At [37] the Judge considers the charge sheet and court  documents.   He
    states:

         "37. The charge sheet and court documents naming the  appellant  as
         the fourth defendant were in RB at sections E and F.  These show  a
         charge sheet dated 20 July 2016 which relates to the incident on 30
         March 2016 relating to the discovery of weapons and  ammunition  at
         the appellant's father's premises.  The appellant said that he  had
         obtained these documents from a friend.


         38.  The respondent  produced  a  Verification  Document  (RB-K1-2)
         dated 30 October 2017 from the British High  Commission  in  Dhaka.
         This reported  a  site  visit  to  the  Sreemangal  Police  Station
         Moulvibazar.  This noted that an  officer  at  the  Police  Station
         located  the  register  and  manually  searched  the  records   and
         confirmed that the Charge Sheets and the dates in the register  did
         not match the documents  submitted  by  the  appellant.   The  High
         Commission representative was also allowed to  check  the  register
         himself.


         39.  In the light of the evidence submitted by the respondent I can
         place  no  reliance  on  the  Charge   Sheets   and   other   court
         documentation presented by the appellant.  There is no evidence  to
         support the appellant's statement that he is wanted by  the  Police
         in Bangladesh."

 7. In her submissions Ms. Everett accepted  that  this  challenge  to  the
    decision had greater merit, first because there was no formal direction
    regarding the burden and standard of proof, and secondly there  was  no
    assessment of the Appellant's rebuttal.

 8. The Judge states at [37] that the Appellant said that he obtained these
    documents from a friend.  However, the Judge has given no consideration
    to the Appellant's evidence as set out in his witness statement  as  to
    what he did after receiving the reasons for refusal letter.  At [20] of
    his statement it states:

         "In relation to the documents that I provided  in  relation  to  my
         claim, the Respondent raised an issue that the  documents  are  not
         genuine.  The Respondent claimed that an officer from British  High
         Commission,  Dhaka  had  visited  Shreemongal  Police  Station   on
         10/10/2017 and verified the documents; and produced [a] report that
         the documents are false.  I would like to inform the learned  judge
         that firstly I had no control over documents.  After  my  screening
         interview, I contacted the solicitor in  Bangladesh  and  requested
         him for copies of the cases filed against me  and  my  family.   He
         said he will get it for  me.   After  some  time  he  sent  me  the
         documents by post which I gave to the Respondent.  I did not verify
         the documents with any other  officials  in  Bangladesh  until  the
         Respondent raised issues.  Further to the Respondent's decision,  I
         requested one of my friends  to  query  about  the  cases  and  the
         documents.  He went to the Shreemongal Police Station and spoke  to
         the officer in charge, Mr  KI,  who  confirmed  that  no  one  from
         British High Commission has visited or enquired  about  me  or  the
         cases on that day or any later dates.  Mr I has provided  a  letter
         confirming that they do have record of the cases  in  their  police
         station.  He could not provide an official letter  as  the  request
         was made unofficially; however, he confirmed that if  any  official
         organisation (like the Respondent) make a formal request, they  can
         provide  the  same  on  their  letter  head  page.   I  invite  the
         Respondent to commence  further  verification  or  demand  for  the
         letter/evidence if they still have doubts regarding the genuineness
         of the cases and documents.  I confirm the  learned  Judge  that  I
         have done my best to defend  the  Respondent's  allegation  and  to
         establish my situation."

 9. The Appellant provided the letter from KI (page 27 of  the  Appellant's
    bundle).  This is addressed To  Whom  It  May  Concern  and  states  as
    follows:

         "This is to certify that Mr. JH, Date of Birth 04/12/1991, S/O: SH,
         Vill:  Birahimpur,   under   Sreemangal   police   station,   Dist:
         Moulvibazar, One G.R case (police case)  no  15/16  is  pending  to
         honorable chief judicial Magistrate court of Moulvibazar.   Accused
         JH is an absconder.  Therefore, honorable chief judicial Magistrate
         court of Moulvibazar issued a  warrant  which  is  pending  in  our
         Sreemangal police station."

10. The letter is signed  and  the  stamp  underneath  states  KI,  BP  No-
    8102024648,   Officer   in   Charge,   Shreemongol   Police    Station,
    Moulvibazar."

11. There is no reference in the decision to the  Appellant's  evidence  as
    set out in his witness statement, or to the letter  from  KI.   I  find
    that the Judge has considered the Respondent's evidence at [38] but has
    not considered the evidence provided by the Appellant in rebuttal.

12. Further, when considering the Respondent's evidence, I  find  that  the
    Judge has made  no  reference  to  the  burden  or  standard  of  proof
    applicable when the Respondent alleges that a document is false.  There
    is no detailed examination of the DVR, and no assessment of whether, by
    its production, the Respondent has met the required burden of proof  on
    him to show that the document is false.   This  failure  is  especially
    significant given that the Appellant attempted to rebut the  allegation
    and produced evidence in support which the Judge did not consider.

13. It was submitted by Ms Everett that, although this error  went  to  the
    credibility assessment, this particular issue had been addressed by the
    Judge "in the alternative" at [49], and  therefore  was  not  material.
    This states:

         "The newspaper reports referred to people named  SH  and  JH  being
         cited as defendants  -  but  the  charge  sheets  produced  by  the
         appellant were not verified by the British High  Commission  Report
         and I place no reliance on those  Court  documents.   Even  if  the
         appellant were listed as a defendant, he could  establish  that  he
         was in the UK at the time of both the alleged offences,  and  would
         be able to defend himself against  those  charges.   The  appellant
         said that this was not possible as there was no law  and  order  in
         Bangladesh.  The Home Office Fact-Finding Report of September  2017
         noted that there was some corruption in the judiciary but  that  it
         was at the higher end and  that  anti-corruption  initiatives  were
         improving.  The appellant has not shown (on the lower  standard  of
         proof) that he would be unable to defend the claims against him."

14. Ms  Everett  submitted  that,  even  if  the  Judge  had  not  properly
    considered the documents at  [37]  to  [39],  he  had  found  that  the
    Appellant would be able to defend himself with reference to  the  fact-
    finding report.  She accepted that it may  be  difficult  to  ringfence
    credibility findings, but submitted that there were  no  flaws  in  the
    consideration at [49] where the Judge had dealt  with  this  particular
    issue of credibility in the alternative.

15. However, I find that at [49] the Judge has again failed to consider the
    evidence which was before him.  While I accept that he found  that  the
    Appellant would be able to defend himself against the charges as he was
    in the United Kingdom at the time,  the  Appellant  countered  this  by
    saying there was no law and order in Bangladesh.  The  Judge's  finding
    that he would be able to defend himself in the courts is based only  on
    the Home Office fact-finding report of September 2017.  While  this  is
    relevant evidence, as was pointed out by Mr. Islam, the  Appellant  had
    provided much more evidence regarding the situation in Bangladesh,  the
    problems with law enforcement and the problems with corruption and  the
    judiciary.

16. I was referred to the  written  submissions  (pages  3  to  12  of  the
    Appellant's bundle).  I  find  that  these  show  that  the  Judge  was
    referred to the background evidence found  in  the  Appellant's  bundle
    from page 64 onwards.  At pages 4 to 8 of the written  submissions  are
    references to  the  background  evidence,  with  particular  paragraphs
    quoted.  This includes, inter alia, the Home Office Country Policy  and
    Information  Note  of  January  2018  and  the  Odhikar  Human   Rights
    Monitoring Report.

17. I find that the Judge has not carried out a proper  assessment  of  the
    evidence when he finds that the Appellant would be able to  defend  the
    claims made against him in Bangladesh.  There is reference only to  one
    part of the background evidence.  I therefore find that [49] is not  an
    adequate answer to the Judge's failure to properly deal with the  court
    documents and court proceedings.

18. I find that the credibility findings cannot stand, as there is an error
    of law in the consideration of the charge sheet  and  court  documents,
    with reference to the evidence provided by the Appellant.

19. Given that I have found that the decision  involves  the  making  of  a
    material error of law, I do not need  to  consider  further  the  other
    grounds of appeal.

20. I have taken account of the Practice Statement dated 10 February  2010,
    paragraph 7.2.  This contemplates that an appeal may be remitted to the
    First-tier Tribunal where the effect of the error has been to deprive a
    party before the  First-tier  Tribunal  of  a  fair  hearing  or  other
    opportunity for the party's case to be put to  and  considered  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  I have found that the crediblity findings  cannot
    stand, and therefore given the nature and extent  of  the  fact-finding
    necessary to enable this appeal to be  remade,  having  regard  to  the
    overriding objective, I find that it is appropriate to remit this  case
    to the First-tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

21. The decision involves the making of a material error of law.  I set the
    decision aside.

22. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.

23. The appeal is not to be listed before Judge Henderson.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date 15 October 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain


