
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12474/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Cardiff Civil Justice Centre|Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|                                     |On 28 May 2021                       |
|Working Remotely by Skype            |                                     |
|On 6 May 2021                        |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    MRCS
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms R Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M Karnik instructed by Orchid Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/2698) I  make  an  anonymity  order.   Unless  the  Upper
    Tribunal or court directs otherwise, no  report  of  these  proceedings
    shall directly or indirectly  identify  the  respondent  (MRCS).   This
    direction applies to both the appellant and to  the  respondent  and  a
    failure to comply with this direction could lead to Contempt  of  Court
    proceedings.

 2. Although this is an appeal by the Secretary of State, for convenience I
    will refer to the  parties  as  they  appeared  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

Background

 3. The appellant is a citizen of Iran who was born on  10  May  1973.   He
    arrived in the United Kingdom on 12 October  2000.   He  was  initially
    refused leave to enter and claimed asylum.  That  claim  was  initially
    refused on 4 December 2000 but, following  the  lodging  of  an  appeal
    against that decision, on 8 June 2001 the decision was withdrawn.   His
    asylum claim was again considered and refused on 29 January  2002.   He
    unsuccessfully appealed against that  decision  and  he  became  appeal
    rights exhausted on 26 September 2002.

 4. On 3 March 2005, the appellant married  a  British  Citizen  ("F")  and
    their daughter ("M") was born on 17 August 2007.

 5. On 17 September 2007,  the  appellant  returned  to  Iran  and,  on  20
    September 2007,  he made an application to enter the UK  as  a  spouse.
    On 11 October 2007, the appellant was granted a spouse visa valid until
    11 October 2009.  On 25 October 2007, the appellant re-entered  the  UK
    and, on 19 April 2010, the appellant was granted  Indefinite  Leave  to
    Remain.

 6. The appellant was convicted of a number of offences between 9 June 2008
    and 5 November 2013.

 7. On 9 June 2018, he was convicted at the Blackburn,  Darwen  and  Ribble
    Valley  Magistrates'  Court  of  harassment  and  breach  of  a   civil
    injunction for which he was sentenced to  a  conditional  discharge  of
    twelve months.

 8. On 6 October 2011, he was convicted at the Preston Crown Court  of  the
    offence of affray and  was  sentenced  to  eight  months'  imprisonment
    suspended for 24 months.  That sentence was subsequently varied  on  18
    February 2018 and activated to a period of imprisonment  of  one  month
    following his conviction on 18 February 2013 at the Preston Crown Court
    on five counts relating to  the  possession  and  control  of  identity
    documents and making a false statement to obtain a driving licence.  He
    was sentenced to twelve months' imprisonment together with his  earlier
    suspended  sentence  being  activated  to  a  period  of  one   month's
    imprisonment.

 9. Following those convictions, on 4 March 2013, a notice of liability  to
    deportation was issued.  The appellant made representations on 15 March
    2013 and 8 April 2013.  A deportation order was  signed  on  19  August
    2013 along with a decision to  refuse  his  human  rights  claim.   The
    appellant appealed against that decision and his appeal  was  dismissed
    on 23 May 2014 and, subsequently, permission to appeal was  refused  by
    both the First-tier Tribunal on 17 June 2014 and the Upper Tribunal  on
    4 August 2014 after which the appellant became appeal rights exhausted.

10. On 5 November 2013, again at the Preston Crown Court the appellant  was
    convicted of five counts relating to perverting the course  of  justice
    for which he was sentenced to two years' imprisonment on each count  to
    run concurrently and disqualified from driving for eighteen months.

11. Following the dismissal of  his  appeal,  the  appellant  made  further
    submissions but these were rejected as not amounting to a  fresh  claim
    under para 353 of the Immigration Rules (HC 395 as  amended).   Further
    submissions were again made on 1 December  2014  and  these  were  also
    rejected under para 353 on 15 January 2015.

12. Further submissions were made on 3 March 2015  and  22  September  2015
    which were refused on 16 December 2015 and  certified.   Following  the
    decision of the Supreme Court in R (Kiarie & Byndloss)  v  SSHD  [2017]
    UKSC 42, the certification decision was withdrawn.   Following  further
    submissions made on 21 January 2018 and 10 January 2019, on 5  December
    2019the Secretary of State refused the appellant's claims  for  asylum,
    humanitarian protection and under Art 8 of the ECHR.  The Secretary  of
    State also certified the appellant's asylum claim  under  s.72  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("the NIA Act 2002").

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

13. The appellant appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   The  appellant
    claimed to be at risk on return to Iran  as  a  Christian  convert  and
    because of his interest in Erfan-e-Halqeh, a form of mysticism  founded
    by Dr Mohammad Ali Taheri.  In relation to Art 8, the appellant claimed
    that it would be "unduly harsh" upon his wife and British Citizen child
    if he were deported to Iran and so Exception 2 in s.117C(5) of the  NIA
    Act 2002 applied.

14. In a determination sent on 24 November 2020, Judge  Evans  allowed  the
    appellant's appeal on asylum grounds and under Art 8 of the ECHR.

15. First, the judge found that the appellant had rebutted the  presumption
    under s.72(2)  and  Art  33(2)  of  the  Refugee  Convention  that  the
    appellant,  although  convicted  of  a  "particularly  serious  crime",
    constituted a danger to the community in the UK.

16. Secondly, the judge was not satisfied that the appellant was a  genuine
    Christian convert.  However, the  judge  found  that  nevertheless,  on
    investigation at Tehran Airport on return to Iran, the appellant  would
    disclose his history including his claim  to  be  a  genuine  Christian
    convert (though rejected in the UK), his claimed association with Erfan-
    e-Halqeh, his marriage to a Christian convert  and,  with  whom,  their
    daughter was  brought  up  a  Christian,  together  with  his  internet
    activity in the UK.  It was reasonably likely that, having done so,  he
    would be persecuted and suffer serious ill-treatment  during  prolonged
    detention by the Iranian authorities.

17. Thirdly, the judge found that Exception 2 applied  under  s.117C(5)  on
    the basis that it would be "unduly harsh" upon the appellant's  British
    Citizen child (M) to remain in the UK if he were deported to Iran.  The
    judge did not accept that the appellant's deportation would be  "unduly
    harsh" on his spouse and it was  not  suggested  that  the  appellant's
    spouse (F) (who is herself a recognised  refugee)  and  their  daughter
    should accompany him to Iran.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

18. The Secretary of  State  sought  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  The  Secretary  of  State  did  not  challenge  the  judge's
    decision in relation to the certification under s.72  of  the  NIA  Act
    2002.  However,  the  grounds  contended  that  the  judge  had  failed
    properly to consider the risk on return to  the  appellant,  given  the
    judge's finding that he was not a genuine Christian  convert,  applying
    the country guidance decision in  PS  (Christianity  -  risk)  Iran  CG
    [2020] UKUT 00046 (IAC).  Further, the judge  had  failed  properly  to
    apply the elevated test for "unduly harsh"  in  Exception  2  and  had,
    therefore, wrongly found that Exception 2 applied.

19. On 22 January 2021, the First-tier Tribunal (Judge O'Garro) granted the
    Secretary of State permission to appeal on both grounds.   However,  in
    doing so,  the  judge  noted  that  the  respondent's  application  was
    "clearly out of time" having been made on 4 January 2021 when notice of
    the First-tier Tribunal's decision had been served on the parties on 24
    November 2020.  I will return to this shortly as an issue  arose  prior
    to the hearing, although it was resolved at the hearing, as to  whether
    or not the  judge  had  properly  granted  permission  given  that  the
    respondent's permission application was out of time.

20.  Following  the  grant  of  permission,  the  Upper   Tribunal   issued
    directions, including in respect of the issue of whether Judge  O'Garro
    had extended  time  in  granting  permission.   In  response  to  those
    directions, Mr Karnik (who represented the appellant  before  me)  made
    written submissions on 2 March 2021.  On behalf  of  the  Secretary  of
    State, Mr Deller made submissions in relation to the  timeliness  issue
    in a response dated March 2021.

21. The appeal was listed for hearing at the Cardiff Civil  Justice  Centre
    with the  Upper  Tribunal  working  remotely.   At  that  hearing,  the
    appellant was represented  by  Mr  Karnik  and  the  respondent  by  Ms
    Pettersen, both of whom joined the hearing remotely by Skype.

The Grant of Permission

22. At the hearing, the representatives agreed that, sitting  as  a  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge, I could determine the issue of timeliness  on  the
    basis that Judge O'Garro's grant of  permission  was  conditional.   Mr
    Karnik accepted,  on  the  basis  of  the  evidence  presented  by  the
    Secretary of State and referred to in Mr Deller's submissions, that the
    permission application filed on 4 January 2021 was, in  fact,  made  in
    time.  That was because, although the judge considered that the parties
    had been  served  on  24  November  2020,  it  was  accepted  that  the
    respondent had, in fact, not been served with the First-tier Tribunal's
    decision until 22 December  2020.   In  those  circumstances,  both  Mr
    Karnik and Ms Pettersen accepted that, sitting as a First-tier Tribunal
    Judge, I could perfect the conditional grant of permission and conclude
    that the application was made in  time  and,  on  the  basis  of  Judge
    O'Garro's reasoning, permission was granted  on  the  basis  that  both
    grounds were arguable.

23. I agreed with that course of action which was, in my judgment,  plainly
    the truth of the situation.  Therefore, the hearing  proceeded  on  the
    basis that permission to appeal was granted to the Secretary  of  State
    and both representatives made submissions  on  the  substantive  issues
    raised in the two grounds.  Mr Karnik also  relied  upon  his  rule  24
    reply dated 29 April 2021 which,  having  been  produced  both  to  the
    Tribunal and respondent on the date of the hearing, I gave Ms Pettersen
    time to consider after which she made submissions.

The Issues

24. There are two grounds of appeal raised by the Secretary of State and  a
    further point raised in response in the appellant's rule 24 reply.

25. Ground 1 contends that the judge, having found that the  appellant  had
    not established that  he  was  a  genuine  Christian  convert,  wrongly
    concluded that the appellant would nevertheless be at risk on return to
    Iran applying the country guidance decision in PS.

26. Ground 2 contends that the judge reached an  irrational  conclusion  on
    the evidence in concluding that it would be  "unduly  harsh"  upon  the
    appellant's daughter if he were deported to Iran.

27. The point raised in para 8 of the appellant's rule 24 reply  challenges
    the judge's adverse credibility finding on the  basis  that  the  judge
    failed to properly take into account the evidence  of  the  appellant's
    wife, who is a genuine Christian convert, that the appellant is also  a
    genuine Christian convert.

Discussion

    Ground 1

28. I will deal first with Ground 1 concerning the risk to  the  appellant,
    the judge having found that he was not a genuine Christian convert.

29. Having considered the evidence at paras 74-78, the  judge  at  para  79
    found as follows:

         "79. Taking all  the  evidence  in  the  round,  I  find  that  the
             Appellant has failed to show that it is reasonably likely that
             he is either a  genuine  convert  to  Christianity  or  has  a
             genuine interest in Erfan-e-Halqeh".

30. Then at paras 79.1-79.7, the judge set  out  a  number  of  reasons  to
    support that finding.

31. Having made that finding, at para  81  the  judge  made  the  following
    additional finding:

         "81. I conclude  that  because  the  Appellant  is  not  a  genuine
             Christian convert and does not  have  a  genuine  interest  in
             Erfan-e-Halqeh he will, so far as that is possible, erase  his
             Facebook account, his Instagram  account,  his  blog  and  any
             other internet related activity before being returned to  Iran
             and the risk of him on  return  should  be  assessed  on  that
             basis".

32. At para 82, the judge set out  the  relevant  country  guidance  in  PS
    concerning the risk to someone who had been found to be  "insincere  in
    his Christian beliefs".  That country guidance is  summarised  in  para
    (4) of the headnote (and at [144] of the decision) as follows:


         "4.  In cases where the claimant is found to be insincere in his or
            her claimed conversion, there is not a real risk of  persecution
            'in-country'. There being no reason for such  an  individual  to
            associate himself with Christians, there is not a real risk that
            he  would  come  to  the  adverse  attention  of   the   Iranian
            authorities.  Decision-makers  must  nevertheless  consider  the
            possible risks arising at the 'pinch point' of arrival:


                  i)         All returning failed asylum seekers are subject
                      to questioning on  arrival,  and  this  will  include
                      questions about why they claimed asylum;


                  ii)        A returnee who divulges that he claimed to be a
                      Christian is reasonably likely to be transferred  for
                      further questioning;


                  iii)       The  returnee  can  be  expected  to  sign  an
                      undertaking renouncing his claimed Christianity.  The
                      questioning will therefore in general  be  short  and
                      will not entail a real risk of ill-treatment;


                  iv)       If there are  any  reasons  why  the  detention
                      becomes prolonged, the  risk  of  ill-treatment  will
                      correspondingly rise. Factors that  could  result  in
                      prolonged detention must be determined on a  case  by
                      case basis. They could include but  are  not  limited
                      to:


                         a)     Previous adverse contact with the  Iranian
                             security services;


                         b)      Connection to persons of interest to  the
                             Iranian authorities;


                         c)      Attendance at  a  church  with  perceived
                             connection to Iranian house churches;


                         d)      Overt social media content indicating that
                             the individual concerned has actively  promoted
                             Christianity."

33. The judge, applying this approach, noted the "pinch  point"  on  return
    and the potential risk to  an  individual,  who  despite  not  being  a
    genuine Christian convert, might be exposed to if  prolonged  detention
    occurred.  At paras 83-84, the judge said this:

         "83. I conclude that the Appellant will be  returned  as  a  failed
             asylum seeker and so he will be asked why he  claimed  asylum.
             He will divulge (because he cannot be expected to lie) that he
             claimed to be a Christian and an  adherent  to  Erfan-e-Halqeh
             (but will also say that in  fact  he  is  neither).   He  will
             therefore be transferred for further questioning.  He will  be
             expected  to  sign  an  undertaking  renouncing  his   claimed
             Christian faith and would in light of  my  findings  above  do
             this.  The question, therefore, is  whether  there  are  other
             factors which might then  result  in  the  detention  becoming
             prolonged.  Such  factors  might  include:  the  fact  of  his
             claimed adherence to Erfan-e-Halqeh, the fact of being married
             to a Christian, the fact of  having  a  daughter  attending  a
             Christian school, the length of his  absence  from  Iran,  the
             disclosure of his  previous  social  media  activity  and  the
             possibility of the Iranian authorities then accessing the same
             despite the Appellant's attempts to delete them.

         84.  It is worth considering at this point the relevance of AB  and
             Others (internet activity - state  of  evidence)  Iran  [2015]
             UKUT  0257  in  relation  to  the  Appellant's  social   media
             activities.  I  conclude  that  AB  and  Others  does  not  in
             principle suggest that the Appellant's internet activities are
             likely to have been identified  by  the  Iranian  authorities:
             [469] notes  that  it  is  difficult  to  'make  any  sensible
             findings about anything that converts a technical  possibility
             of something being discovered into a real  risk  of  it  being
             discovered'.  It is therefore necessary to look  carefully  at
             the specific evidence relevant to the likelihood of  discovery
             in this case.  I find that the appellant has failed to  adduce
             evidence which would suggest that it is reasonably likely that
             his internet activities have come  to  the  attention  of  the
             Iranian authorities.  In particular, he was notably unable  in
             his oral evidence to provide any evidence about how widely  or
             where his blog was read - he said he did not  know.   Further,
             although he suggested  he  had  been  criticised  online,  his
             evidence in this regard was  unconvincing:  the  one  specific
             criticism he produced (page 104  of  the  Appellant's  bundle)
             appeared to be directed at [MA], not at  him,  and  I  do  not
             accept that the person who posted  it  []  was  known  to  the
             Appellant as he  claimed  for  the  first  time  in  his  oral
             evidence.  Such an important fact would,  I  find,  have  been
             included in his witness statement if it were  true.   Finally,
             he has not produced country  background  evidence  to  suggest
             that it is reasonably  likely  that  the  Iranian  authorities
             would have details of the internet activities of someone  with
             as little  profile  as  he.   Nor  has  he  produced  evidence
             supporting  a  contention  that  if  he  delegates  his  blog,
             Facebook page and Instagram account  the  Iranian  authorities
             will be able to access it".

34. Having reached those findings as to what the appellant  would  disclose
    to the Iranian authorities on return and that he  had  not  established
    that they had already accessed his internet activity, the judge went on
    in para 85 of his determination to set out a number of factors that led
    him to conclude that the appellant would nevertheless be at  real  risk
    of serious ill-treatment or persecution  on  return.   The  judge  said
    this:

         "85. However, notwithstanding this, I find that  there  is  a  real
             risk of  ill-treatment  amounting  to  persecution  on  return
             because of religion (his connection with the  Christian  faith
             and his claimed interest in Erfan-e-Halqeh).  This is  because
             when he divulges that he claimed to be a Christian he will  be
             transferred for further questioning.  I find it is  reasonably
             likely that he will not be  able  to  bring  an  end  to  such
             further questioning by simply agreeing to sign an  undertaking
             renouncing his claimed Christianity.  I find it is  reasonably
             likely that his detention will become prolonged  and  that  he
             will be ill-treated when the following factors are taken  into
             account:

             85.1 he will tell those investigating that he has been married
                  for some fifteen years to a  Christian  who  was  born  an
                  Iranian  Muslim  and  that  they  have  brought  up  their
                  daughter as a Christian.  The length of this relationship,
                  the former nationality of his wife and the fact  that  she
                  is an apostate are reasonably likely to raise  a  question
                  mark  over  his  renunciation  of  his  faith  which   may
                  therefore not be accepted.  In summary, it  is  reasonably
                  likely that the Iranian authorities will not  believe  his
                  protestations that he is in fact not a Christian;

             85.2 in light of  this,  it  is  reasonably  likely  that  his
                  renunciation of Erfan-e-Halqeh will  not  be  accepted  at
                  face value and so may result in further interrogation  and
                  detention.  In making this finding I take account  of  the
                  hostility of the Iranian state to Erfan-e-Halqeh  revealed
                  by the  country  background  materials  contained  in  the
                  Appellant's bundle;

             85.3 the fact that he will  be  returned  without  an  Iranian
                  passport after an absence of nearly twenty years (ignoring
                  the brief return trip  to  Iran  in  2007)  is  reasonably
                  likely  to  heighten  the   suspicion   of   the   Iranian
                  authorities.  The Appellant, in the light of his marriage,
                  the faith of his wife and the length  of  his  absence  is
                  clearly in a very different category to an  asylum  seeker
                  being returned after a brief stay in the UK;

             85.4 he will tell those interrogating him about the blog,  his
                  Facebook  page  and  his  Instagram  account.    This   is
                  reasonably likely to extend the interrogation even  though
                  he  will  have  deleted  their  contents.   Further,   the
                  possibility of  the  Iranian  authorities  being  able  to
                  access some of these  materials  (because  they  had  been
                  reposted or copied by other internet users) is a factor to
                  include in the assessment  of  whether  it  is  reasonably
                  likely  that  the  Appellant  will  be  exposed  to   ill-
                  treatment, even if not a factor which  in  and  of  itself
                  makes such ill-treatment reasonably likely".

35. Then at para 86 the judge reached his conclusion as follows:

         "86. Overall, this is a relatively  unusual  case  because  of  the
             length of the Appellant's stay in the UK, the strength of  his
             family ties here and the extent of  his  internet  activities.
             In summary, therefore, I conclude it is reasonably likely that
             he will be persecuted on return as a result  of  ill-treatment
             he is reasonably likely to receive as a  result  of  it  being
             reasonably likely that his detention will become prolonged.  I
             reach this conclusion even though I do not accept that  it  is
             reasonably likely either  that  the  Appellant  is  a  genuine
             Christian or that  he  has  a  genuine  interest  in  Erfan-e-
             Halqeh".

36. Ms Pettersen's submissions may be summarised as  follows.   First,  the
    judge erred in law by making inconsistent findings as to whether or not
    the appellant's internet activity would come to the  attention  of  the
    Iranian authorities.  At para 84 the judge had found that they had  not
    come to the Iranian authorities' attention but at para 85.4  the  judge
    speculated that they could come to the attention of the authorities  in
    the future.  Second, the judge had been wrong to take into account as a
    relevant factor in assessing whether the appellant would be subject  to
    a prolonged detention and therefore an increased risk of  ill-treatment
    that he had been out of Iran for a considerable length of  time.   This
    was not a relevant factor applying PS.   Third,  the  appellant's  wife
    would not be returning with the appellant and it was not entirely clear
    that his wife was a Christian and that her religion  would  be  of  any
    note for the Iranian authorities.  Finally, Ms Pettersen accepted  that
    the UT in PS had not set out an exhaustive list of factors which  might
    lead to the prolonged detention and increased risk of ill-treatment  to
    a person who had been found not  to  be  a  genuine  convert  but,  she
    submitted, the factors relied upon by the judge  did  not  justify  his
    ultimate finding.

37. For the following reasons, I do not accept Ms  Petterson's  submissions
    that the judge erred in law in reaching his finding that the  appellant
    would be at real risk of persecution or serious ill-treatment on return
    to Iran.

38. I set out above the judicial headnote at para (4) concerning the  risk,
    if any, to a returning Iranian national who had been found not to be  a
    Christian convert.  At [113]-[116], the UT said this:

         "113. We are satisfied that a returnee who had made a  false  claim
             of conversion would be reasonably likely to excite  sufficient
             interest to warrant further  questioning.  His  is  an  asylum
             claim that is likely to have depended on sur place activities,
             including baptism and attending church, prima facie evidence
             of a crime under Iranian law.  The evidence overall  indicates
             that the security services follow a specified  procedure  when
             it comes to Christians: they are taken in and required to sign
             the undertaking.  It does not seem  likely  to  us  that  this
             procedure would be followed standing at an arrivals desk, even
             if the subject was protesting that it was all false  and  that
             he was perfectly willing to sign.  A returnee is  not  someone
             who has been picked up on an Iranian street. He is someone who
             has just come back from the United  Kingdom,  possibly  having
             spent a considerable amount of time here; the Iranian security
             services  perceive  there  to  be   a   clear   link   between
             Christianity and attempts by the West to undermine the Iranian
             state. These factors cumulatively give rise, in our view, to a
             "particular concern"  such  that  a  transfer  to  second-line
             questioning would be likely.


         114.  What  then?  The   person   tasked   with   conducting   that
             interrogation will be one who, to put it  bluntly,  will  know
             what he is doing. It is an important job. His task will be  to
             ensure that this returnee is not in fact  a  Western  spy,  or
             someone otherwise deployed to engage in subversive  activities
             such as organising prayer meetings. The returnee will be asked
             to sign the undertaking. There being  no  reason  for  him  to
             refuse, he will do so.   He will explain that yes, he attended
             church in the United  Kingdom,  and  yes,  he  may  have  been
             baptised, but in fact it was all a  charade  to  try  and  get
             asylum so that he could settle and work in the United Kingdom.
               The Iranian security services are no doubt well aware  that
             people make such claims (the Iranian embassy  in  London  only
             need read certain newspapers to know that this is a concern).

         115.  In SSH & HR the panel were satisfied that during  secondary
             questioning there is  the potential for  ill-treatment,  and
             given what we know about the behaviour of the Iranian security
             services generally, this must be right. We are however mindful
             of Mrs Enayat's evidence that returnees would be treated  like
             "any other convert". The specific evidence we have been  given
             about what happens when suspected Christians are held in short
             'disruptive detentions' does not indicate that physical  abuse
             is being used.  Psychological pressure  is  applied  with  the
             clear motive  of  frightening  the  subject  into  signing  an
             undertaking, and thereby disrupting house church networks.  In
             the  case  of  our  disingenuous  returnee,  the  interviewing
             officer would not have to do much  to  ensure  compliance:  he
             need do no  more  than  ask.  We  therefore  find  that  this
             secondary questioning is generally likely to  be  very  short,
             perhaps no more than a few hours, and that  it  will  not,  in
             those circumstances, involve a real risk of serious harm.  The
             returnee will likely be subject to  surveillance  once  he  is
             released, but this will not involve any  risk  of  harm  given
             that he is not a genuine Christian.

         116. We accept that this will not always be  so.   Risk  assessment
             must always be fact specific and decision makers must look  to
             the particular characteristics and behaviour of  claimants  to
             assess whether there is a reasonable  likelihood  of  physical
             harm during these 'second-line' investigations.  We accept the
             Secretary of State's general rule of thumb that the longer the
             detention, the greater the risk of  torture.   Decision-makers
             must therefore  assess  whether  there  are  any  reasons  why
             interrogation would be prolonged.  We do not propose to  offer
             an exhaustive list of  the  kind  of  factors  that  might  be
             relevant here, since the evidence does not permit us to do so.
              We would however note that one aggravating factor identified
             in the sources is 'very outspoken' social media activity: this
             would  have  to  project  the  personal  commitment   of   the
             individual, rather than for instance simply 'liking' posts  by
             others.  Past adverse interest by  Iranian  authorities  would
             also increase risk, as would connections to other  individuals
             with a 'profile'.  We have found that the primary focus of the
             Iranian state is the perceived threat of organised religion,
             and for that reason we are satisfied that association  in  the
             United Kingdom with a Church with known links to Iranian house
             churches would certainly be a risk factor".

39. In summary, the UT recognised that  a  disingenuous  Christian  convert
    would not be at risk within Iran as,  despite  his  disclosure  to  the
    Iranian authorities, any surveillance of the individual  once  in  Iran
    would not reveal any association with Christians or Christian  religion
    as the individual would not be  a  practising  Christian  (see  [115]).
    However, the UT recognised that a returning failed asylum seeker  would
    be subject to questioning on arrival, including questioning as  to  why
    they had claimed asylum.  An individual could be  expected  (indeed  is
    entitled) to tell the truth about this including the basis of his claim
    but also that it had not been accepted.  That would lead potentially to
    the so-called "pinch point"  on  arrival  when  further  and  prolonged
    questioning might take place which could lead to ill-treatment during a
    period of prolonged detention (see [116]).   In  para  (4)(iv)  of  the
    headnote (above) the Tribunal set out a number of factors  relevant  to
    that issue.  However, as the Tribunal itself pointed out at [116],  and
    Ms Pettersen rightly accepted, that is not an "exhaustive list  of  the
    kind of factors that might be relevant".

40. In this appeal the judge found, and it  is  not  challenged,  that  the
    appellant would disclose his history, recognising that he had not  been
    believed, but also his family's religious and other  circumstances  and
    his internet activity.  The appellant cannot be expected to lie but, on
    the other hand, he can be expected to  tell  the  truth  including  the
    outcome  of  his  asylum  claim.   The  UT,  in  particular  in  [116],
    recognised that even a disingenuous Christian convert may be at risk on
    return if he or she would be subject to  prolonged  detention  when  an
    increased risk of ill-treatment arises.  Here,  the  judge  recognised,
    following PS, that the latter issue was the crucial one.   He  did  not
    wrongly conclude that the appellant would per se be at risk as a failed
    asylum seeker who had not been believed to be a Christian convert.   He
    recognised that the issue concerned what would  happen  at  the  "pinch
    point" and whether there was a real likelihood of  prolonged  detention
    with a concomitant greater risk of torture.   On  reading  the  judge's
    reasons, I see nothing inconsistent with the approach set out in PS.

41. First, I do not accept Ms Pettersen's submission that the fact that the
    appellant had been in the  UK  for  fifteen  years  was  an  irrelevant
    factor.  Some reliance was placed on [113] of PS to suggest  that  that
    was an irrelevant or neutral  factor.   In  fact,  in  [113]  the  UT's
    reference to an individual "possibly having spent a considerable amount
    of time here" was seen as a  background  factor  relevant  to  how  the
    Iranian security services might perceive  an  individual  returning  to
    Iran (when they might be a risk) rather than a returnee who was someone
    who had been picked up on an Iranian street.  I do not accept that  the
    UT concluded that the length of time an individual spent in the UK  was
    necessarily irrelevant.  The appellant had spent fifteen years  in  the
    UK and, given the account he would have to truthfully tell, that was  a
    factor which fell to be  considered  as  part  of  an  accumulation  of
    factors in determining whether a  prolonged  detention  was  reasonably
    likely.

42. Secondly, I do not accept that the  judge  made  inconsistent  findings
    concerning  the  Iranian  authorities'  knowledge   of   his   internet
    activities.  What the judge found in para 84 was that they had not  yet
    discovered his internet activity.  The judge did find at para  81  that
    the appellant would delete his internet  activity.   However,  at  para
    85.4, having found that he would, by  telling  the  truth,  inform  the
    Iranian authorities on return about his internet  activity,  the  judge
    found that there was a possibility that the Iranian  authorities  might
    be able to access those materials even though  he  would  have  deleted
    them.  The initial finding is about he  past;  the  second  finding  is
    about the future.

43. Mr Karnik submitted that once material  is  put  on  the  internet,  an
    individual loses control of it.  It was open to the judge to find  that
    there was a real risk that given his activity, some of  it  might  have
    been reposted or copied by others and that there would be traces of his
    activity on the web which, if alerted to it,  the  Iranian  authorities
    might now discover.  I do not accept  Ms  Pettersen's  submission  that
    that is pure speculation rather than a reasonable inference  which  the
    judge was entitled  to  draw  given  the  evidence  about  the  Iranian
    authorities' interest and capacity in relation to investigation of  the
    internet and, as a matter of common  sense,  the  reality  of  internet
    activity which entitled the judge to conclude that, despite attempts to
    delete activity, there is a  real  risk  of  an  individual's  activity
    leaving a footprint that can be discovered.

44. Thirdly, the judge correctly identified that  the  risk  recognised  in
    [116] of the UT's decision, and reflected in para (4) of the  headnote,
    did not impose an exhaustive  list  of  factors  that  might  create  a
    reasonable  likelihood  or  real  risk  of  prolonged   detention   and
    thereafter possible serious ill-treatment or torture.  In my  judgment,
    the judge rationally and reasonably identified  a  number  of  relevant
    factors including the length of time that the appellant had been out of
    the UK, the fact that his wife (previously  an  Iranian  national)  had
    converted to Christianity in the UK and  her  refugee  claim  had  been
    accepted on that basis, their daughter had been brought up a Christian,
    the appellant professed  (albeit  disingenuously)  to  be  a  Christian
    convert and also an adherent to Erfan-e-Halqeh.  Those were facts  that
    the judge was entitled to accept.

45. What the judge found was that, given this combination  of  factors,  he
    was  satisfied  that  it  was  reasonably  likely  that   the   Iranian
    authorities would subject the appellant to prolonged  detention  and  a
    risk of serious ill-treatment.   That finding  would  only  be  legally
    unsustainable if no reasonable Tribunal properly directing itself could
    reach that conclusion, i.e. the conclusion was Wednesbury  unreasonable
    or perverse.  The fact that not  every  judge  would  necessarily  have
    reached the same conclusion does not mean that, a  more  generous  view
    taken by the judge, amounts to an error of law.  As the  Supreme  Court
    pointed out in R (MM (Lebanon)) v SSHD [2017] UKSC  10  at  [107]  (per
    Lady Hale and Lord Carnwath):

         "It is no  doubt  desirable  that  there  should  be  a  consistent
         approach to issues of this kind at tribunal level, but as  we  have
         explained there are means  to  achieve  this  within  the  tribunal
         system. As was said in Mukarkar v Secretary of State for the  Home
         Department [2006] EWCA Civ 1045, para 40 (per Carnwath LJ):



                  "... It is of the nature of such judgments that  different
                  tribunals, without illegality or irrationality, may  reach
                  different conclusions on the same case ... The  mere  fact
                  that one tribunal has reached what may seem  an  unusually
                  generous view of the facts of a particular case  does  not
                  mean that it has made an error of  law  ...  Nor  does  it
                  create any precedent, so as  to  limit  the  Secretary  of
                  State's right to argue for a more restrictive approach  on
                  a similar case in the future. However, on the facts of the
                  particular case, the decision of the  specialist  tribunal
                  should be respected."


46. In my  judgment,  having  correctly  identified  the  approach  to  the
    assessment of any risk on return applying PS,  and  having  set  out  a
    number of relevant factors (none of which were excluded by  the  UT  in
    PS), the judge reached a reasonable and rational finding  that  it  was
    reasonably likely that the Iranian authorities would  not  believe  his
    protestations that he was in fact not  a  Christian.   Taken  with  the
    other factors, it was within the range of reasonable  conclusions  that
    the judge was entitled to reach, that in  those  circumstances  it  was
    reasonably likely that the appellant  would  be  subject  to  prolonged
    detention which, as the UT in PS recognised, was increasingly likely to
    expose an individual to serious ill-treatment or torture  and  for  the
    judge to conclude that the  appellant  had  established  that  risk  on
    return.


47. For these reasons, therefore, I reject the Secretary of State's  Ground
    1.

    Ground 2

48. Turning now to Ground 2, that concerns Art 8  of  the  ECHR.   To  some
    extent, the Art 8 issue is academic as the appellant has  succeeded  in
    establishing his  international  protection  claim.   However,  it  was
    common ground before  me  that  I  should,  nevertheless,  resolve  the
    Secretary of State's challenge to the judge's  decision  to  allow  the
    appeal under Art 8 even if I sustained the judge's  decision  to  allow
    the appeal on asylum grounds.

49. Ground  2  challenges  the  judge's  conclusion  that  Exception  2  in
    s.117C(5) is satisfied.  That provision provides that:

         "(5) Exception 2 applies where  C  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
             relationship with a  qualifying  partner,  or  a  genuine  and
             subsisting parental relationship with a qualifying child,  and
             the effect of C's deportation on the partner or child would be
             unduly harsh".

50. As was common ground before me, if the appellant  -  who  is  a  medium
    offender - could establish that he fell within  Exception  2  then  his
    deportation would not be proportionate and would be a breach of  Art  8
    (see s.117C(3) and NA (Pakistan) v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 662 at [23])  .
    The crucial finding of the judge was that the effect upon his  daughter
    (M), who is a qualifying child as a British Citizen and  with  whom  he
    had a genuine and subsisting relationship, would be "unduly harsh".  At
    paras 89-90, the judge set out the background circumstances as follows:

         "89. Turning to Article  8  considerations  I  make  the  following
             findings of fact in relation to the  Appellant's  relationship
             with his daughter.  I find that he is the primary carer of his
             daughter (who is now 13) because his wife works as a solicitor
             whereas he does not work.  I find that he is very involved  in
             her  life  and  that  this  involvement  increased  when   the
             appellant, his wife and daughter moved  to  Blackburn  in  the
             period following his release from prison in 2015.  I find that
             his daughter [h]as been separated from [him] twice previously,
             once when she was around 5, when he  was  estranged  from  his
             wife, and then again between 2013 to 2015 when  the  Appellant
             was in prison.  These findings are supported by a  variety  of
             evidence  in  addition  to  the  witness  statements  of   the
             Appellant (who I do not find to be  a  credible  witness)  and
             that of his wife.  Such other  evidence  includes  the  letter
             from the guitar teacher (page 182 of the  Appellant's  bundle)
             and the email from [MS] relating to school matters  (page  184
             of the Appellant's bundle).

         90.  I further find that the  Appellant's  daughter  is  upset  and
             anxious at the prospect of her father being removed to Iran in
             the light of the contents of his letter dated 5 February  2020
             (page 329 of the Appellant's  bundle),  the  contents  of  the
             psychotherapist's report dated 28 January 2020  (page  331  of
             the bundle) and the contents of the Appellant's wife's witness
             statement.  I find that if  he  is  removed  to  Iran  she  is
             unlikely to see the Appellant again: her mother is unlikely to
             travel to  Iran  having  been  granted  asylum  here  and  the
             Appellant's daughter, having been brought up a Christian,  and
             against the background of Iran being the  country  from  which
             her mother fled, is unlikely to  choose  to  live  there  even
             [when] she reaches  the  age  of  18.   I  find  against  this
             background she is also unlikely to visit.  Consequently if the
             Appellant is removed the physical separation from his daughter
             is likely to be permanent".

51. Then at paras 91-92, the judge dealt with  a  psychotherapist's  report
    relied upon by the appellant as follows:

         "91. The  psychotherapist's  report  is  an  unimpressive  document
             running  to  just  two  pages.   It  was  apparently  prepared
             following a single meeting with the Appellant's daughter on 18
             January 2020.  No detail of the length  of  that  meeting  are
             included.  No reference is made to whether the psychotherapist
             had access to the daughter's medical records  or,  indeed,  to
             whether there is any  history  of  the  daughter  having  been
             treated for mental health issues.   The  report  is  also  not
             framed as a medico-legal report:  for  instance  there  is  no
             reference   to   the   psychotherapist's   understanding   her
             obligation to the Tribunal etc.  It  is  unclear  whether  the
             'Background History' is simply what has been reported  to  the
             psychotherapist by the daughter and wife of the  Appellant  or
             whether the psychotherapist has also relied on  other  sources
             of information (although this does not seem likely).  However,
             notwithstanding these shortcomings, I give some weight to  the
             opinion contained in it which is as follows:

                  'It  is  clear  to  me  that  [child]  is  suffering  from
                  'Separation  Anxiety'  which  stems  from  her   traumatic
                  experience of sudden disappearance of her father at a very
                  young age as well as  uncertainty  about  his  immigration
                  status  and  deportation  ...  I  strongly  believe   that
                  [child's] father's  deportation  will  have  a  tremendous
                  negative psychological impact on her affecting her  future
                  development on different levels'.

         92.  I give some weight to the opinion (1) because it reflects  the
             opinion of a professional; and (2) because it  is  indeed  the
             case that the Appellant disappeared from his  daughter's  life
             for a significant period of time when she  was  younger  (both
             when he and her mother temporarily separated and when  he  was
             in prison in 2013 and 2015), and because in the  light  of  my
             finding of fact above in relation to who is her primary  carer
             it is unsurprising that the possibility of  her  father  being
             deported has had a negative effective  on  her  and  that  his
             deportation will have negative psychological consequences  for
             her".

52. Then at para 93, the judge went on to find that  the  impact  upon  the
    appellant's daughter would be "unduly harsh" as follows:

         "93. In the light of these findings of fact,  I  conclude  that  it
             would be 'unduly harsh' for the Appellant's child to remain in
             the UK without the Appellant for the following reasons:

             93.1 The Appellant's child has been  separated  from  him  for
                  significant periods on two previous occasions.  This might
                  have reduced the likely negative psychological effects  of
                  his deportation on her (because she has lived without  his
                  presence for a significant period of time with the  result
                  that her relationship with him was not important to  her).
                  However, I find it is likely  to  have  had  the  opposite
                  effect, that is to say that the previous separations  will
                  increase  the  negative  psychological   effect   of   his
                  deportation on her.

             93.2 I  have  reached  this  conclusion  because  of  (1)  the
                  contents of the psychotherapist's report, (2) the contents
                  of the Appellant's child's letter referred to  above,  and
                  (3) the witness evidence.

             93.3.    I conclude that that amplified negative psychological
                  effect means that the effect of the Appellant's removal on
                  his daughter will go beyond 'mere undesirability  of  what
                  is merely uncomfortable, inconvenient or difficult'.

             93.4 I further conclude  that  when  that  amplified  negative
                  psychological effect is combined with: (1) the  day-to-day
                  loss of the Appellant's child's  primary  carer,  who  has
                  helped her adapt to life in Blackburn since she has  moved
                  there; and (2) the fact that  his  removal  will  for  the
                  reasons I have set out above be likely to  result  in  his
                  permanent physical separation from her, the result is that
                  the elevated test is reached.

             93.5 That is to say, the harshness which  the  deportation  of
                  the  Appellant  will  cause  for  his  daughter  is  of  a
                  sufficiently  elevated  degree  to  outweigh  the   public
                  interest in the deportation of foreign criminals".

53. Then at para 94, although this is not  relevant  to  the  grounds,  the
    judge found that it would not be  "unduly  harsh"  on  the  appellant's
    partner (F) if he were deported.

54. On behalf of the Secretary of State, Ms Pettersen  submitted  that  the
    judge's finding in relation to Exception 2 and  the  issue  of  'unduly
    harsh' was unsustainable.  First, the judge had wrongly concluded  that
    the appellant was his daughter's "primary carer" when, in reality,  the
    care of the  appellant's  daughter  was  at  best  shared  between  the
    appellant  and  his  wife.   Secondly,  the   judge   had   found   the
    psychotherapist's  report  to  be  an  unimpressive  document  but  had
    nevertheless relied upon it.   Ms  Pettersen  submitted,  in  her  oral
    submissions, that the judge's finding was irrational on the evidence.

55. There is no doubt that the judge correctly self-directed on the test to
    be applied under Exception 2 in determining whether the impact upon the
    appellant's daughter of his deportation would be  "unduly  harsh".   At
    para 59 of his determination, the judge set out a summation of the law,
    derived from the Supreme Court's decision in KO (Nigeria) v SSHD [2018]
    UKSC 53 and HA (Iraq) v SSHD [2020] EWCA  Civ  117,  by  the  Court  of
    Appeal in KB (Jamaica) v SSHD [2020] EWCA Civ  1385  at  [15].   There,
    Popplewell LJ (with whom McCombe and Asplin LJJ agreed) said this:
         "15. The meaning of "unduly harsh" in  the  test  provided  for  by
         s.117C(5)  has  been  authoritatively  established  by  two  recent
         decisions: that of the Supreme Court in KO (Nigeria) v Secretary of
         State for the Home Department [2018] 1 WLR 5273; and the  decision
         of this court in HA (Iraq) v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
         Department [2020] EWCA Civ 117.  It  is  sufficient  to  note  the
         following without the need to quote the relevant passages:
             (1)  The  unduly  harsh  test  is  to  be  determined  without
             reference to the criminality of the parent or the severity  of
             the relevant offences: KO (Nigeria) para 23, reversing in this
             respect the Court of Appeal's decision in that case,  reported
             under the name MM (Uganda) v Secretary of State for the  Home
             Department [2016] EWCA Civ 617, in which at paragraph 26 Laws
             LJ expressed this court's conclusion  that  the  unduly  harsh
             test required regard  to  be  had  to  all  the  circumstances
             including the criminal's immigration and criminal history.

             (2) "Unduly" harsh requires a degree of harshness  which  goes
             beyond what would necessarily be involved for any child  faced
             with deportation of a parent: KO (Nigeria) para 23.

             (3) That is an elevated test, which carries  a  much  stronger
             emphasis  that  mere  undesirability   or   what   is   merely
             uncomfortable, inconvenient, or difficult; but  the  threshold
             is not as high as the very compelling circumstances test in s.
             117C(6): KO (Nigeria) para 27; HA (Iraq) paras 51-52.

             (4) The formulation in para 23 of KO (Nigeria) does not posit
             some objectively measurable standard  of  harshness  which  is
             acceptable, and it is potentially misleading and dangerous  to
             seek to identify some "ordinary"  level  of  harshness  as  an
             acceptable  level  by  reference  to  what  may  be   commonly
             encountered circumstances: there is no reason in principle why
             cases of undue hardship may not occur quite commonly; and  how
             a child will be affected by a parent's deportation will depend
             upon an almost infinitely variable range of circumstances;  it
             is not possible to identify a base level of "ordinariness": HA
             (Iraq) paras 44, 50-53, 56 and 157, AA (Nigeria) v Secretary
             of State for the Home Department [2020] EWCA Civ 1296 at para
             12.

             (5) Beyond this guidance, further  exposition  of  the  phrase
             will rarely be helpful; and tribunals will not err in  law  if
             they carefully evaluate the effect of the parent's deportation
             on the particular child and then decide whether the effect  is
             not  merely  harsh  but  unduly  harsh  applying   the   above
             guidance: HA (Iraq) at paras 53 and 57. There is no substitute
             for the statutory wording (ibid at para 157)."

56. The judge plainly had that  approach  well  in  mind  in  reaching  his
    findings at paras 89-93, in particular in para 93.3 and  at  para  93.5
    where he referred to the "elevated"  level  of  harshness  required  to
    outweigh the public interest.

57. Turning now to Ms Pettersen's two main points.  First,  she  criticised
    the judge for taking into account that the appellant was his daughter's
    "primary carer" when, on the evidence, it could be at  best  said  that
    care was shared between him and his wife.  In using the phrase "primary
    carer" the judge was not, in my judgment, falling  into  the  error  of
    adopting a definition relevant, perhaps,  in  other  contexts  such  as
    under  the  Immigration  (EEA)  Regulations  2016  when  dealing   with
    derivative rights of residence by individuals who are primary carers of
    an EEA national child.  The point being made by the judge  was,  as  is
    clear in para 89, that the appellant was the person  who  looked  after
    his daughter at relevant times during the day (remembering,  given  her
    age, that she would be at school for much of  this  time)  because  his
    wife worked as a solicitor.  He did not work.  The  judge  was,  in  my
    view, saying no more than the appellant, if  he  were  deported,  would
    deprive his daughter of the support that he alone was able to give  her
    during the working day.  That involvement with his  daughter,  and  his
    removal if he were deported, was a relevant  factor  in  assessing  the
    impact upon her of his deportation  and  whether  it  fell  within  the
    "unduly harsh" test required by Exception 2.  The  judge  did  no  more
    than take into account the  substance  of  that  loss  whether  he  was
    characterised as being the "primary carer" or  simply  the  person  who
    provided any required care during working hours.

58. Secondly,  Ms  Pettersen  criticised  the  judge's  reliance  upon  the
    psychotherapist's report given that, in  para  91,  he  described  that
    report as an "unimpressive document".  Further, the judge had failed to
    take into account that what it said must have been based upon the 'self-
    serving' statements of the appellant and his family.

59. As regards the latter point, no doubt the judge was well aware  of  the
    source of the information upon which the psychotherapist's  report  was
    based.

60. Even though the report was not, in the judge's view, in the form  of  a
    medico-legal report, it was nevertheless written by a professional  who
    had,  at  least,  prepared  it  following  an  interaction   with   the
    appellant's daughter.  In para 92, the judge  explained  that  he  gave
    that report, nevertheless, "some weight" because it was the opinion  of
    a professional and, in his judgment, he accepted that the separation of
    the  appellant  from   his   daughter   had   "negative   psychological
    consequences" upon her.  It may be that the report could not be said to
    be the most persuasive report emanating from  a  relevant  professional
    that can be imagined.  However, the judge was entitled to give it "some
    weight" as part of the overall assessment of the  evidence  as  to  the
    impact upon the appellant's daughter of separation from the  appellant,
    including her own evidence as to that.

61. Having correctly self-directed on the appropriate test and approach  to
    the issue of "unduly harsh" in Exception 2, the  evidence  was,  in  my
    judgment, capable of sustaining the judge's finding that that test  was
    met.  It cannot be said that every judge would necessarily have reached
    that finding but that, as MM (Lebanon) as set out  above  makes  plain,
    that in itself does not mean that a "generous"  finding  is  Wednesbury
    unreasonable or perverse in that no reasonable judge properly directing
    him or herself could reach such a finding.  I am not persuaded that the
    judge's finding fell outside the range of conclusions that a reasonable
    judge properly directing himself could reach.   For  these  reasons,  I
    also reject Ground 2.

    Rule 24 Point

62. That then leaves the rule 24 point raised by Mr Karnik, namely that the
    judge's adverse credibility finding should, itself, not  be  sustained.
    As Mr Karnik pointed out, given that the appellant had succeeded on all
    grounds, it was not possible for him to appeal this factual finding and
    so it was properly raised in a rule 24 reply (see Binaku (s.  11  TCEA;
    s. 117C NIAA; para 399D) [2021] UKUT 34 (IAC)).   As  I  understood  Mr
    Karnik, however, this point was only pursued if a "material error"  was
    found on the basis of the respondent's grounds.  In my judgment, it  is
    now academic  whether  the  judge's  adverse  credibility  finding  was
    sustainable.  The appellant has  succeeded  both  in  establishing  his
    claim under  the  Refugee  Convention  and  Art  8  of  the  ECHR.   In
    particular, the appellant has succeeded on the former ground even given
    the  adverse  credibility  finding  made  by  the  judge.    In   those
    circumstances, it is unnecessary for me to reach any conclusion on  the
    challenge raised in para 8 of the rule 24 reply.  I would say, however,
    that the ground based simply upon a contention that the judge failed to
    give any, or any proper, weight to the view  of  the  appellant's  wife
    that the appellant was a genuine Christian convert fails to  take  into
    account para 75.3 of the judge's determination where he considered both
    the evidence of the appellant and his  wife  as  being  "inconsistent".
    The judge  identified  significant  issues  with  the  appellant's  own
    evidence  and  that  of  other  witnesses  in  reaching   his   adverse
    credibility finding.  Had the point not become academic, I  would  have
    rejected the challenge set out in para 8 of the rule 24 reply.

Decision

63. For the above reasons, the First-tier Tribunal's decision to allow  the
    appellant's appeal on asylum grounds and under Art 8 of  the  ECHR  did
    not involve the making of an error of law.  That  decision,  therefore,
    stands.

64. Accordingly, the Secretary of State's appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  is
    dismissed.


                                                                      Signed

                                                                Andrew Grubb

                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                                                 14 May 2021


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

Judge Evans made no fee award.  That decision has not been challenged and  I
see no basis to depart from it and so it also stands.

                                                                      Signed

                                                                Andrew Grubb

                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                                                 14 May 2021


