
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12272/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Civil Justice Centre      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 14th January 2019                          |On 30th January 2019          |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley


                                   Between

                                    [H S]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms E Ms E A Mottershaw of Counsel instructed by
Paragon Law
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Home Office Presenting Officer


                     REASONS FOR FINDING AN ERROR OF LAW

1.   The appellant was born on [~] 2000 and is  a  citizen  of  Afghanistan.
    He claims asylum on the basis of his imputed opinion, in that he claims
    to fear mistreatment from the  Taliban  because  he  failed  to  attend
    Taliban training camp to where he had been  taken  after  his  father's
    death and  fears  mistreatment  from  the  government  because  of  his
    affiliation to the Taliban.

2.   The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom in April 2014  and  claimed
    asylum.  His claim was refused in December that year but he was granted
    leave to remain  as  an  unaccompanied  child  until  June,  2017.   He
    appealed that refusal and the appeal was dismissed in July,  2015.   He
    made application for further leave to remain in June,  2017  which  was
    refused on 8th November, 2017.  He lodged Notice of Appeal against  the
    decision on 23rd November, 2017.

3.   The determination of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Devlin  in  dismissing
    the appellant's appeal in July 2015  is  at  pages  46  to  76  of  the
    appellant's bundle.  That contains a number  of  findings  of  fact  to
    which the stared determination of  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department (Second Appeals - ECHR - Extra-Territorial Effect) Sri Lanka
    * UKIAT 00702 applies.

4.   The appellant's appeal against the decision of 8th  November  2017  was
    heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Hawden-Beal in  Birmingham  on  19th
    December 2018.   There  was  effectively  only  one  challenge  to  the
    determination, which related to the judge's finding that the  appellant
    could safely return to Afghanistan and live in Kabul.

5.   The determination is rather confused, because instead  of  setting  out
    the clear findings made by Judge Devlin and then applying Secretary  of
    State  for  the  Home  Department  (Second  Appeals  -  ECHR  -  Extra-
    Territorial Effect) Sri Lanka * UKIAT 00702, the  judge  simply  quotes
    odd paragraphs of Judge Devlin's determination, so that the  reader  of
    the determination is left in complete dark as to the findings  made  by
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge.

6.   Judge Devlin, however, found that the appellant did not face  any  risk
    because of his Taliban links, which were not accepted and  was  not  at
    any specific risk from the Taliban were he to relocate to Kabul.  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Hawden-Beal found that it was not unduly  harsh  to
    expect a healthy young adult male to relocate there.  The difficulty in
    this appeal is that the judge was not dealing with an adult male.   The
    judge was dealing with a minor.  At paragraph 17 she said this

         "In those circumstances, although I acknowledge the evidence of the
         foster carer that the appellant is a young man of 17 years or  age,
         who has a significant lack of confidence such that  unusually,  his
         stay with the foster carer has  been  extended  until  he  finishes
         college as opposed to being moved to semi-independent living at the
         age of 18, the fact remains that I cannot be satisfied that he  has
         done all he can  to  contact  his  family  and  that  I  cannot  be
         satisfied that they have moved from  Kapsia  Province,  given  that
         they made no mention of leaving before he left them.  I  find  that
         it is not unduly harsh to expect him to relocate to Kabul, where  I
         am satisfied that his family will be able to join him,  given  that
         Kapsia Province is the  neighbouring  province  to  Kabul  and  the
         family as a whole has had the wherewithal to be able to pay for his
         journey to the UK and I find that the fact that his family will  be
         able to join him in Kabul and  support  him  there  counts  as  any
         vulnerabilities which the appellant may have."

7.   First-tier Tribunal Judge Hawden-Beal earlier  referred  to  a  finding
    made by Judge Devlin, who found it was implausible that  the  appellant
    and his family members had  not  put  in  place  a  mechanism  for  the
    appellant to be able to notify his family of his safe arrival  when  he
    reached a safe third country he was intending to go to.  The judge  did
    not find it credible that the appellant would have no means of  telling
    his family where he was, even if he lost contact with them at  a  later
    date.  The judge refers to the fact that  the  appellant  attempted  to
    make contact with the Red Cross in  2015  with  a  view  to  presumably
    tracing his family, but  produced  no  documentary  evidence  of  those
    efforts, however, he did produce a letter from the Red Cross  in  April
    2018, which the judge regarded as being a "knee jerk reaction"  to  the
    realisation that the hearing date was drawing near.

8.   It was entirely speculative on the part of the  judge  to  assume  that
    the appellant still has family now,  let  alone  that  they  are  still
    living in Kapsia.  They may well have died, they may well  have  moved.
    It is fortunate now perhaps that the Red Cross have been contacted  and
    no doubt before any further hearing Counsel will ensure that  there  is
    an updated report from the  Red  Cross.   I  have  concluded  that  the
    determination of Judge Hawden-Beal does contain material errors of  law
    such that the determination cannot  stand.   I  set  it  aside  in  its
    entirety, the appeal will be heard afresh by a judge other than  First-
    tier Tribunal Judges Hawden-Beal or Devlin.

9.   No anonymity direction is made.


Richard Chalkley                                    Date: 25 January 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley

