
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                    Appeal Number:
PA/12695/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 11 March 2019                        |On 19 March 2019                    |
|                                        |                                    |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN

                                   Between

                                   mr A M
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Mustafa, counsel instructed on a direct access
basis
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a national of Sri Lanka born on 25 November 1986.

 2. He arrived in the UK as a student  in  September  2005,  following  the
    arrest of himself and his uncle by the police in Sri  Lanka,  following
    which the Appellant's uncle had committed suicide  whilst  in  custody.
    The Appellant remained in the UK for five years and  then  returned  to
    Sri Lanka in 2010 for a wedding.  He was asked on  his  return  by  his
    uncle's brother, i.e. another uncle, to  give  evidence  to  the  Human
    Rights Commission in relation to his uncle's death in custody  and  the
    Appellant did so.  He claims that two days later people in a white  van
    came to the family home and told his father that an arrest warrant  had
    been issued for him, following which the Appellant went to stay with an
    aunt and then came back to the UK four days later via the airport.

 3. The Appellant claimed asylum in May 2017 when he underwent a  screening
    interview. He was subsequently substantively interviewed and his asylum
    application was refused on 22 November 2017.

 4. The Appellant appealed against that decision and his appeal came before
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Gandhi for  hearing  on  14  September
    2018.  The Appellant, through his Counsel, sought to adjourn his appeal
    on the basis that Counsel had only been instructed the previous day  on
    a direct access basis and there  was  no  witness  statement  from  the
    Appellant or his partner nor a bundle of documents  including  evidence
    relevant to the basis of claim.   The  judge  refused  the  adjournment
    request on the basis the Appellant had had ample opportunity to  obtain
    the relevant evidence from Sri Lanka  and  that  in  January  2018  his
    appeal had already been adjourned precisely in  order  to  obtain  such
    documentation.  The judge  proceeded  to  dismiss  the  appeal  on  all
    grounds.

 5. Permission to appeal was sought in time on the basis that the judge had
    erred in promulgating the decision three and a half  months  after  the
    date of hearing; the judge erred in her assessment of  the  Appellant's
    credibility at [32] to [80];  and  in  respect  of  Article  8,  whilst
    accepting the Appellant was in a subsisting relationship with a British
    national of North Korean origin, the judge failed to take into  account
    his partner's medical issues in the assessment of proportionality.

 6. Permission to appeal was granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Mark
    Davies in a decision dated 22 December 2018 on the basis:

         "It is arguable that taking into  account  the  hearing  had  taken
         place on the 14th September 2017 and the decision was  promogulated
         on the 28th December the Judge did not consider the  evidence  with
         the care he claims and arguably committed an error of law.

         It is an essential element of justice that decisions are made in  a
         timely manner."

     Hearing

 7. At the hearing before the Upper Tribunal, the parties were agreed  that
    in fact permission had been granted on an erroneous basis  because  the
    length  of  time  between  the  hearing   and   promulgation   of   the
    determination was approximately three months, i.e. 14 September 2018 to
    28 December 2018, rather than fifteen months.  The misunderstanding had
    arisen because the decision and reasons  states  erroneously  that  the
    hearing took place on 14 September 2017.

 8. In his submissions, Mr Mustafa stated that even if  there  had  been  a
    factual misapprehension, he still maintained there were material errors
    of law in the judge's decision and the issue was not so much whether it
    was the lapse in time but  whether  there  was  a  substantial  factual
    error.

 9. Mr Mustafa sought to rely on a ground  of  appeal  that  had  not  been
    previously raised and that is  that  the  judge  erred  in  failing  to
    adjourn the appeal as this prevented the Appellant from having  a  fair
    hearing as he did  not  have  the  opportunity  to  provide  a  written
    statement or evidence.

10. I pointed out to Mr Mustafa that it was not open to him to  raise  this
    ground of appeal because it had not been raised previously and  it  was
    now too late.  Mr Mustafa submitted that it  was  a  protection  claim,
    which required anxious scrutiny and that, he too had been instructed on
    a direct access basis and there had been a substantial  change  in  his
    case in that the Appellant had not previously had the benefit of  legal
    representation but was now being represented by Counsel.

11. Mr Avery helpfully indicated he did not object to this late  ground  of
    appeal which the judge had dealt with thoroughly in  the  decision  and
    reasons.

12. In those circumstances and given that the original basis of  the  grant
    of permission had fallen away, I permitted admission of the  ground  of
    appeal challenging the failure of the judge to adjourn the appeal.

13. Mr Mustafa sought to rely on the decision in Nwaigwe [2014] UKUT  00418
    (IAC) in particular the headnote, where  the  Upper  Tribunal  held  in
    practice the question will be whether the refusal deprived the affected
    party of his right to a fair hearing.  The  test  is  one  of  fairness
    rather than whether  the  First-tier  Tribunal  acted  reasonably.   Mr
    Mustafa submitted it was quite clear that the  Appellant  was  for  the
    first time being represented by Counsel.  Given that he had raised  the
    protection claim it was vital he gave his evidence in written form with
    detailed reasons to address the concerns raised by  the  Respondent  in
    the refusal letter and  he  had  effectively  been  deprived  of  that.
    Whilst he accepted the Appellant was previously granted an  adjournment
    he submitted that his medical condition,  which  was  accepted  by  the
    judge,  meant  that  in  fairness  he  should  have  been  granted  the
    opportunity to put in a  written  statement.   He  submitted  that  the
    absence of such a statement was clearly reflected in  the  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal.  The judge made adverse  credibility  findings
    due to a lack of explanation by the Appellant and had the  matter  been
    adjourned, the Appellant would have had an opportunity to address these
    points that concern  the  judge  by  setting  them  out  in  a  witness
    statement cf. [34] of the judge's decision and question 68  at  B16  of
    the Respondent's bundle).  He submitted in  truth  that  there  was  no
    inconsistency in the Appellant's account here.

14. Mr Mustafa submitted that at [44] of her decision, the  judge  expected
    documentary evidence as to the  Appellant's  medical  condition,  which
    could have  been  provided  had  the  Appellant  had  the  opportunity.
    Similarly in relation to the judge's findings  at  [46]  and  [47]  the
    Appellant  could  have  provided  explanations  had  the  matter   been
    adjourned and see also [55] and  [59]  of  the  judge's  decision.   He
    submitted that for these reasons  the  hearing  was  affected  and  was
    unfair. He invited the Upper Tribunal to find a material error  of  law
    and remit the appeal back  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  give  the
    Appellant a proper opportunity to address these  issues  by  way  of  a
    witness statement given that it is a protection claim.

15. Mr Mustafa also sought to rely on the  point  raised  at  [17]  of  the
    grounds of appeal, that the judge had failed to take into  account  the
    Appellant's partner's medical issue in assessing the proportionality of
    removal.  He sought to rely on a letter  dated  25  May  2018  from  St
    George's University Hospital which states that the Appellant's  partner
    has hepatitis B.  Despite searching of the file however, and  this  was
    confirmed by Mr Avery, there is no evidence that that letter  had  been
    submitted to the First-tier Tribunal Judge and there  is  no  reference
    that either in submissions or in  her  oral  evidence  the  Appellant's
    partner made reference to suffering from this illness.

16. In his submissions Mr Avery stated that he did  not  see  there  was  a
    fairness issue.  The Appellant had had plenty of time  to  prepare  for
    the  hearing,  which  had  already  been  adjourned   once   previously
    specifically to  permit  him  to  obtain  documentation.   However  the
    Appellant appears to have done nothing about obtaining those  documents
    in a timely way.  The fact that Counsel was  only  instructed  the  day
    before is  the  responsibility  of  the  Appellant  and  there  was  no
    unfairness.  The strongest argument, Mr Avery submitted,  is  that  the
    Appellant did not have the documentary evidence he wished to rely upon.
     However he had plenty of time to obtain these documents.

17. He submitted that the judge has covered the Appellant's case in quite a
    lot of detail and it could not be said that there was anything wrong in
    his approach to the evidence.  He did not consider that the Appellant's
    partner had health problems and there was no evidence from  the  Record
    of Proceedings that this was mentioned before the judge.

18. In reply, Mr Mustafa submitted the Appellant  was  disadvantaged.   All
    the findings were on the basis that the evidence of the  uncle's  death
    was not put before the Tribunal and yet had the matter  been  adjourned
    the Appellant could have obtained this evidence.  In  relation  to  why
    the Appellant had not acted before, Mr Mustafa submitted that this  was
    due to the fact that the Appellant had been engaged in substance misuse
    and was unrepresented.

     Findings and Reasons

19. I do not find a material error of law in the decision of the First-tier
    Tribunal Judge, who gave lengthy and cogent consideration to whether or
    not it was necessary to adjourn the appeal.  The  judge  at  [15]  made
    clear that her findings of fact and the  reasons  for  them  were  made
    shortly after the hearing; at [17] that  she  has  been  alert  to  the
    danger of rejecting evidence because it appears inherently  implausible
    from a westernised viewpoint.   She  directed  herself  in  respect  of
    Karanakaran [2000] EWCA Civ 11 and GJ [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC) and  also
    considered at [22] in light of the Appellant's  claimed  mental  health
    problems, that he was a vulnerable witness and  offered  the  Appellant
    breaks during the hearing.

20. From [23] onwards the judge considered the issue of the application for
    an adjournment but found sustainably that it was not necessary for  the
    appeal to be adjourned in order to be fair to the Appellant.  She  gave
    a number of reasons for  this.   Firstly  at  [26]  that  although  the
    Appellant talked about being in  a  state  of  addiction,  the  medical
    evidence before her was  not  adequate  to  show  this.  There  was  no
    evidence of being seen by his GP and the evidence at  (E)  showed  only
    that he went to his GP in 2017 because he was feeling tired and he  was
    given a clean bill of health.  She found at [27] that the Appellant has
    had ample opportunity to obtain documents from Sri Lanka,  particularly
    given that the appeal had been  adjourned  in  January  2018  for  that
    purpose. The judge found  although  the  Appellant  had  stated  he  is
    suffering from depression and there is evidence that  he  has  received
    counselling for  mental  health  difficulties,  there  was  no  medical
    evidence to show that he has a substance misuse  problem  nor  that  he
    stopped communicating with his family in Sri  Lanka  after  his  asylum
    interview in November 2017 [27].

21. The Judge also found that the Appellant  had  a  longer  standing  drug
    habit than he had admitted to and she did not accept in  the  light  of
    any evidence about treatment that he was no longer  addicted  over  the
    last one to two months, particularly "as even by his own evidence he is
    still taking drugs and alcohol albeit he claims he is not dependent  on
    them" [28]. At [29] the judge found that, even if she were  to  adjourn
    the appeal, the Appellant would not obtain the documents from Sri Lanka
    because there was no particular change in his circumstances.  The judge
    then went on to give reasons for finding the Appellant's account not to
    be credible.

22. Whilst I accept Mr Mustafa's submission that the matters that gave rise
    to a negative credibility finding could have been  dealt  with  by  the
    Appellant in a witness statement, the essential point here is  that  it
    was not accepted by the judge that the reasons for  not  obtaining  the
    documentation from Sri Lanka or seeking legal  representation  well  in
    advance of the hearing were credible.  Thus  the  decision  in  Nwaigwe
    [2014] UKUT 00418 (IAC) has to be considered in light of that  finding,
    which was clearly open to the judge on the evidence before her.

23. Rule 19 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2005  provides
    that it is necessary when applying for  an  adjournment  to  show  good
    reason why an adjournment is necessary and to provide evidence  of  any
    fact or matter relied upon in support of the application.  It  is  also
    the case that the Tribunal must not adjourn an appeal unless  satisfied
    that the appeal cannot otherwise be justly determined.  The  Judge  did
    not accept that a good reason had been  put  forward,  particularly  in
    light of the fact that the appeal had been adjourned  once  already  in
    order for the Appellant to obtain documentation and she gave clear  and
    sustainable reasons for her finding at [23]-[20] of  her  decision  and
    reasons.

24. In respect of Mr Mustafa's secondary point regarding the failure by the
    Judge to take into account the Appellant's partner's medical  condition
    in her assessment of the proportionality of removal of  the  Appellant,
    it is clear from the Judge's record of proceeding and that of the  Home
    Office Presenting Officer and the absence on the  file  of  the  letter
    dated 25 May 2018 from St George's University Hospital, that this issue
    was simply not raised before the Judge at the appeal hearing. The Judge
    clearly cannot be expected to deal with  a  point  that  was  not  even
    raised before her. Thus there is no substance in this ground of  appeal
    either.



Notice of Decision

There is no error of law  in  the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
Gandhi. The appeal is dismissed.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed   Rebecca Chapman                              Date: 18 March 2019


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman

