
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12323/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester CJC                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On December 12, 2018                         |On 9 January 2019             |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

                                   MRS P N
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               the Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Patel, Legal Representative
For the Respondent:    Mr Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to Rule 14(1) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules
    2008  (the  UT  Procedure  Rules)  I  make  an  order  prohibiting  the
    disclosure  or  publication  of  specified  documents  or   information
    relating to the proceedings or of any matter likely to lead members  of
    the public to identify any person whom  the  Upper  Tribunal  considers
    should not be identified. The effect of such an "anonymity  order"  may
    therefore be to prohibit anyone (not merely the parties  in  the  case)
    from disclosing relevant  information.  Breach  of  the  order  may  be
    punishable as a contempt of court.

 2. The appellant is a national of South Africa.  The appellant claimed  to
    have entered the United Kingdom in June  2013  and  claimed  asylum  on
    September 16, 2016. The respondent refused  her  protection  and  human
    rights claims on November 7, 2017 under paragraphs 336 and 33F HC 395.

 3. The appellant lodged grounds of  appeal  on  November  24,  2017  under
    Section 82(1) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  Her
    appeal  came  before  Judge  of   the   First-tier   Tribunal   Maxwell
    (hereinafter called "the Judge") on January 2, 2018 and in  a  decision
    promulgated on January 16, 2018 he dismissed her appeal on all grounds.



 4. The appellant appealed this decision on January 23, 2018. Permission to
    appeal was granted by Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  O'Garro  on
    February 2, 2018 on a limited basis, finding it arguable the Judge  had
    arguably erred by failing to  engage  sufficiently  with  the  material
    issue of the appellant's vulnerability as a victim of  trafficking  and
    her suicidal indications.

 5. When this matter first came before me on July 3, 2018 Ms Aboni,  Senior
    Home  Office  Presenting  Officer,  acknowledged  the  Judge  had   not
    considered the medical evidence when considering her vulnerability as a
    witness or the impact returning her to South  Africa  as  a  victim  of
    trafficking.

 6. In light of  this  concession  and  taking  into  account  the  medical
    evidence  stated  she  suffered  from  depression  and   had   suicidal
    tendencies I was satisfied the Judge erred by failing to  factor  these
    issues into his decision and there was an error in law.

 7. I retained the appeal in the Upper Tribunal and preserved the following
    findings for the resumed hearing:

      a) The appellant, as a married woman, is  a  member  of  a  particular
         social  group.  However,  any  ongoing  fear  of  her  husband   is
         subjective and is not well-founded for the purposes of a protection
         or human rights claim.

      b) As a victim of human trafficking, the appellant was a member  of  a
         particular social group. The trafficker had  arranged  for  her  to
         travel to the United Kingdom via Dublin and she was forced to  work
         as a prostitute to repay him and to pay for her  accommodation  and
         food. When he returned to Nigeria in August 2014 she  was  able  to
         escape from his control.

      c) There was no evidence that the original  trafficker  had  contacted
         her family in South Africa.

      d) Any adverse finding under section 8 of the Asylum  and  Immigration
         (Treatment of Claimants etc.) Act 2004 carried very little weight.

 8. The appellant's solicitors have since  lodged  further  evidence.  This
    evidence  includes  a  psychiatric  report  prepared  by  Dr  Raffi  on
    September 17, 2018, a letter from her GP dated August 22,  2018  and  a
    skeleton argument.

 9. Dr Raffi, a consultant psychiatrist, had interviewed the  appellant  on
    August 30, 2018 and he recorded that the appellant  had  suffered  with
    depression and was prescribed 20mg of Citalopram for her depression. He
    confirmed that she remained a high  risk  of  injuring  herself  having
    provided a significant history of self-harming behaviour  from  a  very
    early age and that she remained a moderate to high risk  of  committing
    suicide if she did not receive the psychological  and  medical  support
    she required or  if  she  was  placed  in  an  unsafe  environment.  He
    concluded  she  had  been  historically  exploited   both   physically,
    sexually, mentally and financially and there remained a very high  risk
    of exploitation.

10. Dr Raffi also confirmed that the appellant had a complex post-traumatic
    stress disorder and she required support by the Community Mental Health
    services. Such treatment would include a combination  of  psychological
    and psychiatric approaches. Importantly, Dr Raffi  had  grave  concerns
    for her health and safety and  vulnerability  if  she  was  removed  or
    returned to a new area or worse still she was  returned  to  her  South
    Africa.

11. Dr McKinnell confirmed the appellant was taking 20mg Citalopram  and  5
    mg Diazepam. Dr McKinnell recorded  that  the  appellant  had  suffered
    extreme emotional trauma from an early age and  this  trauma  had  been
    compounded over the years by her experiences in working as a prostitute
    both in South Africa and after she had been trafficked  to  the  United
    Kingdom. She had an  unstable  personality  disorder  with  significant
    emotional scars and she often felt so desperate that she wished to  end
    her life or harm herself.

12. At the commencement of the resumed hearing Mr Bates indicated  that  he
    did not oppose the granting of some form of status to this appellant in
    light of the medical evidence. Given the expert report from Dr Raffi he
    accepted there would be insurmountable obstacles to her  re-integration
    into South Africa but with regard to the risk of trafficking he  argued
    that as her trafficker came from Nigeria and there had been  no  visits
    to the family by the trafficker, she was not  at  risk  of  persecution
    anymore. However, due to  her  subjective  fear  he  accepted  internal
    relocation may be  unreasonable  or  unduly  harsh  and  she  would  be
    entitled  to  humanitarian  protection  under  article  15(b)  of   the
    Qualification Directive. He also accepted  it  was  arguable  that  she
    faced a real risk of inhumane treatment contrary to article 3 ECHR.

13. Ms Patel submitted the appeal  should  be  allowed  under  the  Refugee
    Convention. There was a  preserved  finding  she  was  a  member  of  a
    particular social group as she had been trafficked and if  returned  to
    South Africa there was a real  risk  she  would  be  forced  back  into
    prostitution and then she would be at risk of being  trafficked  again.
    Support for this argument could be found in Dr  Raffi's  report.  Human
    trafficking and prostitution is rife in South Africa and  the  risk  to
    her of being re-trafficked is real and  she  was  entitled  to  refugee
    status. She also submitted that because of her circumstances she  faced
    a real risk of inhumane treatment under article 3 ECHR.  Mr  Bates  had
    conceded there were  insurmountable  obstacles  to  her  returning  and
    therefore article 8 was engaged.

    FINDINGS

14. I have been helped considerably in this appeal by the sensible approach
    of Mr Bates who having considered the  medical  evidence,  that  I  had
    directed to be obtained, accepted that this appellant must  succeed  in
    her appeal. The only issue was whether she succeeded under the  Refugee
    Convention or was granted Humanitarian Protection.

15. I do not intend to recite the facts of this sad case save to  say  that
    there was a preserved finding by me that she had being trafficked  from
    South Africa by a Nigerian agent to this country and that she had  then
    been forced to continue her work as a prostitute in order to repay  the
    agent and to pay for her own accommodation and living expenses.

16. I had directed that a full  medical  report  be  obtained  because  her
    medical history suggested that there was a real  risk  that  she  would
    self-harm  and  would  be  unable  to  prevent  similar  agents  taking
    advantage from her were she to be returned. It was  important  to  gage
    how an expert felt she would respond to being returned and  whether  or
    not the expert felt she would face a real risk.

17. Having read the report of Dr Raffi I am  left  in  no  doubt  that  the
    appellant is an extremely vulnerable  woman  and  whilst  the  previous
    trafficker has disappeared  from  the  scene  and  there  has  been  no
    suggestion of any visits to her family home by him  or  his  associates
    nevertheless the objective  evidence  suggests  that  prostitution  and
    trafficking are rife in South Africa  and  given  the  content  of  the
    medical report I am satisfied that it is reasonably  likely  she  would
    face similar problems in South Africa again. Having established she  is
    a member of a particular social group I  conclude  that  returning  her
    would place her at risk of persecution and there was evidence that  the
    State would be unable to provide her  with  the  necessary  protection.
    That is not to say that all women face a similar risk but  simply  that
    on the facts of this case this appellant faced such a risk.

    Asylum Aspect of Claim

18. Having considered all the evidence and the submissions made to me, I am
    satisfied that there is a reasonable likelihood  of  persecution  on  a
    Refugee Convention ground if she were returned to South Africa  because
    I am satisfied her claim is made out.

    Humanitarian Protection

19. Having succeeded in her application for asylum she cannot succeed under
    article 15(b) of the Qualification Directive.

    Article 3 ECHR

20. Given the circumstances of her case and taking into account the medical
    evidence I find that there  is  a  real  risk  that  she  would  suffer
    inhumane treatment in  South  Africa  because  of  what  she  would  be
    returning to.

    Article 8 ECHR

21. Mr Bates had  already  conceded  that  there  would  be  insurmountable
    obstacles in returning this appellant to Africa. In considering private
    life I am required to look at this through the prism of the Immigration
    Rules and in particular paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) HC 395.

22. The medical evidence set out why there would be  there  would  be  very
    significant  obstacles  to  her  integration  into  South  Africa.  Her
    circumstances are the same  today  as  they  were  when  she  made  her
    application.

23. In Treebhawon and Others (NIAA 2002 Part 5A - compelling  circumstances
    test) [2017] UKUT 13  (IAC)  it  was  held  that  mere  hardship,  mere
    difficulty, mere hurdles, mere upheaval and  mere  inconvenience,  even
    where multiplied, are unlikely to satisfy the test of "very significant
    obstacles" in paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules.  In Parveen  v
    SSHD [2018] EWCA Civ 932 Underhill LJ commented on that observation and
    said, " I have to say that I do not find that a very  useful  gloss  on
    the words of the rule. It is fair enough  to  observe  that  the  words
    "very significant" connote an  "elevated"  threshold,  and  I  have  no
    difficulty with the observation that the test will not be met by  "mere
    inconvenience or upheaval". But I am not sure that saying  that  "mere"
    hardship or  difficulty  or  hurdles,  even  if  multiplied,  will  not
    "generally" suffice  adds  anything  of  substance.  The  task  of  the
    Secretary of State, or the Tribunal, in any given  case  is  simply  to
    assess the obstacles to integration relied on, whether characterised as
    hardship or difficulty or anything else, and  to  decide  whether  they
    regard them as "very significant"".

24. As stated above, Mr Bates conceded this issue and I  am  satisfied  but
    given her personal circumstances and the  professional  opinion  of  Dr
    Raffi I am satisfied that she would  face  very  significant  obstacles
    were she to be returned.

25. On the basis that the appellant does satisfy the Immigration  Rules  it
    would be disproportionate to refuse her appeal on private life  grounds
    under article 8 ECHR.

    DECISION

26. There was an error in law and I previously set aside the protection and
    human rights decisions.

27. I have re-made those decisions as follows:

      a) I allow the appeal on protection grounds.

      b) I allow the appeal under articles 3 and 8 ECHR.


Signed   Date 14/12/2018

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I do not make a fee award as no fee was payable.


Signed   Date 14/12/2018

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis

