
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: pa/12326/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 9 November 2018                      |On 18 February 2019                 |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                     Ah
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Mr Tan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, AH, was born 1 January 1992 and is  a  male  citizen  of
    Afghanistan.  By a decision dated 7 June 2017, the Secretary  of  State
    refused the appellant international protection.  The appellant appealed
    to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Malik)  which,  in  a   decision
    promulgated on 31 July 2018 dismissed the appeal.   The  appellant  now
    appeals, with permission to the Upper Tribunal.

 2.  The  appellant  appeared  before  the   Upper   Tribunal   without   a
    representative.  He  had  previously  applied  for  an  adjournment  in
    writing by a letter dated 6 November 2018.  That application  had  been
    refused by Mr Asim Hussain, a lawyer of the Upper Tribunal (IAC).   The
    appellant had sought an adjournment on the basis that he was unable  to
    find a legal representative.  He  also  complained  that  he  would  be
    unable to understand the proceedings  unless  a  Dari  interpreter  was
    booked to assist him.  Mr Hussain,  refusing  the  application,  stated
    that an interpreter would be provided at the Upper Tribunal hearing but
    found also that the appellant had sufficient time to  find  alternative
    legal representation.

 3. On 9 November 2018 at the Upper Tribunal hearing, the appellant renewed
    his application for an adjournment.  Having regard to the fact that the
    grounds for the adjournment were  identical  to  those  put  before  Mr
    Hussain and rejected by him, I also rejected  the  application  for  an
    adjournment.  I consider that the appellant had had sufficient time  to
    obtain legal representation.  I  was  also  satisfied  that,  with  the
    assistance of a Dari interpreter, the appellant was  fully  capable  of
    understanding the proceedings in the Upper Tribunal.

 4. The appellant claimed to be a convert to Christianity.  He claimed also
    that he had encountered problems with the Taliban in Afghanistan  which
    made him fear returning to his native country.  At [25], the judge gave
    detailed  reasons  for  rejecting  the  appellant's   claim   to   have
    encountered problems with the  Taliban.   I  consider  the  appellant's
    challenge to the decision in  that  respect  is  nothing  more  than  a
    disagreement with findings available to the judge on the evidence.  The
    judge  also  rejected  the  appellant's  claim  to  have  converted  to
    Christianity.  Granting permission, Judge Doyle, noted that the judge's
    assessment of the appellant's claimed conversion  to  Christianity  may
    have been "undermined by TF and MA [2018] CSIH 58."

 5. I have considered what the judge has  said  regarding  the  appellant's
    claimed conversion to Christianity very carefully.  I  cannot  identify
    any error of law in his analysis.  Unlike the appellants in TF and  MA,
    the appellant's attendance at the Holy Innocence Church has  been  very
    recent.  The letter from the warden of the church, Hillary Jones, dated
    8 July 2018 before the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  states  that  "[the
    appellant] is relative new to our congregation so there is not a lot to
    say about him!" The appellant had started attending the church early in
    2018.  Notwithstanding his recent involvement with the church, Ms Jones
    confirmed that the appellant had been baptised "the other  week".   The
    judge found that the evidence of Ms  Jones  contradicted  that  of  the
    appellant who claimed that he was unable to read  or  write;  Ms  Jones
    indicated that the appellant "can read and follow  Farsi."   The  judge
    therefore rejected the appellant's claim that he was able to follow and
    understand the religious services and this led him, in  turn,  to  find
    that the appellant was not a  genuine  convert  to  Christianity.   The
    judge observed that "mere attendance at church did  not  to  the  lower
    standard indicate a genuine conversion to Christianity."

 6. Given the fact that the appellant had only attended the church  at  the
    beginning of the year and that the written evidence from Ms  Jones  was
    not unequivocally supportive and, in any event, appeared to  contradict
    that the appellant himself, I am  satisfied  that  the  judge  did  not
    arguably err in law by concluding that the appellant was not a  genuine
    convert.  I am satisfied that he has given appropriate  weight  to  the
    evidence of Ms Jones.  That evidence was only of limited assistance  to
    an appellant whose credibility  otherwise  the  judge  had  given  good
    reasons for rejecting.

 7. I am satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal's analysis of the  evidence
    was legally sound and that it achieved  findings  of  fact  which  were
    plainly available to it.  I can identify no reason  to  set  aside  the
    decision for the reasons advanced by the appellant or at all.

Notice of Decision

This appeal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 1 February 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date 1 February 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane
