
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA128592016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5 July 2017                               |On 1 August 2017              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS

                                   Between

                                     s v
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms U Miskiel of Counsel instructed by KILC
For the Respondent:    Mr P Armstrong, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Aujla promulgated on 20 April 2017 dismissing  the  Appellant's  appeal
    against a refusal of a protection claim, the  protection  claim  having
    been refused by the Respondent for reasons set out in  a  'reasons  for
    refusal' letter ('RFRL') dated 28 October 2016.


2.   The Appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka, born on 15 November  1985.   I
    do not propose to rehearse his immigration history or the substance  of
    his asylum claim bearing in mind  that  the  nature  of  the  challenge
    before the Upper Tribunal is essentially one of procedural fairness.

3.   The Appellant's appeal was initially listed for hearing on  16  January
    2017.  On that occasion Ms Miskiel of Counsel attended to represent the
    Appellant instructed by KILC.  The appeal  was  adjourned  and  in  due
    course re-listed for 5 April 2017. Ms Miskiel was again  instructed  to
    represent the Appellant.


4.   On the morning of the hearing Ms Miskiel  awoke  with  what  was  later
    diagnosed  as  a  subconjunctival  haemorrhage,  together  with   other
    symptoms that occasioned her very particular concern.  I do not propose
    to go into the details of the medical conditions: suffice to  say  that
    there is supporting medical evidence on file and it seems to me that Ms
    Miskiel had every reason to be concerned about  her  medical  condition
    and acted  appropriately  in  due  course  in  attending  Accident  and
    Emergency.  However, as indicated in the Grounds of Appeal, on her  way
    to St. Thomas' Hospital she 'stopped off' at  Taylor  House  where  she
    informed staff of her condition and that she could  not  attend  court.
    Although there is no record on file of these  particular  circumstances
    Ms Miskiel has deposed evidence to that effect, and it  is  clear  that
    something of this was communicated to First-tier Tribunal Aujla because
    he responded by indicating that a representative should attend from the
    solicitor's office.  Mr Vallipuram Kulendran accordingly made  his  way
    to Taylor House.  He has deposed a statement in support of the  Grounds
    of Appeal dated 3 May 2017.  In his statement he relates the history in
    similar terms to that set out above, indicating  additionally  that  he
    received a call from his client (the Appellant)  that  the  Immigration
    Judge wanted him to attend the Tribunal and accordingly  he  rushed  to
    the Taylor House. He says in his statement that he had no documents and
    was not prepared to present the case.  He also says that the  Judge  in
    effect entered the room, opened the file and asked him to  proceed  and
    "did not want to listen to my explanation".


5.    The  Respondent's  representative  before  the   First-tier   Tribunal
    prepared a pro forma attendance note that Mr Armstrong has been able to
    provide  to  the  Tribunal  today.   It  records  under   the   heading
    'Preliminary issues' - "Counsel taken ill, Judge asked  for  solicitors
    to attend instead".


6.   I am satisfied that the circumstances plainly indicated  to  the  Judge
    that the Appellant's representatives were not ready to proceed  on  the
    morning of the hearing and were seeking an adjournment.  In  the  first
    instance Ms Miskiel informed the staff at the court of her last  minute
    inability  to  represent  the  Appellant  with  no   arrangements   for
    alternative  representation  being  made.  Rather  than   granting   an
    adjournment it was the  Judge  that  initiated  the  attendance  of  Mr
    Kulendran. I accept that the Judge did not accede to, or  engage  with,
    Mr Kulendran's protestations that he was not prepared to represent  the
    Appellant.


7.   It is a troubling feature of this  case  that  the  Judge's  Record  of
    Proceedings contains no mention of these circumstances that have led to
    the challenge today. Indeed the Decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge is also entirely silent on any of these circumstances.


8.   The Judge, as is  apparent  from  the  foregoing,  proceeded  with  the
    appeal and in due course dismissed the appeal for reasons  set  out  in
    his Decision.


9.   The Appellant applied for  permission  to  appeal  raising  grounds  in
    respect of procedural unfairness  and  also  raising  some  grounds  in
    respect of the substantive  decision  on  the  appeal.   Permission  to
    appeal was granted on 17 May 2017 by First-tier Tribunal Judge Foudy in
    material part in these terms:

         "3.  Although detailed grounds describe the sequence of  events  on
             the morning of the hearing, and a witness statement  has  been
             submitted by the legal representative, Mr Kulendran, whom  the
             Judge required  to  conduct  the  appeal  in  the  absence  of
             Counsel, no reference is made to the  application  to  adjourn
             the decision.  This is highly unusual and it is arguable  that
             it is an error of law as it is a failure to faithfully  record
             all relevant events in the hearing.


         4.   Mr Kulendran states that he was not prepared  to  conduct  the
             appeal, having instructed Counsel to do so.   It  is  arguable
             that this hampered the Appellant's  ability  to  have  a  fair
             hearing."


10.  Mr Armstrong for the Secretary of State  today  argues:  in  substance,
    irrespective of representation, there was no change in the basis of the
    Appellant's protection claim;  moreover the  Appellant  still  had  the
    benefit of representation at the appeal hearing; yet further  there  is
    nothing in the procedural fairness point that would suggest there would
    have been any material difference in the outcome of the appeal.


11.  The applicable law in respect of adjournment and fairness is  helpfully
    explored in the decision of Nwaigwe  (adjournment  -  fairness)  [2014]
    UKUT 00418 (IAC), a decision of the President.  My attention  has  been
    directed in particular to what is set out at paragraphs 7-9:

         "7.  If a Tribunal refuses to accede  to  an  adjournment  request,
             such decision could, in principle,  be  erroneous  in  law  in
             several respects: these include a failure to take into account
             all    material    considerations;    permitting    immaterial
             considerations to intrude; denying the party concerned a  fair
             hearing;  failing  to  apply  the  correct  test;  and  acting
             irrationally.  In practice, in most cases the question will be
             whether the refusal deprived the affected party of  his  right
             to a fair hearing.  Where an adjournment refusal is challenged
             on fairness grounds, it is important  to  recognise  that  the
             question for the Upper Tribunal is not whether the  FtT  acted
             reasonably.  Rather,  the  test  to  be  applied  is  that  of
             fairness:  was there any deprivation of the  affected  party's
             right to a fair hearing? Any temptation to review the  conduct
             and decision of the FtT through  the  lens  of  reasonableness
             must be firmly resisted, in order to avoid a  misdirection  in
             law.  In a nutshell, fairness is the supreme criterion.

         8.    The  cardinal  rule   rehearsed   above   is   expressed   in
             uncompromising language in the decision of the Court of Appeal
             in  SH  (Afghanistan)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
             Department [2011] EWCA Civ 1284, at [13]:

                  'First, when considering  whether  the  immigration  Judge
                  ought to have granted an adjournment,  the  test  was  not
                  irrationality.  The test was not whether his decision  was
                  properly open to him or  was  Wednesbury  unreasonable  or
                  perverse.  The test and  sole  test  was  whether  it  was
                  unfair'.


             Alertness to this test by Tribunals at both tiers  will  serve
             to prevent  judicial  error.  Regrettably,  in  the  real  and
             imperfect world of contemporary litigation,  the  question  of
             adjourning a case not  infrequently  arises  on  the  date  of
             hearing, at the doors of the court. I am conscious, of course,
             that in the typical case the Judge  will  have  invested  much
             time and effort in preparation, is understandably  anxious  to
             complete the day's list of cases for hearing and may well feel
             frustrated  by  the  (usually)   unexpected   advent   of   an
             adjournment request.  Both the FtT and the Upper Tribunal have
             demanding   workloads.    Parties   and   stakeholders    have
             expectations, typically elevated  and  sometimes  unrealistic,
             relating to the throughput and output of cases in the  system.
             In the present era, the spotlight on  the  judiciary  is  more
             acute than ever before.  Moreover, Tribunals must consistently
             give effect  to  the  overriding  objective.  Notwithstanding,
             sensations of frustration and  inconvenience,  no  matter  how
             legitimate, must always yield to the parties' right to a  fair
             hearing.  In determining applications for adjournments, Judges
             will also be guided by focussing on the overarching  criterion
             enshrined in  the  overriding  objective,  which  is  that  of
             fairness.

         9.   In passing, I am conscious that the FtT procedural  rules  are
             scheduled to be replaced by a new code which  is  expected  to
             come into  operation  on  20  October  2014.   The  provisions
             relating to adjournments, previously enshrined in rules 19 and
             21 have been substantially simplified.  Within the  new  code,
             the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure)   Rules  2014,
             Rule 4(3)(h),  under  the  rubric  'Case  Management  Powers',
             provides that the FtT -

                       'may ...  adjourn or postpone a hearing'.

             This substantially less prescriptive  formula  reinforces  the
             necessity of giving full effect, in every case, to the  common
             law right  and  principles  discussed  above.  The  overriding
             objective remains unchanged: see Rule 2.  FtT  Judges  dealing
             with  adjournment  issues  should  continue   to   apply   the
             principles rehearsed above and the decision of  the  Court  of
             Appeal in SH (Afghanistan), giving primacy to the criterion of
             fairness."


12.  I note further to the foregoing that  the  current  appeal  was  indeed
    decided under the regime of the  2014  Procedure  Rules,  and  in  that
    context  I  emphasise  the  President's  observation  that  the   "less
    prescriptive formula therein reinforces the necessity  of  giving  full
    effect to the common law right and principles discussed".


13.  In my judgement the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  singularly  fails  to
    demonstrate that he has given consideration and/or full effect  to  the
    Appellant's common law right to a fair hearing, in circumstances  where
    his Decision does not address any of the events that have detained  the
    Upper Tribunal in debate today.  Judge Foudy's observation in  granting
    permission to appeal is apposite: the absence from the Decision of  any
    record  of  the  circumstances  preceding  Mr   Kulendran's   reluctant
    appearance and the absence of any consideration of an adjournment or an
    explanation for the decision to proceed, constitute an error of law.


14.  I have noted the  matters  referred  to  by  Mr  Armstrong  as  perhaps
    indicating that the Judge was perfectly entitled to  proceed  with  the
    appeal notwithstanding the illness of Counsel who had  previously  been
    instructed, and the late attendance of an OISC caseworker who  but  for
    the telephone call from his client would have  been  about  his  normal
    daily business and had to, in effect, drop all other matters to  attend
    a hearing for which he  was  unprepared.   I  doubt  that  in  all  the
    circumstances the matters identified by Mr Armstrong made it reasonable
    for the Judge to have proceeded.  Be that as it may, I  have  no  doubt
    that it was unfair to proceed.  The  Judge  denied  the  Appellant  the
    benefit of duly instructed and properly prepared Counsel, and  moreover
    offered no explanation in the Decision for so doing.


15.  In those circumstances I find the Judge erred in law. The only  outcome
    must be that the decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Aujla  is  set
    aside; the Appellant is entitled to a fair hearing with all  issues  at
    large before the First-tier Tribunal anew.


16.  Both representatives confirmed that no particular or  specific  further
    Directions were necessary: accordingly the appeal is to be re-listed at
    Taylor House on the first available date before any  Judge  other  than
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Aujla; standard directions are to be issued.


17.  For the avoidance of any doubt I make the following observation. I  was
    initially  surprised  to  see  Ms  Miskiel  appearing  before   me   in
    circumstances where aspects of the Appellant's challenge were based  on
    her account of  events  on  the  morning  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    hearing, and there was no prior indication as to the  extent  to  which
    such  matters  were  accepted.  (The  Respondent's  Rule  24   response
    essentially complained that details of the challenge had not  yet  been
    seen by  the  Respondent.)  However,  Mr  Armstrong  did  not  seek  to
    challenge Ms Miskiel's account of her conduct on  the  morning  of  the
    hearing,  or  any  of  the  supporting   medical   evidence.   In   the
    circumstances I was satisfied that it was appropriate to  proceed  with
    Ms Miskiel acting as the Appellant's representative today.


Notice of Decision

18.  The Decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained a material  error  of
    law and is set aside.


19.  The decision in the appeal  is  to  be  remade  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal by any Judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge  Aujla  with
    all issue at large.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



The above represents a corrected transcript of ex tempore reasons  given  at
the conclusion of the hearing.


Signed:                                 Date: 6 July 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis

