
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/12472/2019 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided under rule 34                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 14 August 2020                    |On 18 August 2020                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN


                                   Between

                                     ML
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTIOn made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Sohaib Fatimi Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Alain Tan, Specialist Appeals Team


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan who claims  to  be  at  risk
      from the Taliban. He is appealing against a decision of Judge  of  the
      First-tier Tribunal Russell ("the judge") promulgated  on  4  February
      2020 dismissing his protection and human rights claim.

   2. The grounds of appeal are wide ranging and include the contention that
      the judge failed to adequately consider documentary  evidence  (ground
      1)  and  misapplied  Devaseelan  (Second  Appeals  -  ECHR  -   Extra-
      Territorial Effect) Sri Lanka * [2002] UKIAT 00702 (ground 3).

   3. Permission to appeal was granted by the Upper Tribunal on 11 May 2020.
      At the same time as granting  permission,  the  provisional  view  was
      given that the question of whether the First-tier Tribunal erred could
      be determined without a hearing.

   4. On 9 July 2020 the respondent submitted a response under  rule  24  of
      the Upper Tribunal Procedure Rules stating that it was  accepted  that
      the First-tier Tribunal materially erred as identified  in  grounds  1
      and 3. The respondent stated:

        "In considering the documents relied upon by the appellant the FTTJ
        failed to consider the Taliban threat letter and  the  letter  from
        the police command Nangahar - both were relevant to  the  claim  of
        being previously threatened  by  the  Taliban  and  post-dated  the
        Tribunal's previous decision in 2017....  It  is  further  accepted
        that the approach taken by the FTTJ did  not  reflect  the  correct
        approach under Devaseelan as set out in the grounds."

   5. In the light of the position of the respondent as set out in  rule  24
      response, I find that the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  should
      be set aside on the basis that it involved the making of an error on a
      point of law. As the appeal will need to be considered afresh with  no
      findings preserved, having regard to  para.  7.2(b)  of  the  Practice
      Statements of the Immigration and Asylum Chambers  of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal and Upper Tribunal, I have decided that the appeal should  be
      remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.



Notice of Decision

 a. The appeal is allowed.

 b. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside and the appeal  is
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard afresh by  a  different
    judge.

Direction Regarding Anonymity

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.
|                                    |                                    |
|                                    |                                    |
|Signed                              |                                    |
|                                    |                                    |
|Daniel Sheridan                     |                                    |
|Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan       |Dated:  14 August 2020              |






                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS


1.    A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must  make
a written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any such application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:


2.    Where the person who appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).


3.    Where the person making the application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


4.    Where the person who appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal  is  outside
the United Kingdom at the  time  that  the  application  for  permission  to
appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if  the
notice of decision is sent electronically).


5.    A "working  day"  means  any  day  except  a  Saturday  or  a  Sunday,
Christmas Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.


6.    The date when  the  decision  is  "sent'  is  that  appearing  on  the
covering letter or covering email

