
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12373/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport (Columbus House)     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 17th August 2017                   |On 27th September 2017               |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVIDGE

                                   Between

                                    a Q M
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr C Simmonds
     Instructed by: Asylum Justice
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or a court directs otherwise, the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

 1. The Appellant is an Iraqi national who appeals a decision of the First-
    tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Barcello  promulgated  on  24th  January  2017,
    dismissing the Appellant's appeal on international protection  grounds.



 2. The Appellant appeals firstly on the basis that the judge was wrong  to
    conclude that the Appellant could return  to  Baghdad.  It  was  not  a
    conclusion available to the FTTJ as it was not an argument relied  upon
    by the Respondent.

 3. I find there is no merit in that ground as the reasons for refusal  are
    drawn wide enough to encompass a return to Baghdad.

 4. The Appellant secondly challenges the decision on the basis that,  even
    if the option of return to Baghdad was open to the First-tier Tribunal,
    the decision is inadequate in the context of current case law.

 5. At the hearing both representatives were in agreement that in light  of
    the most recent Court of Appeal decision  in  respect  of  the  country
    guidance set out in the case of AA (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG [2015]  UKUT
    544 (IAC), to the point that the judge is required to assess the safety
    of an Appellant who has no CSID card on  return  to  Baghdad,  even  if
    presence  in Baghdad was to be in the short term before  relocating  to
    IKR, there had been an omission by the judge  that  amounted  to  legal
    error.

 6. In light of that agreed error I canvassed with the  representatives  as
    to how I should exercise  my  powers.   Mr  Mills  for  the  Respondent
    submitted that the matter should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal
    because there was a degree of fact-finding beyond the  usual  remit  of
    the rehearing in the Upper Tribunal.

 7. Mr Simmonds for the Appellant sought to persuade me that I  should  set
    aside  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  in  its  entirety,
    including the decision on relocation. He submitted that  I  could  deal
    with the case shortly by simply focussing on the  relocation  position.
    The Appellant was bound to win. It is a waste of resources to remit the
    matter. I could straightforwardly find that it would be unduly harsh to
    expect him to relocate because, as per the case  of  HF  (Iraq)  [2013]
    EWCA Civ 1276 states at [116]:

         "The Tribunal accepted, however, that  she  would  need  to  return
         regularly to Kirkuk in order to use the PDS card and take advantage
         of the food subsidies."

 8. Mr Simmonds invited me  to  set  the  decision  aside  and  remake  the
    decision in line with the factual finding  of  that  paragraph  finding
    that it was unduly harsh to expect the Appellant  to  relocate  to  IKR
    because he would similarly be required to travel to use food subsidies.
     He referred me to his grounds setting out the supremacy of HF over the
    Upper Tribunal decision of AA (on the basis  that  the  Upper  Tribunal
    could not overrule the Court of Appeal.  He asserted that the judge had
    simply failed to deal with the point that he had made.

 9. I find no merit in that position. The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  did
    take on that argument. It is germane to point out that at [37] he  says
    the following:

         "As stated by the Court of Appeal  in  TM,  KM  and  LZ  (Zimbabwe)
         [2010] EWCA Civ 916 I 'must treat as binding any  country  guidance
         authority relevant to the issues in dispute unless  there  is  good
         reason for not doing so, such as fresh evidence  which  cast  doubt
         upon its conclusions'."

10. There is no merit in Mr Simmonds'  submission  that  the  fact-specific
    finding relating to a person from Kirkuk, based on a system  applicable
    at the time of the evidence in that  case,  provides  better  authority
    than an Upper Tribunal country guidance case which plainly  deals  with
    matters  of  difficulties  some  years  later.   The  Court  of  Appeal
    themselves having only recently considered the Upper Tribunal case  and
    maintaining its import, save as to the need to make findings as to  the
    risk arising from the absence of documents  on  the  date  of  hearing,
    really requires no explanation from  me  as  to  why  the  argument  is
    legally hopeless. Further, paragraph 116 of HF is merely a  note  of  a
    submission, and is not a factual finding of the Court of Appeal.   Even
    if as a submission it accurately reflects a factual finding of  the  UT
    relevant to that individual, this case involves a different person at a
    different time. The issue is fact sensitive and must be assessed on  an
    individual basis. It is misconceived to assert that the case of  HK  is
    determinative of the  factual  position  here.  The  judge  finds  this
    Appellant has relatives in  the  IKR,  and  there  is  no  evidence  to
    conclude that they have  problems  caused  by  having  to  periodically
    return to Kirkuk, and relying on HF does not assist  the  Appellant  in
    establishing any factual error. There is nothing in  the  grounds  that
    disturbs the consideration of the relocation point.

11. In conclusion: the error of law is of the assessment of risk on  return
    to Baghdad arising from documentary  difficulties.     Given  that  the
    judge, in line with the erroneous understanding of the  legal  duty  of
    the time, considered the matter to be irrelevant to  his  consideration
    there is  an  inadequate  consideration  of  the  factual  matrix,  and
    accordingly it is appropriate to remit  the  matter  de  novo  on  this
    point.   The judge will need to make the necessary factual findings  in
    respect of documentation to determine whether the Appellant can  safely
    be relocated to Baghdad in the long or short term, and whether  or  not
    he would be able to travel to the IKR.  The Grounds of  Appeal  do  not
    disturb the judge's findings otherwise in terms of  relocation  to  the
    IKR and those findings stand including  the  finding  that  should  the
    Appellant be able to get to the IKR, it would not be  unduly  harsh  to
    expect him to relocate there.

Decision

12. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal reveals an error of law in  the
    assessment of risk on return to Baghdad and is set aside to that extent
    and remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for that point to be  heard  de
    novo.   The  case  is  remitted  to  Judge  Barcello  to  resolve   the
    documentary dispute.

Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davidge


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD


No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davidge
