
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12398/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 9th May 2019                      |On 28th May 2019                     |
|                                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAFFER


                                   Between

                                     P I
                         (ANONYMITY direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms E Mottersaw, Turpin & Miller LLP (Oxford)
For the Respondent:    Mr Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Iran who was born on  15  January  1991.
    His application for asylum was made on 2 August 2018.  His  application
    was refused on 5 October 2018.  The matter came before  Judge  Birk  at
    Birmingham on 4 January 2019.  She dismissed the appeal.  Permission to
    appeal was granted by Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge  Doyle  on  26  March
    2019 on the following basis:

         "2.  On balance there is sufficient in the grounds to make  out  an
             arguable case that the First-tier Tribunal Judge erred in  the
             approach to the guidance in TF (Iran) v Secretary of State for
             the  Home  Department  [2018]  CSIH  58  when  assessing   the
             appellant's claim to have a well-founded fear  of  persecution
             because of his religion.  The Judge's assessment of supporting
             evidence from church members in the UK lies between  [45]  and
             [50] of  the  decision.   It  is  arguable  that  the  Judge's
             findings in relation to the appellant's  claimed  Christianity
             are inadequately reasoned.

         3.   The grounds are arguable."

 2. Mr Bramble accepted that the grounds include a  claim  that  the  Judge
    gave inadequate consideration and materially erred by failing to follow
    country guidance on the relevance of the Appellant's Kurdish  ethnicity
    in assessing the risk of persecution.

Conversion

 3. In summary, the Appellant was saying that he finds it difficult to  say
    whether he has converted.  He believes in Jesus and  is  happy  amongst
    Christians and at the Church.  He is not a practising Muslim.  In  Iran
    he would continue to believe  in  Jesus  and  would  want  to  continue
    attending Church and learning about Christianity even though  he  knows
    it would be risky.  He did not rely on his attendance at Church earlier
    and had not gone through a conversion process.  The evidence in support
    of his claim y goes back over a period from 2012 to 2018 from a variety
    of individuals who identified him as a regular attender and participant
    in the Church and community activities.

 4. The Judge found [44]:

         "He is not a convert and has not been baptised."

 5. The Judge rejected some of the written evidence as the  Appellant  does
    not claim to have evangelised or proselytised and has not  attended  an
    Evangelical Church, but a Baptist Church.  The Judge finds at [45]:

         "45. ... that the Appellant's lack of conversion means he will  not
             be considered an apostate.  Not being an active Muslim  is  in
             itself not a risk factor on return.  I  find  that  having  an
             interest in the Christian religion since 2012, with a view  to
             considering himself to be a Christian, but without  indicating
             that he intends to be baptised at any stage does not establish
             a genuine interest nor conversion to  another  faith.   Having
             taken into  account  his  own  description  of  his  religious
             interest and the many letters of  support,  I  find  that  his
             commitment to attending at the church in the UK  as  described
             by him is more to do with the community and friendship that it
             has shown him in the UK rather  than  to  be  about  genuinely
             changing his  religion.   I  seriously  doubt  that  he  would
             continue to attend church in Iran.  I do not find that he  can
             be considered or would be considered a  Christian  convert  in
             Iran."

 6. In summary, Mr Bramble submits that the Judge has  applied  a  holistic
    approach and has not imported into the  assessment  of  his  faith  the
    concern she had in relation to his ethnicity and the problems that  may
    flow from that.

 7. Ms Mottershaw submits that it is not appropriate to peer into someone's
    sole.  There was important evidence from the Church members and  it  is
    unclear  why  the  Judge  has  rejected  his  account.   The  issue  is
    perception.

 8. I agree with Mr Bramble that the Judge had made findings  available  to
    her on the evidence that the Appellant had not converted  and  had  not
    shown a genuine interest in Christianity, but was  more  interested  in
    the community support and friendship that was  available  by  attending
    church.  She was entitled to say  "I  seriously  doubt  that  he  would
    continue to attend church in Iran".  She was  entitled  to  reject  the
    various views of those who had filed letters of support for the reasons
    she gave.  She did not import her views on  ethnicity  into  the  faith
    claim.

Ethnicity

 9. In relation to the  Appellant's  ethnicity,  the  Judge  summarises  HB
    (Kurds) Iran CG [2018] UKUT 00430 (IAC) stating that:

         "30. ... HB makes it clear that the mere fact of being  of  Kurdish
             ethnicity with  or  without  a  valid  passport  and  even  if
             combined  with  illegal  exit  does  not  create  a  risk   of
             persecution or a breach of Article 3.  It  is  a  risk  factor
             where it is combined with other factors  which  may  create  a
             real risk  of  persecution  or  Article  3  ill-treatment.   A
             relevant risk factor in this appeal would  be  involvement  in
             Kurdish political groups or activity, even if the  expressions
             are peaceful dissent, speaking out about  Kurdish  rights,  or
             organised activity in support of Kurds.  This can be low level
             political activity.

         31.   The  assessment  of  risk  involves  an  assessment  of   the
             likelihood of such activities being discovered by the  Iranian
             authorities and  the  nature  of  the  activity  and  material
             available and how that is likely to be regarded and viewed  by
             the Iranian authorities."

10. The Judge extracts the headnote from BA  (demonstrators  in  Britain  -
    risk on return) Iran CG [2011] UKUT 38.   The Judge notes the  evidence
    of the Appellant's attendance at a limited number of  political  events
    and his use of social media showing him at those events  which  support
    Kurdish rights outside the Iranian Embassy during which he was  holding
    a placard and chanting and where there  was  local  Iranian  TV  taking
    coverage.  The Judge noted at [36] the background information about the
    Iranian  government's  crackdown  on  online  freedom   of   expression
    intensifying.

11. The Judge summarised the evidence at [37] as meaning:

         "that it can be gleaned that not all  political  activity  will  be
         under surveillance  and  merely  participating  in  some  political
         action abroad is insufficient to place a person at risk  on  return
         of persecution or ill-treatment".

12. The Judge made the following finding at [38]:

         "38. I find that over a number of recent years that  the  Appellant
             has participated in  no  more  than  5  demonstrations  and  4
             political meetings.  I find that he has been a member  of  the
             crowd in all events that he has attended.  He is not prominent
             on the photographs that he has produced as he is one of  many.
             He is not a regular participant in demonstrations.  He has  no
             role or membership to any political organisation or party.   I
             find that his political profile is extremely  low.   There  is
             little evidence that when he has been a participant that those
             events have attached any great media attention in  the  UK  or
             Iran.  I find that the Appellant has not demonstrated that any
             pictures of  himself  have  or  are  likely  to  come  to  the
             attention of the Iranian authorities.  I find  that  there  is
             little reason as to why he came  under  scrutiny  upon  return
             since he is not a university  student,  he  had  no  political
             profile before he left Iran, I have not accepted that he is at
             risk due to his father's background nor the  account  he  gave
             about being pursued in Iran, the length of time  that  he  has
             been in the  UK  has  not  been  demonstrated  to  lead  to  a
             heightened risk and his illegal  exit  is  not  a  great  risk
             factor."

13. Ms Mottershaw's submission  is  that  the  Judge  materially  erred  in
    thinking that his ethnicity had to  be  linked  to  something  else  to
    create heightened suspicion.  He should  not  have  to  lie  about  his
    internet activity or political activity here. As it is accepted he  had
    attended demonstrations and there was internet activity, because of the
    heightened scrutiny,  these  factors  would  come  out  and  there  was
    therefore a real risk of harm.

14. Mr Bramble submitted that there was a  thorough  consideration  of  the
    facts and the Judge relied on the relevant background evidence and case
    law.

15. I agree with Ms Mottershaw that the Judge  has  misapplied  HB  and  in
    particular headnote (7) which states:

         "Kurds involved in Kurdish political groups or activity are at risk
         of arrest, prolonged detention and physical abuse  by  the  Iranian
         authorities. Even Kurds expressing peaceful dissent  or  who  speak
         out about Kurdish rights also face a real risk  of  persecution  or
         Article 3 ill-treatment".

16. His ethnicity will raise the concerns of the Iranian authorities.  They
    will then be reasonably likely to apply  a  higher  level  of  scrutiny
    toward the Appellant. He should  not  be  required  to  lie  about  his
    activities here. There is no delineation  as  to  where  the  political
    activity occurred or what level is required.

17. In those circumstances, I am satisfied that the Judge materially  erred
    in law on the basis of the Appellant's ethnicity.

Decision on further progress of the appeal

18. Ms Mottershaw submitted I should set the matter aside and remit it.  Mr
    Bramble submitted that I could retain the matter in the Upper  Tribunal
    as there was no fact-finding issue.  I have all the information.

19. I agree with Mr Bramble.  It is not necessary for me to  reconvene  the
    hearing or remit it.  I have the relevant evidence and simply  have  to
    remake the decision.  The Appellant  has  attended  demonstrations  and
    been active on the internet in support of Kurdish issues. He should not
    be required to lie about that on return.  Due  to  his  ethnicity  upon
    return, he will be questioned by the  authorities  about  his  activity
    here, and upon him revealing what he has done, there is a real risk  he
    will be arrested, subjected to a prolonged  detention,  and  physically
    abused by the Iranian authorities.

Notice of Decision

20. I am satisfied the Judge made a material error of law.

21. I set aside the decision.

22. I remake the decision by allowing the Appellant's appeal.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saffer
23 May 2019



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saffer
23 May 2019
