
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
PA/12119/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                     |         Decision & Reasons           |
|                                      |Promulgated                           |
|On 9th October 2017                   |         On 18th October 2017         |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR

                                   Between

                                     id
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms H Spencer-Bolton, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is the appellant's appeal against the decision of Judge Smith  and
    Judge Shimmin made following a hearing at  Bradford  on  27th  February
    2017.

Background

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Guinea born on 25th September  1993.   He
    left Guinea in 2014 and travelled to Mali before going on to Calais  in
    France.  He claims to have arrived in the UK  on  8th  April  2016  and
    claimed asylum on 27th April 2016.

 3. His partner is also a national of Guinea.  She was forced, at  the  age
    of 16, to marry a man of 46 who already  had  two  wives  and  was  her
    deceased sister's husband.  She was repeatedly raped and  assaulted  by
    him and her father threatened to kill her if she left him.  She arrived
    in the UK on 22nd November 2011 and claimed asylum on 1st May 2012.  On
    4th December 2012 she was granted asylum and leave to remain in the  UK
    for five years.

 4. At the time of the hearing, his partner was pregnant  with  his  second
    child.  She also has a son, who arrived with her in the UK, who is  her
    husband's child. The couple, who were childhood friends, were  reunited
    in Calais in August 2015, when Ms F visited the appellant there, and C,
    their first child was born on 18th May 2016.

 5. The panel accepted the evidence almost in its entirety.   At  paragraph
    51 of the determination they said that they found Ms  F  to  be  wholly
    credible.

 6. The appellant claimed that he would be at risk  on  return  because  he
    would be targeted by his partner's husband and father  because  of  his
    relationship with her.  The panel was satisfied that when the appellant
    expressed an interest in seeing  her,  he  was  threatened  with  being
    beaten to death because he was perceived by her  husband  to  have  had
    sexual relations with her and to have taken her virginity.

 7. The panel had some concerns about the appellant's evidence in  relation
    to his flight from Guinea and counted it against him that  he  did  not
    claim asylum in France.  However, at paragraph 61 they wrote:

         "61.  Weighing  all  the  evidence  for  what  it  is  worth,   and
             considering it cumulatively in the light of the challenges  to
             it by the respondent we find that the appellant has proved  to
             the required standard of reasonable likelihood that the  facts
             he alleges are true."

 8. The panel concluded however that the appellant's fear of his  partner's
    husband and father did not bring  him  within  the  protection  of  the
    Refugee Convention and in any event, whilst  they  were  not  satisfied
    that there was a sufficiency of protection for them in Guinea, they did
    believe that he could reasonably relocate to an  area  of  the  country
    where the family had no connections with the  police  or  the  security
    services.

 9. On that basis they dismissed the asylum appeal.

10. The panel then went on to consider the best interests of the  children,
    both the appellant's stepson and his own child and  they  had  specific
    regard to Sections 117A and 117B of the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002.

11. The appellant's partner has a grant of refugee status in the  UK  until
    December 2017 and the panel said it would not be reasonable  to  expect
    her and the children to  accompany  the  appellant  if  he  was  to  be
    removed.

12. They considered whether the relationship was subsisting  prior  to  the
    appellant's entry into the UK and said that whilst they  accepted  that
    he had had a friendship with her in the past, he  had  had  no  contact
    with her for some time until she visited him in Calais and they decided
    that there was no subsisting relationship of  any  substance  prior  to
    April 2016.

13. At paragraph 89 the panel said:

         "C is the appellant's natural child.  We accept that he has  formed
         a bond with his father and the appellant shares equally with  Ms  F
         in C's upbringing.  C is very young, aged under one year  old,  and
         if the appellant was to be removed his emotional needs would not be
         substantially affected because C is too young to  really  recognise
         his father."

14. However, they found that the relationship with M, the older  child  was
    stronger than that which M has with his biological father.  It  was  in
    the best interests of the children to have secure loving parents living
    under the same roof, and they also noted that  Ms  F  had  very  little
    family support in the UK and bringing  up  three  children  as  a  lone
    parent would be challenging for her.

15. Moreover the panel accepted that if the appellant was  removed  contact
    between him and C and his soon to be born child and  with  Ms  F  would
    effectively break down.  Ms F did  not  have  the  financial  means  to
    travel to Guinea and would be in danger if she visited there.  At best,
    if contact was to be maintained, it would be  by  means  of  telephone,
    video calls and letters and whilst M might appreciate such  contact  it
    would have no relevance to C.

16. Nevertheless the panel was not  satisfied  that  there  would  be  very
    significant obstacles to the appellant's integration  into  Guinea  and
    having carried  out  a  "balance  sheet  exercise"  they  came  to  the
    conclusion that the appellant had not satisfied them on his  Article  8
    claim, and they dismissed the appeal.

The Grounds of Application

17. The appellant sought permission to  appeal  on  the  grounds  that  the
    judges  had  failed  to  apply  the  appropriate  test  of   compelling
    circumstances when assessing the appellant's  Article  8  claim.   They
    accepted  that  the  contact  between  him  and  his   children   would
    effectively break down but failed  to  consider  the  severity  of  the
    interference with family life when conducting the  balancing  exercise.
    The effect of the decision would  effectively  extinguish  family  life
    rather than merely interfere with it.

18. It was also argued that the judges had failed to  properly  assess  the
    evidence about the length of the relationship.

19. Permission to appeal was initially refused by Judge Pedro but, upon re-
    application, granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede who  said  that  it
    was arguable that the panel's finding as to  the  commencement  of  the
    appellant's relationship with his partner was inadequately reasoned and
    that the findings on Section 117B were incomplete.

Consideration of whether there is a material error of law

20. I am satisfied that the judges have erred for the following reasons.

21. First, the judges said in terms both that they accepted the appellant's
    partner's evidence in its entirety and that the core of the appellant's
    evidence in relation to what happened to him in Guinea was true.

22. It was their evidence that the couple had been friends since 2008  and,
    because the appellant  knew  of  Ms  F's  difficult  circumstances,  he
    assisted her mother in arranging for her escape and sold his  motorbike
    to provide her with funds.  After she left he  was  threatened  by  her
    husband who believed that they had had a sexual relationship.  When  he
    arrived in Calais  he  managed  to  obtain  her  telephone  number  and
    contacted her and asked her to meet him there.  They slept together and
    she became pregnant.

23. As Mr Diwnycz very frankly acknowledged, there  is  a  tension  between
    those  positive  findings  and  the  panel's   conclusions   that   the
    relationship only really began in April 2016, which remains unresolved.



24. It is difficult to see how the panel can reasonably have concluded that
    the relationship between this couple commenced in April 2016, when  the
    appellant finally arrived in the  UK,  having  accepted  not  only  his
    evidence of historic friendship but also  that  they  had  conceived  a
    child  together  some  eight  months  earlier.  The   panel   therefore
    approached their consideration of Article 8 through an incorrect prism.

25. Second, it is unclear whether the panel had in mind  the  correct  test
    when deciding whether the  appeal  ought  to  be  allowed  outside  the
    Immigration Rules, namely whether there  are  compelling  circumstances
    such as to require a grant of leave.

26. The decision, so far as Article 8 is concerned, is set aside.  There is
    no challenge to the asylum decision.

27. It was agreed between the parties that the decision could be re-made on
    the basis of the present  evidence  without  the  need  for  a  further
    hearing.

Findings and Conclusions

28. At the date of the respondent's decision, and the date of  the  hearing
    before  the  original  judges,  the  appellant  could  not   meet   the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules principally because  he  did  not
    meet  the  definition  of  partner  in  relation   to   the   financial
    requirements, in relation to paragraph EX.1  and  in  relation  to  the
    Rules governing leave to remain as the partner of a refugee.

29. All require the couple to have been living together in  a  relationship
    akin to a marriage or a  civil  partnership  for  two  years  or  more.
    Whilst  the  relationship  between  the  couple  in  this  case  is  of
    longstanding, according to their own evidence, it only became a  sexual
    relationship in August 2015  and  therefore  was  not  one  akin  to  a
    marriage or civil partnership until that date.

30. However, I am required to consider matters as they are as at  the  date
    of this hearing. As at today's date, the relationship has subsisted for
    the required length of time.

31. The requirements set out in EX.1(b),  are  that  the  applicant  has  a
    genuine and subsisting relationship with a partner who is in the UK and
    is a British citizen, settled in the UK or in the UK with refugee leave
    or humanitarian protection, and there are insurmountable  obstacles  to
    family life with that partner continuing outside the UK.

32. The fact of the partner's refugee status, absent any other evidence, is
    itself strongly indicative of the test being  satisfied.   No  evidence
    has been adduced by the respondent, or argument made, to establish that
    the partner could return to Guinea whilst she has refugee leave here.

33. As the original panel acknowledged, the effect of this  decision  would
    be a complete severance of the relationship between the appellant,  his
    partner and his children.

34. I am of course conscious that the appellant's partner's leave is  about
    to be reviewed because the initial five year grant is about to come  to
    an end.

35. At  that  point  the  respondent  will  no  doubt  decide  whether  the
    appellant's partner remains at risk and whether protection to  her  and
    the children ought to be extended.  If she decides not to do so, on the
    basis that it would be safe, in her present  circumstances  to  return,
    the argument that there would be  insurmountable  obstacles  to  family
    life with the appellant continuing in Guinea would fall away,  and  the
    requirements of paragraph EX(1) would not be met.

36. If the family could reasonably return to  Guinea  as  a  unit  at  that
    point, there would be no compelling reason why a grant of leave outside
    the Rules should be made.

Notice of Decision

37. The original judge has erred in law.  The decision is set aside.  It is
    re-made as follows.  The appellant's appeal is allowed.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed


[pic]

Deputy           Upper           Tribunal            Judge            Taylor
          Date 15 October 2017
