
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12865/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Cardiff CJC                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 20 June 2019                      |On 23 July 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

                                   Don [H]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Miss S Rushforth, Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

1.   The appellant, a national of Sri Lanka,  has  permission  to  challenge
    the decision of Judge Roblin of the First-tier Tribunal (FtT) sent on 1
    March 2019 dismissing his appeal  against  the  decision  made  by  the
    respondent on 23 October refusing his protection claim.

2.    The  appellant's  principal  ground  contended  that  the  judge   was
    procedurally unfair in refusing the adjournment  request.   His  wife's
    letter setting out his grounds of appeal states that:

         "I believe the Tribunal should have  notified  us  that  they  have
         refused my adjournment request and took away the  opportunity  [of]
         at  least  (appellant's  wife)  participate  as  a  witness  to  my
         husband's case.  Also my husband could have tried to participate to
         this hearing with the GP's supervision if we knew this."


3.   The appellant's  grounds  also  took  issue  with  the  judge  counting
    against his inconsistency in the evidence he had given at his screening
    interview as opposed to  elsewhere  when  he  had  explained  that  the
    interview transcript was inaccurate.

4.   Other grounds advanced by the appellant took  issue  with  the  judge's
    refusal to accept that he was a journalist; the significance the  judge
    attached to the fact that the appellant  left  Sri  Lanka  on  his  own
    passport; and the judge's reliance on a  mistranslation  of  "hall"  as
    "hole in the ground."

5.   At the hearing the appellant attended as  a  litigant  in  person.   He
    said he had  understood  there  would  be  an  interpreter  present.  I
    informed him one had not been booked. He said his English was not  good
    but he wished to proceed.  I said that I would  ensure  that  the  Home
    Office Presenting Officer spoke slowly and that if he had  any  concern
    about understanding what was being said, he should inform me  at  once.
    In order to assist him, I  asked  Miss  Rushforth  to  go  first.   She
    submitted that the appellant had failed to attend an appeal hearing  on
    two separate occasions and the judge's reasons for refusing to  adjourn
    were entirely  reasonable.   She  argued  that  the  appellant's  other
    grounds amounted to mere disagreements with  the  judge's  findings  of
    fact.

6.   The appellant said that he wished to apologise for his absence  at  the
    hearing before the FtT.  He had produced medical  evidence  in  advance
    and if need be could produce more.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  did  not
    respond to his e-mail of 18 February.  If they had he could  have  sent
    his wife.  As regards other points raised in his  written  grounds,  he
    needed another chance to explain his case and to have  an  interpreter.
    Because of his English  he  did  not  want  to  take  risks  of  giving
    incorrect information.  He has been experiencing a lot of problems with
    his children and with threats for his life.

My Decision

7.   In order to address the issue of whether it was procedurally unfair  of
    the judge to refuse to adjourn it is first of all necessary to set  out
    what the judge said about this.

8.   At paragraphs 4 - 6, under the sub-heading  "Preliminary  Issues",  the
    judge stated:

         "Preliminary Issues


         4.   I heard initial representations from Ms Wallace as to why  the
             hearing should proceed in the absence of the  Appellant  which
             were as follows.  On the 6th December 2018 there  had  been  a
             previous adjournment.  The  Appellant  had  not  attended  the
             hearing and a decision was made to proceed in his absence.   A
             late request to adjourn was received  supported  by  a  letter
             from Brecon Centre of Health dated 27 th November 2018 and  an
             e mail from the Appellant s wife dated  5  th  December  2018.
             The court was reconvened and  the  hearing  reopened  and  the
             Adjournment granted.


         5.   On the 17 th  March  2016  the  Appellant  did  not  attend  a
             previous hearing in relation to his immigration  appeal.   The
             Appeal was refused in his absence.  The Appellant  was  served
             with notice of  today's  hearing.   It  was  submitted  by  Ms
             Wallace that there was no reason the appeal could not proceed.
              The Appeal was listed for hearing at  10  and  there  was  no
             attendance by the Appellant  when  the  hearing  commenced  at
             10.50.


         6.   Following the conclusion of the hearing at 11.10 I was  handed
             at 1.45 a partial medical  report  dated  15th  February  from
             Brecon Centre for Health and an e mail from  the  Appellant  s
             wife dated  15th  February  2019,  received  by  the  tribunal
             service at 10.39 on the  19th  February  2019,  requesting  an
             adjournment."


9.   At paragraph 26 the judge stated:

         "Evidence and Findings


         26.  I began the hearing by identifying Ms Wallace  the  presenting
             officer for the Respondent.  The Appellant did not attend  the
             hearing.  Having heard  submissions  from  Ms  Wallace  as  to
             whether the hearing should  proceed  in  the  absence  of  the
             Appellant , which I accept , and having checked the  file  and
             noting the papers were  served  and  that  the  Appellant  had
             notice I was satisfied I was empowered to determine the appeal
             in the absence of the Appellant.


10.  At paragraphs 46-48 the judge concluded:

         "46. The appellant's hearing was previously listed  on  6  December
             2018 and adjourned on that occasion.  Following the conclusion
             of the hearing a letter  from  the  appellant's  GP  dated  27
             November 2018  was  received  indicating  that  the  appellant
             suffers from depression and is very  stressed  and  unable  to
             attend  the  hearing.   The  report  was  accompanied   by   a
             supporting email from the appellant's  wife.   The  Court  was
             therefore reconvened and the appeal was adjourned in light  of
             the further evidence.


         47.  Similarly, the hearing on 19 February proceeded in the absence
             of the appellant.  Following the conclusion of the hearing  at
             11.10 an incomplete letter from the appellant's  GP  dated  15
             February 2019 was produced together with  an  email  from  the
             appellant's  wife.   Both  purported  to  request  a   further
             postponement of the  Court  hearing  due  to  the  appellant's
             mental health.


         48.  This was the second occasion  that  the  appellant  after  the
             allocated hearing time of 10 o'clock, requested an adjournment
             on the basis of his depression/mental health.  As  the  letter
             was not drawn to my attention until 1.45 I did  not  have  the
             opportunity to consider the same  during  the  course  of  the
             hearing.  I was satisfied the appellant, as an e mail was sent
             to the Tribunal on  the  day  of  the  hearing,  knew  of  the
             hearing, and had failed to make the application for a  further
             adjournment  in  advance  of  the  hearing  when  he  had  the
             opportunity to do  so.   This  was  the  second  occasion  the
             Appellant on the day of the hearing requested an  adjournment.
             Another adjournment would cause further delay and would not be
             in the interests of justice."


11.  The sequence of events is therefore as follows.  On 17 March  2016  the
    appellant did  not  attend  a  previous  hearing  in  relation  to  his
    immigration appeal.  The appellant's asylum appeal was originally fixed
    for Thursday 6 December 2018.  The appellant did not attend.  The judge
    concerned decided to  proceed  in  the  appellant's  absence  but  upon
    receipt of a late request to adjourn from the appellant (in the form of
    a letter from Brecon Health Centre dated 27 November 2018 and an e-mail
    from the appellant  and  his  wife  sent  on  5  December),  the  judge
    reconvened and granted the adjournment.  The hearing was  re-fixed  for
    19 February 2019.  On 15 February the appellant's wife sent an email to
    the Tribunal saying the appellant was too  anxious  to  attend.  On  18
    February  the  Tribunal  wrote  to  the  appellant  requesting  further
    information. On the same day the appellant sent the letter from  Brecon
    Centre for Health dated 15 February requesting an  adjournment  due  to
    the appellant's mental health. On the 19th February there  was  (again)
    no attendance by or on behalf of the appellant.   The  judge  commenced
    the hearing at 10.50.  At 1.45 he was handed the medical  letter  dated
    15 February 2019 from Brecon Centre for Health and an e-mail  from  the
    appellant's wife, also dated 15 February 2019. He stated that they were
    received by the Tribunal Service at 10.39 on 19 February but  the  date
    of the email is 15th February.  Both the email of 15th February and the
    letter from the Brecon  Centre  for  Health  had  requested  a  further
    postponement due to the appellant's mental health. Although  there  had
    been a request made by the Tribunal administration on 18th February for
    more information, that does not appear to have been made known  to  the
    judge, nor the fact that the appellant had sent  a  response  enclosing
    the Brecon Health Centre letter on the 18th.

12.  In my judgment the judge's decision to proceed  was  flawed.    Central
    to the judge's reasoning was the belief that on their own  account  the
    appellant and his wife must have known well before the hearing that  he
    was not intending to appear, yet they  did  not  contact  the  Tribunal
    until after 10 a.m. on 19 February  (the  day  of  the  hearing).   The
    letter from the doctor dated 15 February notes that the appellant  "has
    a new rescheduled court hearing coming up next week and he  is  feeling
    too anxious to attend it."  However, on the judge's own findings -  and
    it is confirmed by the copy of the e-mail  produced  by  the  appellant
    before me - the e-mail sent by his wife was sent on 15 February 2019.

13.  There is no mention of this email by Judge Roblin but according to  the
    appellant he received a letter from the Tribunal on  18  February  (the
    day before the hearing) requesting further information.  In response he
    e-mailed on the same day attaching the medical letter dated 15 February
    2019 from Brecon Centre for Health.

14.  Whilst the appellant and/or his wife should have phoned  early  in  the
    morning of the 19th  to ascertain whether the case would  be  adjourned
    or not, it cannot be excluded, given the contents of the medical report
    and the fact that they had previously obtained an  adjournment  on  the
    basis of  similar  medical  evidence,  also  late-submitted,  that  the
    appellant's explanation is plausible, namely that  he  assumed  that  a
    further adjournment had been or would be granted.  A further  factor  I
    take into account when assessing procedural fairness is  that,  on  the
    basis of the medical letter, the appellant is a vulnerable witness  and
    some allowance as to be afforded to his explanation for not attending.

15.  Whilst therefore the appellant's conduct  in  relation  to  adjournment
    requests is to be criticised, the judge's analysis failed  to  consider
    the position from the perspective of the appellant who had sent  an  e-
    mail requesting an adjournment four days in advance and  up  until  the
    day of the hearing had only received a request for further  information
    which he had provided.

16.   Accordingly,  whilst  the  fault  lies  in  part  with  the   Tribunal
    administration in not ensuring the judge had all correspondence  before
    him, the result has been that there was procedural  unfairness  in  the
    judge proceeding with the appeal in the absence of the appellant.

17.  The case is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.

18.  For the avoidance of doubt, in case the appellant should  identify  any
    medical difficulty in the way of attending for  the  next  hearing.   I
    direct that by the end of  July  2019  he  produce  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal with a copy to the Home Office a written statement setting out
    in detail any points he wishes to make in support of  his  appeal.   If
    the  appellant  fails  again  to  attend,  for  whatever  reason,  that
    statement will stand in lieu of his oral testimony and the  judge  will
    be able to proceed in his absence.

19.  To summarise:

    The decision of the FtT judge is set aside for material error of law.

    The case is remitted to the FtT (not before Judge Roblin).

No anonymity direction is made.

First-tier Tribunal listing  is  instructed  to  ensure  an  interpreter  is
    booked.


Signed                                  Date: 9 July 2019

[pic]
Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
