
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12294/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13 February 2018                          |On 23 February 2018           |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE APPLEYARD


                                   Between

                                    [a m]
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms L Brakaj, Legal Representative.
For the Respondent:    Mr K Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Iraq who appealed against the decision of
    the Respondent refusing him international protection. He  appealed  and
    following a hearing Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Batiste,  in  a
    decision promulgated on 30  October  2017,  dismissed  the  Appellant's
    appeal.

 2. The Appellant sought permission to appeal which was granted by Judge of
    the First-tier Tribunal Scott-Baker in a  decision  dated  21  December
    2017. Her reasons for so doing were: -

         "1.  The Appellant seeks permission to appeal against a decision of
             the First-tier Tribunal (Judge  Batiste)  who,  by  notice  of
             decision and reasons promulgated on 30 October 2017  dismissed
             the Appellant's appeal against the decision of the  respondent
             of 14 October 2016 refusing to grant asylum  and  humanitarian
             protection under paragraph 336 of HC 395 (as amended).

         2.   The grounds assert that there the First  Tier  Tribunal  Judge
             had made erred in law as the appellant  could  not  return  to
             Baghdad as he originated from Mosul and had lost contact  with
             his family, he had no CSID or  any  means  of  obtaining  one.
             Reliance was placed on AA (Article 15(c) Iraq) CG  UKUT  00544
             IAC and BA (Return to Baghdad)  Iraq  CG  [2017]  00018  which
             showed that it was  relevant  to  return  as  to  whether  the
             appellant had a CSID or any other form of identity.

         3.   The judge records at [15] that the appellant originated from a
             small village near Mosul and feared Daesh. At  [16]  he  noted
             that the Appellant had never been to the IKR.

         4.   At [22] the judge accepted that the  appellant  could  not  be
             returned to Baghdad. At [23] to [27] the judge considered  the
             issue of return to the IKR, noting that the appellant  was  an
             ethnic Kurd. At [24] he found that  the  appellant  could  fly
             from Baghdad to Erbil and found at [25] that he would be  able
             to work there, although it was clear from the findings at [23]
             that he was aware of the visa restrictions to  those  who  did
             not originate from the area.

         5.   It is considered that these findings of fact  arguably  amount
             to  an  error  of  law  and  further  that  the  decision   is
             inadequately reasoned  as  the  judge  gives  no  reasons  for
             explaining how the appellant could be returned to Baghdad  for
             onward travel to Erbil having found at [22] that  he  did  not
             hold the requisite identity documents.

         6.   Permission is granted."

 3. Thus, the appeal came before me today.

 4. At the outset Mr Diwnycz accepted  that  there  was  a  material  error
    within this decision as prior to its promulgation direct  international
    flights to Erbil were suspended. The parties agreed therefore that  the
    factual matrix and all the findings of the Judge  within  the  decision
    are to be preserved but the appeal is to be remitted to the  First-tier
    Tribunal to consider the single issue of risk  on  return  to  Iraq  in
    terms of relocation only, given the finding that this Appellant  cannot
    be returned to Baghdad.

 5. That is an analysis that I share. Whilst I did  consider  dealing  with
    the matter today I was not provided with a suitable interpreter for the
    Appellant and considered this not to be the way forward.

Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making
of an error on a point of law. The  facts  found,  as  detailed  above,  are
preserved except for any relating to risk on return to Erbil. The appeal  is
remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be  dealt  with  afresh  pursuant  to
Section 12(2)(b)(i) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement  Act  2007  and
Practice Direction 7(b) before any Judge aside from Judge Batiste.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 19 February 2018.

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard

