
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12399/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 14th June 2019                    |On 27 June 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ZUCKER


                                   Between

                                BB (Albania)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Cleghorn, Counsel instructed by Halliday Reeves
Law Firm
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Albania whose date of birth  is  recorded
    as  25th  September  1994.   She  made  application  for  international
    protection on the basis of her being a victim of domestic  violence  in
    her home country.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008
Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

 2. The factual matrix in this case is not  in  dispute.   She  was  in  an
    abusive relationship.  She did not marry the man chosen for her by  her
    father but rather became pregnant consequent upon her relationship with
    another man.

 3. Her application  for  international  protection  was  refused  and  she
    appealed.  Her appeal was heard by Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Cope.  He dismissed the appeal.  Not content  with  that  decision,  by
    Notice  dated  5th  March  2019  the  Appellant  made  application  for
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal and on 26th March 2019 Judge
    Loke granted it.

 4. The grounds in short submitted that the judge placed too much weight on
    the case of DM (sufficiency of protection -  PSG  -  women  -  domestic
    violence) Albania CG [2004] UKIAT 00059, that case being  some  fifteen
    years old, and more particularly by giving weight to a  country  report
    which had  not  been  included  in  the  bundles  of  either  party  in
    circumstances in which in particular the Appellant's representative had
    not been able to make submissions.

 5. It was not necessary for me to determine whether or not there had  been
    an error of law in this matter because the parties  were  in  agreement
    that there had on the  basis  of  the  inherent  unfairness  which  the
    Appellant faced in not being able to make submissions when so  much  of
    that report was relied upon by Judge Cope.

 6. At the commencement of the proceedings before me once the error of  law
    had been acknowledged, Ms Cleghorn sought to persuade me that this case
    now in the Upper Tribunal should be resolved by determining whether  or
    not  the   Appellant   was   entitled   to   humanitarian   protection,
    notwithstanding the fact that that  was  not  a  point  raised  in  the
    grounds which she drafted.

 7. The first ground of appeal makes reference to DM leads  the  reader  to
    the view that what was complained about was whether or not there was  a
    "convention reason". However, that was  completely  irrelevant  because
    there had already been a concession by the Secretary of State  on  that
    point in the reasons for refusal letter.

 8. I am very grateful to Mr McVeety in this case for accepting that in the
    remaking of the decision the sole issue was whether or not it would  be
    unduly harsh for this Appellant internally to relocate within  Albania.
    For the avoidance of doubt the concession as to whether  or  not  there
    was a Convention reason was not in respect of all  women  from  Albania
    but women who had been victims, such as  this  appellant,  of  domestic
    violence.

 9.  By  Article  8  of  the  Qualification  for  International  Protection
    (Directive 2011/95/EU):-

      1)  As  part  of  the  assessment  of  the  application  for  internal
         protection member states may determine that an applicant is not  in
         need of international protection if in a part  of  the  country  of
         origin there is no well-founded fear of being persecuted or no real
         risk of suffering serious harm and the applicant can reasonably  be
         expected to stay in that part of the country.


      2) In examining whether  a  part  of  the  country  of  origin  is  in
         accordance with paragraph 1, member states shall  at  the  time  of
         taking the decision on the application have regard to  the  general
         circumstances prevailing in that part of the  country  and  to  the
         personal circumstances of the applicant.


      3) Paragraph (1) may  apply  notwithstanding  technical  obstacles  to
         return to the country of origin.


10. The leading case of Januzi [2006] UKHL 5,  para  21  is  helpful.  Lord
    Bingham said: -

         "The decision-maker, taking account of all  relevant  circumstances
         pertaining to the claimant and his country of origin,  must  decide
         whether it is reasonable to expect  the  claimant  to  relocate  or
         whether it would be unduly harsh to expect him to  do  so  ...  The
         decision-maker must do his best to decide, on such material  as  is
         available, where on the spectrum the particular case falls ...  All
         must depend on a fair assessment of the relevant facts".

11. In AH (Sudan) [2007] UKHL 49 at paragraph 20 Baroness Hale  cited  with
    approval the UNHCR view that the test was whether the individual  would
    be able to live a "relatively  normal  life  without  undue  hardship",
    itself a formulation approved in Januzi.

12. Although complaint is made about the reference of  Judge  Cope  to  the
    particular report, neither party before me in this appeal in the  Upper
    Tribunal referred to it or sought to rely on it.  Mr McVeety relied  on
    certain parts of the refusal letter, but more particularly  on  the  UK
    Home Office Country Policy and Information Note Albania: Women  fearing
    domestic abuse (December 2017) 3/01/2018.  At 2.5.3 it is of note  that
    in 2015: -

         "The People's Advocate of Albania stated that  women,  particularly
         those who may be vulnerable, such  as  divorced  women  and  single
         mothers ... faced inequality in  the  workplace,  and  barriers  in
         receiving the social  and  economic  benefits  to  which  they  are
         entitled"

    However, by reference to paragraph 2.5.4 Mr McVeety  pointed  out  that
    these women are entitled to receive state benefits and where  a  person
    has had their case reviewed by a court and a restraining order has been
    issued, then a victim  of  domestic  abuse  would  be  entitled  to  an
    additional sum.

13. Mr McVeety then took me to  paragraph  9.4.5.   Under  the  heading  of
    "State benefits" after making reference to 9.4  which  deals  with  the
    issue of employment in Albania in which at 9.4.3 it reads: -

         "The People's Advocate of Albania (which states that it defends the
         rights, freedoms and lawful interests of individuals from  unlawful
         and incorrect acts or omissions of public administration bodies  as
         well as third parties acting on its behalf. It has as  its  mission
         the prevention of potential conflicts between public administration
         and the individual) published a report in 2015 which stated 'Women,
         particularly divorced women and single mothers  ...  face  problems
         with their access to justice, inequality in  the  labor  relations,
         and barriers in receiving the social and economic benefits to which
         they are entitled'".

14. Finally, with respect to that report Mr McVeety referred  to  paragraph
    9.8 which, under the heading of "Children of Single Mothers" noted that
    such children are given priority in  school  registration  and  lessons
    though that is not particularly relevant on  the  facts  of  this  case
    since the Appellant's child is not yet 2 years of age.

15. I observe that Judge Cope found that it was not reasonable, indeed  not
    possible, to expect this Appellant to  return  to  her  home  area.  By
    consent that is a preserved finding.

16. It was common ground, that the area from which the Appellant hailed  in
    Albania was a "conservative" area in the north.

17. There are two country guidance cases to which I was referred: the first
    is TD and AD (Trafficked women) CG [2016] UKUT 00092 and the other  was
    the earlier case of AM and BM (Trafficked women) Albania CG [2010] UKUT
    80.  In respect of the case of AM and BM I was referred to a number  of
    paragraphs but particularly paragraphs: 154; 158; 171 and 186.

18. I remind myself that the cases are concerned largely with  trafficking.
    In this appeal it is not suggested that the Appellant  was  trafficked.
    The concern is that she may be found, or in any  event  would  have  to
    live under the worry and concern of being found, thereby being at  risk
    of serious harm and having also to live with the fear of harm coming to
    her  child  in  circumstances  in  which  she  would  be  significantly
    disadvantaged by the societal norms in Albania towards unmarried  women
    with child.

19. Although the Appellant is university educated, the evidence taken  from
    the interview which was  not  challenged  was  that  she  came  from  a
    relatively modest background.

20. The country guidance suggests that a young woman  with  a  child  would
    find it significantly more  difficult  to  achieve  reintegration  into
    Albanian society than would be the case in many other  countries.  Each
    case turns on its own facts.

21. What I have to have  regard  to  is  the  social  status  and  economic
    standing of the Appellant's family;  the  level  of  education  of  the
    Appellant and her family; her  state  of  health,  particularly  mental
    health in respect of which I am told, and it did not appear  to  be  in
    dispute, that she suffers  from  post-traumatic  stress  disorder;  the
    presence  of  an  illegitimate  child;  the  area  of  origin  of   the
    Appellant's family and her age.

22. Apart from the level of education of the Appellant herself which is  at
    university level, those factors all weigh  in  the  Appellant's  favour
    insofar as she seeks to succeed in this appeal.

23. The country guidance cases also, contrary to  the  submission  made  on
    behalf of the Secretary of State, do suggest that there is a real  risk
    that where someone relocates still they may be found, and even if it is
    the case that there is no  sufficient  evidence  that  the  Appellant's
    family are actively pursuing her, there is the real risk (supported  by
    the country guidance) that she would be seen and her  presence  in  the
    country would come to the attention  of  her  family  who,  as  I  have
    already observed, are from a conservative area and take the  view  that
    her conduct has dishonoured them with the risk that she might  then  be
    pursued.

24. So it is that she would, I find, be living in fear of harm not only  to
    herself but also to her child in circumstances in which  she  would  be
    disadvantaged in obtaining work, not least  because  she  has  a  young
    child to look after and no family network to look to for support, which
    is an important component of survival  in  Albania.   The  issue  of  a
    support network appears to be of  particular  significance  and  was  a
    matter which concerned the Upper Tribunal, particularly in the case  of
    TD and AD.

25. As the Courts have observed, resolving the issue as to whether  or  not
    it would be unduly harsh is not an  easy  task.   Ultimately  it  is  a
    finding of fact, but having regard  to  the  submissions,  the  country
    guidance cases and  the  background  material  to  which  I  have  been
    referred, and noting the very tender years of the baby, noting that the
    Appellant would return with little if  any  support,  I  find  that  it
    would, even having regard to the norms of Albania, be unduly  harsh  to
    expect this Appellant internally to relocate.

26. As that was the sole issue in this case, it follows that the  Appellant
    is to be  recognised  as  a  refugee.   The  question  of  humanitarian
    protection does not arise in this case and  necessarily  the  Appellant
    succeeds under Articles 3 and 8 of the ECHR.

Notice of Decision

The decision of Judge Cope is set aside having contained  a  material  error
of law.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is  remade  such  that  the
Appellant succeeds on refugee and human rights grounds.



Signed                              Date: 25 June 2019





Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Zucker
