
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12560/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 19 October 2018                            |On 08 November 2018           |


                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

                                  ahmad [d]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss G Patel, Counsel, instructed by Duncan Lewis &
Co
     Solicitors (Harrow Office)
For the Respondent:    Mr D Bates, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant, a national of Afghanistan, has permission  to  challenge
    the decision of Judge Foudy of the First-tier Tribunal (FtT) sent on  4
    July 2018 dismissing his  appeal  against  the  decision  made  by  the
    respondent on 15 November 2017 refusing his protection claim.

2.   The grounds contend that the judge erred in failing

    (1)  to consider material matters/evidence;


    (2)  to properly consider the expert evidence;


    (3)  to consider the country evidence; and


    (4)  to apply the country guidance case of AS (Afghanistan)  CG  [2018]
         UKUT 00118 to the appellant's circumstances.

3.   I heard helpful submissions from both representatives.

4.   I consider ground (1) no more than  a  disagreement  with  the  judge's
    findings of fact regarding the issue of whether the appellant had given
    a credible account of the Taliban writing to his father to tell him  to
    stop working for the US Forces and for the appellant  to  stop  dancing
    and to work as spies for the Taliban.

5.   Ground (2) take aim at the judge's finding at paragraph 53 that  no-one
    in Afghanistan would continue to expect the appellant to be  a  dancing
    boy as he was now over 20.  They seek to  argue  that  having  accepted
    that the appellant was a Bacha Brees (dancing boy) and that his  father
    may have been killed by the Taliban, the  judge  should  have  attached
    weight to the view expressed by  the  expert  Mr  Foxley  that  it  was
    plausible that someone in their early  to  mid-20s  could  be  seen  as
    having potential for Bacha Bazi and other  forms  of  sexually  abusive
    activity.  However, whilst stating that this scenario was plausible, Mr
    Foxley made clear that dancing boys are "released from their roles when
    they are 18 years old" (paragraph 34).

6.    The grounds separately contend that the judge misconstrued the  expert
    report on this issue because the expert did go on  to  state  that  the
    appellant's past history in bacha bazi activities might draw him to the
    attention of the Taliban or  other  groups  either  as  someone  to  be
    punished or exploited (paragraph 52).  However, the judge  clearly  had
    this aspect of the expert report in mind, stating at paragraph 27:

         "I also find it incredible that  he  would  be  targeted  in  Kabul
         either by Commander Assad or by anyone wishing to sexually  assault
         him because of his history of dancing.  Not only would that history
         of being a dancer be unknown in Kabul, but the expert was  mistaken
         in thinking that the Appellant is a victim of  sexual  abuse.   The
         Appellant emphatically states that he was not abused in his dancing
         years.  Mr Foxley has either misunderstood the Appellant's evidence
         in that regard or was misinformed of it.   Therefore,  Mr  Foxley's
         opinions on the likelihood of further abuse are not helpful as they
         are set against his belief that  the  Appellant  has  already  been
         sexually abused when he was not."

7.   Whilst the judge's focus in paragraph 27  is  on  internal  relocation,
    her assessment shows that she was clearly aware of Dr Foxley's opinions
    on risks to dancing boys after the age of 18.  In my judgement  it  was
    within the range of reasonable responses for the judge to have assessed
    that as the appellant had not as a dancing  boy  been  subject  to  any
    sexual abuse, that made it much less likely he would face  exploitation
    or harm upon return as a man in his early  20s.   In  this  regard  the
    judge was quite entitled to treat as a factor reducing the value of  Dr
    Foxley's report in the context of  this  appeal  that  the  latter  had
    assumed - wrongly - that the appellant's case  was  that  he  had  been
    sexually abused.  (see paragraph 35 of his  report:  "I  find  it  very
    plausible that forms of organised sexual abuse have  been  directed  at
    your client ...").

8.   To recapitulate,  I  do  not  consider  that  the  grounds  succeed  in
    impugning any of the judge's findings of fact regarding the appellant's
    particular circumstances.  In my judgment, with one possible caveat  to
    which I shall return below, the judge was entitled to conclude that the
    appellant would not face a real risk of persecution or serious harm  in
    his home area.

9.   Mr Bates did state in his submissions that  he  would  agree  with  the
    appellant's grounds that the judge was wrong to conclude the  appellant
    could safely return to his home area.  He cited the fact that the judge
    had accepted that the appellant's father may have been  killed  by  the
    Taliban.  However, it is clear from the judge's  findings  that  whilst
    she accepted the father may have been killed, she did not accept it had
    been for the reasons  claimed  by  the  appellant:  see  paragraph  22.
    Because I consider this was a finding open to the appellant, I disagree
    with Mr Bates' position (which was also Ms Patel's position  on  this).
    I have benefited from the submissions of the parties but in the end, it
    is for me to decide whether errors of law have  been  made.   The  only
    caveat I would  make  concerns  the  issue  of  possible  risk  to  the
    appellant arising from his past history as a dancing boy  and  that  is
    best dealt with in the context of in the analysis of the other  grounds
    which principally challenge the judge's findings on internal relocation
    to Kabul.

Internal Relocation

10.  If the appellant is not at risk in his home  area  then  the  issue  of
    internal relocation does  not  strictly  arise,  but  since  return  to
    Afghanistan would be via  Kabul  these  two  issues  cannot  be  wholly
    divorced and in case I  am  wrong  in  my  assessment  of  the  judge's
    treatment of risk in the home area, it is relevant that I  set  out  my
    analysis of her treatment of the internal relocation issue.

11.  Grounds 3 and 4 essentially argue that the judge  erred  in  concluding
    that the appellant could safely and reasonably relocate to Kabul.

12.  First of all, for reasons I have already given, the issue  of  internal
    relocation or more generally the possibility of  the  appellant  living
    safely and reasonably in Kabul, can only be  considered  on  the  basis
    that he is not someone who has been targeted by the  Taliban  or  other
    groups in his home area: that core aspect of his claim was not accepted
    by  the  judge  and  I  have  upheld  her  findings.   Hence  the  only
    characteristics of the appellant that stood to be considered in respect
    of the issue of relocation to live in Kabul are these intrinsic to him.
     In that regard it is not in dispute that he is young and that  he  has
    no physical or psychological health problems: He is also -  and  as  we
    have seen this was a fact found by  the  judge  -  someone  who  has  a
    history as a dancing boy. He also had a father who had been  killed  by
    the Taliban.

13.  Miss Patel submits that the judge failed to take into account that  the
    appellant's history as a dancing boy would put the  appellant  at  risk
    because he would be recognised in Kabul by powerful  persons  from  his
    area (who regularly attend functions where there are dancing boys)  and
    also, because he  is  of  Tajik  ethnicity,  he  will  more  easily  be
    identified and this aspect of his history known.  In  this  regard  she
    relies on the opinion of Dr Foxley especially as set out  in  paragraph
    80 where it was stated:

         "Stigma attached to his previous life could hamper his  ability  to
         develop a social life and find safe and  secure  accommodation  and
         employment whichever part of Afghanistan he returns to."

14.  Analysis of the submissions necessitates looking closely at  paragraphs
    26 and 27 of the judge's decision (the latter which I  cited  earlier).
    In paragraph 26 the judge stated that it was unlikely  the  appellant's
    background would be known in Kabul.  She also cited AS, noting that  it
    held that even a person of low-level interest to the Taliban would  not
    be at risk in Kabul.  She concluded, by reference  to  AS,  that  as  a
    single adult male in good health the appellant could relocate to  Kabul
    "even if he knew no-one there".  At paragraph 27 she then addressed the
    issue of whether the appellant's history as a dancing boy would put him
    at risk, finding that

    (1)  his history of being a dancer would not be known; and


    (2)  since the appellant had no history of being sexually  abused,  "Mr
         Foxley's opinions on  the  likelihood  of  further  abuse  are  not
         helpful".

15.  As regards (1), Miss  Patel  submitted  that  the  appellant  would  be
    identified in Kabul as a  former  dancing  boy,  especially  given  the
    proximity of the appellant's home area, Quarabagh, to  Kabul  (said  by
    the appellant to be 40-50 minutes by car, by the respondent one  hour).
    Given however, the great size of Kabul (and even  taking  into  account
    that the appellant is a Tajik) and given that the appellant was now  in
    his early 20s, I consider it was open to the judge  to  find  that  the
    appellant's history as a boy dancer would not be known.   I  note  that
    even Dr Foxley thought that returning  to  Kabul  would  "significantly
    reduce the risk that he might be specially targeted by insurgent groups
    or local village elders, commanders or  officials  ...".    As  regards
    (2), I consider the judge was entirely  right  to  regard  Dr  Foxley's
    error in thinking that  the  appellant  had  been  sexually  abused  as
    significantly compromising the value of the expert's assessment of risk
    arising from his history  as  a  dancing  boy.   In  opining  that  the
    appellant would be at risk because of his history as a dancing boy, the
    expert clearly saw past sexual exploitation as a  crucial  aspect:  see
    paragraphs 34-35, 41-42, 44, 76-78.   In  short  I  consider  that  the
    judge's treatment of the issue of the safety and reasonableness of  the
    appellant if returned to Kabul and not wishing to return  to  his  home
    area, was not vitiated  by  legal  error.   The  judge  did  apply  the
    guidance given by the UT in the CG case of AS.

16.  For the above reasons I conclude that the appellant's grounds  are  not
    made out and that accordingly the decision of the FtT judge must stand.

No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                                  Date: 26 October 2018
             [pic]
Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

