
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12938/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 29 August 2019                             |On 5 September 2019           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                     DTK
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant


                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Karnik
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS




 1. By a decision dated 3 June 2019, I found that the  First-tier  Tribunal
    had erred in law such that its decision failed  to  be  set  aside.  My
    reasons were as follows:

    "1.  The appellant was born on 8 July 1997 and is  a  male  citizen  of
    Iran. By a decision dated 28  October  2018,  the  Secretary  of  State
    refused  the  appellant's  claim  for  international  protection.   The
    appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal  which,  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 24 January 2019, dismissed the appeal. The appellant now
    appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

    2.   By a Rule 24 notice dated 25 March 2019, the  Secretary  of  State
    indicated that he did not oppose the appellant's application.  However,
    the Secretary of  State  did  state  that,  'the  credibility  findings
    against the appellant has not been challenged and,  as  a  result,  any
    rehearing would be restricted to risk on  return  as  a  failed  asylum
    seeker with no profile known to the authorities.'

    3.   The appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal on
    the basis that the judge had not made any proper findings regarding his
    claim that his father, a member of the KDP, had been executed when  the
    appellant was aged two years old. The judge  recorded  the  appellant's
    claim in this regard as did the  Secretary  of  State  in  the  refusal
    letter. However, the Secretary of State made no  specific  response  to
    that part of the appellant's claim  and  likewise  the  judge  made  no
    specific finding. Having said that, the judge at [26-27] concluded that
    the appellant was not the witness of truth; it could be said  that  the
    judge rejected all aspects of the  appellant's  claim,  including  that
    regarding his father and his fate. However, the Secretary of State  has
    not sought to oppose the appeal to the Upper Tribunal. I set aside  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal  preserving  all  the  findings  of
    fact. The decision will be remade in the Upper Tribunal at or following
    a resumed hearing. The grounds of appeal [3] state (correctly) that the
    judge did not make a specific finding regarding the appellant's  father
    was the claim was 'not a fact  rejected  by  the  respondent.'  In  the
    judge's grant of permission [2] it is stated that 'it was not  disputed
    [by the Secretary of State]'  that  the  appellant's  father  had  been
    executed as claimed'. That seems to  me  to  be  a  misreading  of  the
    refusal letter and, indeed, of the grounds of appeal. The fact  remains
    that there has been no unequivocal acceptance by the Secretary of State
    or clear finding by  the  Tribunal  that  the  appellant's  father  was
    executed as claimed. That claim  will  need  to  be  considered  and  a
    finding of fact made by the  Upper  Tribunal  before  the  decision  is
    remade. The Upper Tribunal will hear evidence  from  the  appellant  on
    this issue only; the First-tier  Tribunal  's  findings  regarding  the
    appellant's own  credibility  will  not  be  revisited.  If  the  Upper
    Tribunal finds that the appellant's father was executed as claimed, the
    appellant will need to prove to  the  necessary  standard  that  he  is
    himself at risk on return to  Iran  as  a  consequence.  If  the  Upper
    Tribunal finds that the appellant's father was not executed as claimed,
    then the appellant will need to prove that he is nonetheless at risk on
    return to Iran.

    Notice of Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on 24 January  2019
    is set aside. All of the findings of fact  shall  stand.  The  decision
    will be remade in the Upper Tribunal at or following a resumed hearing.
    The Upper Tribunal will determine whether, as claimed by the appellant,
    is father was executed when the appellant was aged two years  old.  The
    Upper Tribunal will thereafter determine the risk on return to Iran  of
    the appellant."

 2. The burden of proof is on the appellant. The appellant is  required  to
    prove that it is reasonably likely that at the date  of  this  decision
    there  are  substantial  grounds  for  believing  that  the  he   meets
    requirements  of  the  Refugee  or  Person  in  need  of  international
    protection (Qualification )  Regulations  2006  and  the  Statement  of
    Changes in Immigration Rules CM6918 and/or insofar as applicable to the
    decision appealed against is not in breach of the appellant's protected
    human rights under the Human Rights Act 1998.

 3. The appellant had filed and served an additional  bundle  of  documents
    which  includes  an  updated  witness  statement.  The  appellant  gave
    evidence in Kurdish Sorani with the assistance of  an  interpreter.  He
    adopted his written statement as his evidence in chief. He  was  cross-
    examined by Mr Diwnycz, who appeared for the Secretary of State.

 4. I reserved my decision.

 5. I refer again to my error of law decision. I directed that the findings
    of fact of the First-tier Tribunal  should  stand  and  that  only  the
    question of the alleged execution of the appellant's father remained to
    be determined along  with  any  risk  and  return  to  Iran  which  the
    appellant might face should he be able to prove  that  his  father  had
    been executed. Notwithstanding that direction, the  updated  bundle  of
    documents submitted by the appellant contained  printouts  of  Facebook
    pages; the appellant continues to claim that his activity in support of
    opposition groups on Facebook may expose him  to  risk  and  return.  I
    allowed Mr Diwnycz to cross-examine the appellant in respect  of  these
    printouts. At [19] of the latest bundle there is a photograph which all
    parties agree shows the appellant standing in  a  road  and  holding  a
    placard. The Facebook posting bears the date 15 May but with  no  year;
    the appellant said that the year was 2019. The photograph  purports  to
    be an updated cover photograph for the appellant's Facebook account. In
    cross-examination, the appellant was asked whether the  photograph  was
    taken in front of the Iranian embassy in  London.  The  appellant  said
    that it had been taken at that location but he could not  say  when  it
    had been taken; he did not, when questioned, claim that it  been  taken
    on 15 May 2019. When asked to  identify  the  Iranian  Embassy  in  the
    photograph, the appellant said that the photograph was 'not very clear'
    and that he could not say whether the Embassy was located on the  right
    or left of the appellant.  At  one  point  in  cross  examination,  the
    appellant said that he could  not  confirm  where  the  photograph  was
    taken. When asked again, he said that the Iranian Embassy  is  situated
    on the right of the photograph (that is, to the appellant's left side).

 6. I found the appellant's evidence under cross-examination regarding  the
    photograph to be very confused. It is, frankly, not  credible  that  he
    could not remember the year in which  the  photograph  had  been  taken
    given that  he  considered  it  sufficiently  significant  to  post  on
    Facebook as his cover photograph. His inability to identify readily the
    location of the Iranian Embassy leads me to conclude that the appellant
    has failed to discharge the burden of proving that the  photograph  was
    taken outside that Embassy. Further, I am reminded of the  findings  of
    the First-tier Tribunal as regards the  appellant's  reliability  as  a
    witness have been preserved. The First-tier  Tribunal  found  that  the
    appellant was 'perfectly comfortable at telling lies and  in  doing  so
    has substantially undermined his credibility.' The judge found that the
    appellant had concocted his account of events in Iran and had told lies
    in respect of his asylum claim 'from the very  outset';  at  [22],  the
    judge found that the appellant had even lied about his date  of  birth.
    It is against the background of those preserved findings that I need to
    assess the credibility of the appellant's  evidence  before  the  Upper
    Tribunal. I find the appellant has failed to discharge  the  burden  of
    proving that he is a genuine supporter of Iranian opposition  political
    groups in the United Kingdom. I find that the photographs in  his  most
    recent bundle of documents cannot be relied upon as showing that he has
    been actively involved in sur place activities  in  opposition  to  the
    Iranian state.

 7. As regards the appellant's claim that this father was executed in Iran,
    he has now filed and served a copy of  a  document  which  purports  to
    detail  court  proceedings  in  January  2001   following   which   the
    appellant's father was sentenced to  be  executed.  Significantly,  the
    appellant has not produced the original document. In  his  most  recent
    statement [13], the appellant claims that he only received the document
    on 9 August 2019. He claims that it been sent to him by  a  friend  who
    had, in turn, sent the document via a  third  party  from  Iraq.  Again
    significantly, the appellant has not  kept  the  original  envelope  in
    which he claims the document arrived at his home in the United Kingdom.
    I considered this document in accordance with the principles set out in
    Ahmed [2002] UKIAT 00439. Neither I nor the First-tier  Tribunal  judge
    whose findings of fact I have preserved have been satisfied  that  this
    appellant is a reliable and truthful witness. In all the circumstances,
    I do not find that the document which he has now filed which he  claims
    relates to his father's sentence of death can relied upon at all.

 8. Even if I am wrong in reaching that finding, I agree  with  Mr  Diwnycz
    who submitted that the document, whilst it refers to  the  sentence  of
    execution, is not proof that the appellant's father was executed as  he
    claims. In light of what I have said above  regarding  the  appellant's
    lack of credibility as a witness, I find the appellant  has  failed  to
    discharge the burden of proving that his  father  was  executed  as  he
    claims. The appellant will not, therefore, face any risk and return  on
    account of his being related  to  a  deceased  known  opponent  of  the
    Iranian state.

 9. In conclusion, I find of the appellant is an Iranian citizen of Kurdish
    ethnicity. No part of his account of past events in Iran may be  relied
    upon. I find that the appellant has  not  proved  that  any  activities
    purportedly in support of Iranian opposition groups in which he  claims
    to have been involved in the United  Kingdom  will  have  come  to  the
    attention of the Iranian state or are reasonably likely to expose  into
    any risk on return to Iran. I find the appellant has  failed  to  prove
    that his father was executed and, further, that the document  which  is
    now produced which he claims relates to a sentence of death against his
    father is not reliable evidence at  all.  I  refer  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal decision at [28-39] and adopt the reasoning contained therein.
    The appellant will present to the Iranian authorities and return  as  a
    failed asylum seeker of  Kurdish  ethnicity;  beyond  possessing  those
    characteristics, there is nothing whatever in this appellant's  profile
    which is likely to excite the  interest  of  the  Iranian  authorities.
    Having regard to all  the  background  material  and  relevant  country
    guidance, I find that the appellant is not at risk on return  to  Iran.
    His appeal is, therefore, dismissed.



Notice of Decision

    The appellant's appeal against the decision of the Secretary  of  State
    dated 28 October 2018 is dismissed.


Signed                              Date 29 August 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






















