
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: pa/12372/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Cardiff CJC                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 28 February 2019                    |On 02 April 2019                     |
|                                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                                     HA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms J Lowis instructed by Migrant Legal Project
(Cardiff)
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008  (SI  2008/2698)  I  make  an  anonymity  order  prohibiting   the
    disclosure of the publication of any matter likely to lead  to  members
    of the public identifying the appellant.  A failure to comply with this
    direction could lead to Contempt of Court proceedings.





Introduction

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan who was  born  on  3  January
    1989.  He arrived in the  United  Kingdom  on  17  September  2015  and
    claimed asylum.  The basis of that claim was that he had been  targeted
    by the Taliban because of his  employment  by  a  number  of  companies
    concerned with construction and infrastructure in Afghanistan.   On  10
    November 2017, the Secretary of State refused  the  appellant's  claims
    for asylum, humanitarian protection and on human rights  grounds.   The
    Secretary of State did not accept that the  appellant  had  worked  for
    foreign companies, as he claimed, in Afghanistan and  so  would  be  at
    risk on return.

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 3. In a determination dated 17 January 2018,  Judge  Lever  dismissed  the
    appellant's appeal on all grounds.  Judge Lever, whilst  not  accepting
    in its entirety the appellant's evidence of  his  employment,  accepted
    that it was possible that  the  appellant  had  some  or  most  of  the
    employment for foreign construction  companies  that  he  claimed  (see
    paras 19 and 22).  However, the judge rejected the appellant's  account
    that he had been targeted by  the  Taliban  on  three  occasions.   The
    first, which the  appellant  claimed  occurred  in  late  2014,  was  a
    threatening letter delivered to  the  appellant's  home.   The  second,
    which the appellant claimed occurred in January 2015, involved  a  raid
    by the Taliban  at  a  funeral  which  the  appellant  claimed  he  was
    attending in a village close  to  his  own  and,  when  warned  of  the
    Taliban's approach, from which the appellant managed  to  escape.   The
    third incidence, which the appellant claimed occurred in February 2015,
    involved a car in which he and others were  being  driven  being  fired
    upon from a Taliban roadblock.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 4. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal on four
    grounds.  Permission was initially refused by the  First-tier  Tribunal
    but on 14 June 2018  the  Upper  Tribunal  (UTJ  Plimmer)  granted  the
    appellant permission.  UTJ Plimmer singled out  ground  1  but  granted
    permission on the remaining three grounds even  though,  in  her  view,
    they were "less strong".

Discussion

 5. Relying upon grounds 1, 3 and 4 Ms Lowis submitted that the  judge  had
    erred in law in reaching his adverse findings, in particular  that  the
    appellant  had  not  been  targeted  by  the  Taliban  because  of  his
    employment   by   foreign   companies   involving    construction    or
    infrastructure sites in Afghanistan.

 6. First, she submitted that the judge had wrongly taken into account,  in
    reaching that finding, that the appellant had not held "any  particular
    senior position or role within any employment that he  may  have  had".
    That, Ms Lowis  submitted,  was  not  consistent  with  the  background
    evidence.  Secondly, she submitted  that  the  judge  had  reached  his
    adverse finding by making inferences that were either not substantiated
    by the background evidence or which  were  not  properly  open  to  the
    judge.

 7. I accept the substance Ms Lowis' submissions.

 8. It is clear that the judge accepted that the appellant  may  have  been
    employed in the way that he claimed.  The  judge  expressly  made  that
    finding at para 22.  He reached that conclusion in  the  light  of  the
    background evidence where, at para 22 he said this:

         "I accept the prospect that the Taliban have targeted  construction
         and infrastructure sites in their own country and I further  accept
         that one of the characteristics for  a  terrorist  group  like  the
         Taliban is the setting up of illegal and temporary  roadblocks.   I
         do not find any  of  those  features  therefore  described  by  the
         Appellant as being inconsistent with the situation in  the  country
         and I accept that there may well be many people who  have  directly
         been affected  by  or  can  relate  stories  that  deal  with  such
         incidents."

 9. The judge then went on to conclude at para 22:

         "However I do not find that the Appellant has  at  any  stage  been
         specifically targeted nor do I find that he has adversely  come  to
         the attention of the Taliban nor that he has  held  any  particular
         senior position or role within any employment that he may have had.
          The Appellant is merely providing evidence of the type of activity
         and destruction that  has  and  no  doubt  continues  to  occur  in
         Afghanistan at the hands of the Taliban."

10. So, as can be seen, the judge considered that the appellant's case was,
    in general, consistent with  the  background  material.   In  para  22,
    however, he doubted that the  appellant  had  actually  been  targeted,
    inter alia, because he had not held "any particular senior position  or
    role within any employment that he may have had".

11. Ms Lowis relied upon two background documents  which  were  before  the
    judge.  The first is the UNHCR Eligibility Guidelines for Assessing the
    International Protection Needs of Asylum-seekers (19 April 2016) at E1-
    99 of the appellant's bundle.  There,  under  the  general  heading  of
    "potential  risk  profiles"  at  internal  pages  38-39  (E40-E41)  the
    following is set out:

         "g)  Other Civilians Perceived as Supporting the Government or  the
             International Community

         AGEs are reported to kill civilians deliberately to punish them  or
         supporting the government, with the killings intended to serve as a
         warning to  others.   AGEs  are  also  reported  to  use  different
         mechanisms to warn civilians  against  supporting  the  Government,
         including text messages, local radio broadcasts, social  media  and
         "night letters" (shab nameha).  In locations where AGEs  have  been
         unable to win public support,  they  are  reported  to  harass  and
         intimidate local communities, and to mete out  punishments  against
         the local population  for  supporting  the  Government.   Civilians
         accused of "spying for" for Government are reportedly subjected  to
         summary trials in parallel and illegal judicial procedures operated
         by AGEs; the  punishment  for  such  alleged  "crimes"  is  usually
         execution."

12. As, Mr Lowis submitted, the risk category of those civilians "perceived
    as supporting the government or the international community"  does  not
    limit the category to those with any  "particular  senior  position  or
    role".

13. Further, Ms Lowis relied upon the report by  EASO,  Country  of  Origin
    Information Report: Afghanistan Individuals Targeted By Armed Actors in
    the Conflict (December 2017) at  pages  CC1-CC128  of  the  appellant's
    bundle at paras 1.2, 1.2.2 and 1.2.2.2 as follows:

         "1.2 Targeted individuals

         Targets of deliberate killings or abduction by insurgents  in  2016
         include,  according  to  UNAMA,  tribal  elders,  judicial   staff,
         civilian government administration staff and civilians  alleged  to
         be government spies, but also civilians who refused to comply  with
         insurgent instructions in 2017, UNAMA added to this list 'civilians
         perceived to oppose Anti-Government Element values'

         Dr. Antonia Giustozzi summarised the  targets  of  the  Taliban  as
         individuals the  Taliban  considers  to  be  'misbehaving'.   These
         include many of the  individuals  listed  by  UNAMA  above  and  in
         addition, Giustozzi adds 'individuals of any category  selected  by
         the Taliban as useful or necessary to their  war  effort,  and  who
         have refused to collaborate'.

         1.2.2 Government officials or the accusation of being a  government
         spy

         In  2016,  UNAMA  recorded  481  incidents   targeting   government
         officials, including judges, prosecutors and judicial staff but not
         including ANSF, resulting in 521 casualties.  For example, in  2016
         in Kandahar City, there was a continued spree  of  execution  style
         killings  of  civilians  working  for  or   perceived   as   having
         connections with the local authorities.

         1.2.2.2 Accusation of supporting the government or spying

         Targeting by the Taliban is not limited to those who are government
         employees, but also to those who are accused of being  a  supporter
         of the government.  In 2013, UNAMA documented 246  attacks  against
         civilians who had no official affiliation to  government,  NGOs  or
         recognised  civilian   institutions   (i.e.   medical,   education,
         elections,  development  programming).    These   attacks   against
         civilians resulted in 532  civilian  casualties.   These  incidents
         involved insurgents  deliberately  targeting  civilians,  including
         farmers,  shopkeepers  and  students,  whom   they   perceived   as
         supportive of the government or national or international  security
         forces.  Sources report on the following examples:

           . In August 2017, the Taliban allegedly kidnapped over 30 people
             from a village in Kandahar, killing several of  them,  on  the
             accusation of supporting the government.




           . In Herat's Gozara district, the Taliban  stopped  the  car  of
             three employees of road construction company and shot them  on
             the spot."

14. In my judgment, the qualification put upon the  risk  category  by  the
    judge in para  22  of  his  determination  was  not  supported  by  the
    background evidence.

15. Mr Mills, who represented the Secretary of  State  submitted  that  the
    judge's conclusion was not inconsistent with  the  background  evidence
    and, in such a case, his conclusion would only  be  flawed  if  it  was
    irrational in the sense of beyond the realms of common sense. Whilst  I
    do not disagree with Mr Mills' submission in principle  which,  indeed,
    probably lies at the root of the well-known cases of HK (Sierra  Leone)
    v SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ 1037 and Y v SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ  1223  on  the
    limits of "plausibility" as a tool for assessing the truth of a  claim,
    here there is no basis in the background evidence or the limitation  of
    the risk category to those who hold a "particular  senior  position  or
    role" and it is not self-evident, in the absence of expert evidence  or
    objective background evidence, why  the  risk  category  should  be  so
    limited.  The background evidence is, in reality, more wide ranging  in
    the scope of the targeted group.  To that  extent,  the  limitation  is
    inconsistent with the background  evidence  and  the  judge  offers  no
    rational reasoning as to why, despite the background evidence, the risk
    category is more limited.  That was, in my judgment, an  error  in  his
    reasoning which undermines his adverse finding.

16.  The  judge's  reasons  for  concluding  that  the  appellant  was  not
    specifically targeted are not limited to para 22.  Indeed, in  para  21
    he deals with the three incidents relied upon by the appellant to  give
    rise to his claim.  There, the judge said this:

         "In terms  of  the  Appellant's  personal  problems  his  interview
         discloses in reality very little personal  difficulty.   The  first
         matter related by the Appellant is as late as December 2014.   That
         means the Appellant had been working  for  such  companies  without
         incident for a period of five years.   In  reality  the  threat  in
         December 2014 appears to have  been  a  general  threat  against  a
         particular site where  the  Appellant  was  working  demanding  the
         closure of the site for a specified period.  Curiously  the  threat
         was not for the permanent closure of the site and possibly  related
         to a bracket of time when the Taliban  sought  to  operate  without
         being observed.  The threat appears to be against those in the site
         generally and may well as the Appellant infers  be  a  not  unusual
         type of threat or demand.  I do not accept as credible  that  there
         was any personal threat or letter sent to the Appellant at his home
         as he suggests.  The reality of course is that if the  Taliban  did
         know where he lived then subject to  the  Appellant  swiftly  doing
         what they demanded they would have been able to kill or capture him
         with ease.  The Appellant certainly makes no reference to any other
         threat being received at his home or any attempt or movement by the
         Taliban or individuals to kill him directly.  Further it cannot  be
         said that in any of the jobs the Appellant has described he was  in
         charge or in any real  senior  position.   Insofar  as  the  second
         incident in January 2015 is concerned that did not relate  to  work
         but rather the fact the Appellant removed himself  swiftly  from  a
         village where he had gone for a funeral when news was received  the
         Taliban were coming to that village.  Again  I  do  not  accept  as
         credible any direct or inferential evidence that Taliban would come
         to the village specifically to target  the  Appellant.  As  I  have
         indicated above  there  would  have  been  no  difficulty  in  them
         targeting the Appellant at his home or place or  work  if  they  so
         desired.  It is also unclear how they would necessarily have  known
         in advance the Appellant was intending to attend  a  funeral.   The
         final incident is the Appellant simply travelling as a passenger in
         a taxi or private vehicle where the driver with some skill  avoided
         a Taliban roadblock which he had spotted."

17. Ms Lowis mounted a sustained attack upon the judge's approach  in  para
    21 to the appellant's evidence.   In  my  judgment,  she  identified  a
    number of features in the judge's approach which further undermined his
    adverse finding.

18. In relation  to  the  threats  which  the  appellant  claimed  to  have
    received, he identified two specific threats: there was the letter left
    at his home in December 2014; and there was the raid by the Taliban  at
    a funeral he was attending in January 2015.   The  judge  characterised
    the appellant's claim, as set out in his interview, as  disclosing  "in
    reality very little personal difficulty".  There is the obvious problem
    with that characterisation as the appellant identified two incidents of
    personal targeting.  In my judgment, the reason why the  judge  adopted
    this characterisation is perhaps because he did not fully  reflect  the
    appellant's account in interview of the incidents in December 2014  and
    January 2015.

19. As regards the letter, the judge described that threat  as  in  reality
    being a "general threat against a particular site where  the  appellant
    was working demanding the closure of the site for a specified purpose."
     What the appellant actually said in his interview at  questions  48  -
    57, in summary, was that he had received a warning letter in  which  he
    was told that he must come and cooperate with the Taliban and that they
    knew that he worked with "the foreigners and infidels".  He was  warned
    that if he did not do that they would kill him.  That, on its face, was
    not a "general threat against a particular site" but rather a  specific
    threat against the appellant himself.

20. As regards the incident at the  funeral  in  January  2015,  the  judge
    stated that this "did not relate to  work"  and  then  noted  that  the
    appellant swiftly removed  himself  from  the  village  when  news  was
    received that the Taliban were coming.  The judge concluded that he did
    not accept that there was "any direct or inferential evidence that  the
    Taliban  would  come  to  the  village  specifically  to   target   the
    appellant".

21. There are two difficulties with that.  First, as Ms Lowis pointed  out,
    there was support in the background evidence to which she referred  me,
    and which I have set out above, in the EASO Report at para  1.2.2.2  of
    the Taliban kidnapping over 30  people  from  a  village  in  Kandahar,
    killing several of them because they were  accused  of  supporting  the
    government.  Secondly, the appellant's evidence,  again  given  in  his
    interview, was not that he left the funeral simply because he heard the
    Taliban were coming but rather because he was  specifically  warned  of
    that by the brother of the person who had organised  the  funeral  (see
    question 60 of the asylum interview).  In  his  witness  statement  the
    appellant says at para 5: "I found out later, from the person  who  had
    organised the funeral, that the Taliban had been asking for me by  name
    when they arrived at the funeral."  Again, the appellant's evidence was
    that he was being specifically targeted.

22. Ms Lowis also attacked the judge's reasoning that it was  not  credible
    that the Taliban would target the appellant in a nearby village in  the
    way he claimed when they knew where he  lived  and  therefore  if  they
    wished could without "difficulty" target him at his home or  his  place
    of work.  Ms Lowis relied on the well-known passage in the judgment  of
    Keene LJ in Y at [25] that a judge:

         "should be cautious before finding  an  account  to  be  inherently
         incredible, because there is a considerable risk that  he  will  be
         over influenced by his own views on what is or  is  not  plausible,
         and those views will have inevitably been  influenced  by  his  own
         background in this country and by the customs and ways of  our  own
         society.  It is therefore important that he should seek to view  an
         appellant's account of events...in the context of conditions in the
         country from which the appellant comes."

23. At [27] Keene LJ also said:

         "A decision maker is entitled to regard an account as incredible by
         such standards, but he must take care not to do so  merely  because
         it would not be reasonable if it had happened in this country.   In
         essence, he must  look  through  the  spectacles  provided  by  the
         information he has about conditions in the country in question."

24. Taken as a point alone, I would not accept Ms  Lowis'  submission  that
    the judge was not entitled to reach the finding that  he  did  on  this
    issue even though, as she submitted, the  judge  failed  to  take  into
    account that the appellant had gone into hiding in February 2015 -  two
    months after the threatening letter) until he left Afghanistan in April
    2015.

25. That said, however, the  cumulative  effect  of  the  problems  in  the
    judge's  approach  and  reasoning  which  I  have   identified   above,
    particularly in relation to the claimed incidents in December 2014  and
    January 2015 fatally, in my judgment, undermine his adverse finding  in
    relation to whether the appellant  was  specifically  targeted  by  the
    Taliban.  I take that view despite also seeing  no  difficulty  in  the
    judge's assessment of the third incident - at the roadblock - which  on
    the appellant's own account does not appear to be an incident at  which
    he was targeted specifically.

26. In addition, the judge also took  into  account,  as  relevant  to  the
    general credibility of the appellant, a  number  of  other  matters  in
    particular relating to his  previous  immigration  history.   Ms  Lowis
    relied upon grounds 3 and 4 in this regard.  She relied upon  the  fact
    that at para 24 the judge appeared to cast doubt upon  the  appellant's
    credibility based upon his having previously made  an  application  for
    entry clearance as a spouse but, inter alia, noting that there  was  an
    "abrupt and wholly unexplained ending to this relationship."  The judge
    commented at para 24:

         "accordingly to some  extent  what  the  appellant  appears  to  be
         describing  is  consistent  and  familiar  but   the   abrupt   and
         unexplained ending to that relationship is very unusual and without
         explanation from the Appellant cannot be taken any further."

27. Ms Lowis submitted that the appellant had not  been  cross-examined  on
    how his relationship ended  and  it  was  unfair  to  make  an  adverse
    credibility finding based upon it.

28. Further, at  para  25,  commenting  on  the  appellant's  earlier  visa
    application, the judge appeared to cast doubt on  the  truthfulness  of
    the appellant based upon his claim at the time of that visa application
    that he was unemployed and that it was inconsistent with his account of
    what had  occurred  to  him  in  Afghanistan  that,  when  making  that
    application, he had given  as  his  permanent  address  an  address  in
    Pakistan where he had only claimed to be living for  about  one  month.
    As regards the latter, the judge rejected the  appellant's  explanation
    that he had given the address in Pakistan because there  was  no  FedEx
    delivery  in  Afghanistan  for  the  return  of  documents   with   his
    application on the basis that: "the application was made by website  on
    the internet".

29. Ms Lowis submitted that as regards the indication  that  the  appellant
    had inconsistently said that he was "unemployed" at  the  time  of  his
    visa application, that was simply not the case.  Mr Mills  acknowledged
    that  point.   As  regards  the  judge's  reason  for   rejecting   the
    appellant's explanation for giving an address  in  Pakistan,  Ms  Lowis
    submitted that the fact that his  application  had  been  made  on  the
    website was not inconsistent with his explanation for having to give an
    address to which a FedEx delivery could be made  in  Pakistan  for  the
    return of documents.  I accept Ms Lowis' submission in regard  to  both
    these matters.  Also, the judge placed  weight  upon  the  "abrupt  and
    wholly unexplained ending" of the appellant's marriage  and  that  does
    not appear to have been a matter upon which he was given an opportunity
    to give an explanation in the  absence  of  cross-examination  on  that
    point.

30. Although these matters might not individually be sufficient  to  unpick
    the judge's adverse credibility finding, when taken  cumulatively  with
    the matters I have  already  identified  in  relation  to  the  judge's
    assessment of the appellant's account of being  specifically  targeted,
    they add weight to the view that I take that, read overall, the judge's
    adverse credibility finding was materially flawed in law.

31.  Consequently,  for  these  reasons  I  am  satisfied  that  the  judge
    materially erred in law in reaching his  adverse  credibility  finding.
    His decision must, accordingly, be set aside.

32. In the light of that, the appellant's claim to humanitarian  protection
    should also be remade in the light of  any  factual  findings  made  in
    respect of his asylum claim.

Decision

33. Accordingly, the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
    making of an error of law and the decision is set aside.

34. Given the nature and extent of the fact-finding  required,  and  having
    regard to para 7.2 of the Senior President's  Practice  Statement,  the
    appropriate disposal of this appeal is to remit it  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for a de novo rehearing.

35. The appeal is remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  de  novo
    rehearing before a judge other than Judge Lever.


                                                                      Signed
                                                                       [pic]
                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal



                                 Dated 28 March 2019
