
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12086/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 27th August 2019                           |On 4th September 2019         |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN


                                   Between

                                 mr s m b h
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Turner (instructed by Chancery Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Miss J Isherwood (Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal to the Upper Tribunal by the Appellant in relation to
    a Decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Cockrill who, in a Decision and
    Reasons  promulgated  on  21st  May  2019,  dismissed  the  Appellant's
    protection appeal.  That followed a hearing  at  Taylor  House  on  8th
    April 2019 when the Appellant was represented by Mr Chelvan of Counsel.



 2. The Appellant's case is that he is a national of Bangladesh and  is  at
    risk on return on account of his links with the BNP, both in Bangladesh
    before leaving and in the UK since.

 3. The background of this case is that when the  substantive  hearing  was
    first listed, the day before the hearing two  voluminous  bundles  were
    lodged, which the Secretary of State had not  had  the  opportunity  to
    consider in any depth and which  contained  two  FIRs  containing  very
    serious allegations against the Appellant,  including  one  of  murder.
    Those documents referred to incidents which had allegedly  taken  place
    while the Appellant was in the UK.  The matter was  adjourned  on  that
    occasion, because of the amount of documentation submitted at the  last
    minute and with a direction by the judge for the Secretary of State  to
    consider and verify, if possible, those FIRs.

 4. When the matter next came before the Tribunal on 8th  April  2019,  the
    Secretary of State, not unusually, had  done  nothing  about  verifying
    those documents.  On that occasion the Appellant attended  court  ready
    to give evidence, having filed a witness statement and a host of  other
    documents.  He was also accompanied by three  witnesses  who  had  also
    filed witness statements and were ready to give evidence.

 5.  Unfortunately  for  the  Appellant,  on  that  occasion  Counsel   who
    represented him decided to take what he believed to  be  a  good  legal
    point, namely that if the Secretary  of  State  had  not  verified  the
    documents that inferred  that  the  Secretary  of  State  accepted  the
    documents and the Appellant was entitled to win  his  appeal.   Counsel
    called no evidence and proceeded on the basis of his  submission  only.
    Not surprisingly his submission did not find  favour  with  the  judge,
    rightly,  in  light  of  VT  (Article   22   Procedures   Directive   -
    confidentiality) Sri Lanka [2017] UKUT 368 (IAC).

 6. Mr Turner did not challenge that decision but submitted the  Judge  had
    erred in not considering the written evidence provided. It is the  case
    that when one reads the Decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  that  the
    judge was clearly distracted by the  argument  being  put  to  him  and
    indeed more of the Decision and Reasons is taken up with  dealing  with
    that submission than the written evidence before him.  He did not  hear
    any oral evidence because Counsel elected not to call  it,  relying  on
    his legal point and submissions only.  The  judge,  whilst  considering
    the main thrust of the claim, did not give any  detailed  consideration
    to the documentary evidence and did not have anything  to  say  at  all
    about the witnesses' evidence as contained in their witness statements.



Notice of Decision

 7. As I hope I have made clear, I am not criticising the judge  unduly  in
    this because he was somewhat misled and distracted by the unmeritorious
    submission being made to him.  However, this is a protection appeal and
    the Appellant is entitled to have  his  case  given  the  most  anxious
    scrutiny and all of the evidence taken into account.   It  was  not  in
    this case and for that reason the Decision has to be set aside  because
    all the evidence needs to be considered and findings of  fact  made  on
    it.  Miss Isherwood acknowledged that to be the case. The appellant not
    having had a  fair  hearing  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  it  is
    appropriate to remit it to the First-tier Tribunal for a full rehearing
    on all matters before  a  different  judge.   The  appropriate  hearing
    centre remains Taylor House.  The appeal  is  allowed  to  the  limited
    extent that it is set aside and remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for
    a rehearing.  I maintain the anonymity direction.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed: [pic]                                Date 28 August 2019


Upper Tribunal Judge Martin
