
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12181/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 17th April 2019                   |On 01st July 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

                                     SHA
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. C Holmes, Counsel instructed by Greater
                    Manchester Immigration Aid Unit
For the Respondent:    Mr. A McVeety, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. An anonymity direction was made by the First-tier Tribunal ("FtT").
      As this is a protection claim, it is appropriate that a direction is
      made. Unless and until a Tribunal or Court directs otherwise, the
      appellant is granted anonymity. No report of these proceedings shall
      directly or indirectly identify him. This direction applies amongst
      others to all parties. Failure to comply with this direction could
      lead to contempt of court proceedings.


   2. This is an appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal ("FtT")
      Judge Garratt promulgated on 31st December 2018.


   3. The appellant is a national of Iraq, of Kurdish ethnicity, and from
      Sulaymaniyah in the IKR region.  The appellant has given differing
      accounts as to when he left Iraq, and his journey to the UK. In any
      event, he claims to have arrived in the UK on 7th December 2015, and
      made a claim for asylum on that date.  His claim was refused for the
      reasons set out in the respondent's decision of 9th October 2018. That
      was the underlying decision that was the subject of the appeal before
      the FtT.


   4. The background to the claim for international protection is summarised
      at paragraphs [3] and [4] of the decision of the FtT.  There are two
      strands to the claim.  First, his claim to fear for his life at the
      hands of members of the Mirawdali tribe who had blamed him for failing
      to assist in the rescue of two men from the appellant's village during
      an incident that occurred on 25 October 2015.  Second, his claim to
      have converted to Christianity from Islam whilst in the UK.


   5. At paragraphs [13] to [29] of the decision, the FtT Judge sets out the
      evidence received by the Tribunal from the appellant.  At paragraphs
      [30] to [32] of his decision, the Judge sets out the evidence given by
      the appellant's wife and at paragraphs [33] to [41], the Judge sets
      out the evidence received by the Tribunal from a number of witnesses
      including the appellant's son. The Judge's findings and conclusions
      are set out at paragraphs [57] to [77] of the decision.


   6. The FtT Judge did not find the appellant's account of the events that
      he claims occurred on 25 October 2015, to be credible. At paragraphs
      [59] and [60], the FtT Judge gives his reasons for rejecting the
      appellant's account that he would be blamed for the death of the two
      individuals for failing to assist in their rescue.  The Judge had also
      noted the claim that the appellant's wife was attacked on 25th of
      October 2015 and lost consciousness.  The appellant's wife's account
      of that incident is referred to at paragraph [32] of the decision.  At
      paragraph [33] of the decision, the Judge records the evidence given
      by the appellant's son who "said that he had seen his mother hit in
      Iraq as a result of which she was "not well and went to hospital".  At
      paragraph [58] of the decision, the Judge states:


         "... Whilst the evidence of both refers to an incident on 25
         October 2015, when the appellant's wife was attacked and lost
         consciousness, neither witness has related the incident to the
         circumstances which the appellant claims resulted in the attack. In
         particular the evidence of the appellant's young son was clear,
         brief and to the point in describing the incident in which he saw
         his mother hit. Whilst I do not attack the quality of his evidence,
         I have to remark that there is no mention, in his statement of 3
         December 2018 of any attack on his mother. The incident referred to
         by the son and his mother has not been credibly linked to the
         claimed incident involving the two fishermen. The incident could, I
         conclude, relate equally, to a business or family dispute."


   7. Having considered the evidence, the FtT Judge concluded at paragraph
      [61] as follows:


         "whilst I have therefore concluded that the fishing incident did
         not occur as claimed I accept that there may have been a dispute
         affecting the appellant's family which led to the assault upon his
         wife or she may have had an accident. The incident may have
         triggered the appellant's departure from the IKR with his family
         but I cannot conclude that the motive for leaving Iraq was
         primarily anything more than economic. I reach that conclusion
         bearing in mind the appellant's admission that US$8,000 was paid to
         the agent from his business resources to facilitate the journey to
         the United Kingdom. Indeed, the appellant's evidence suggests that
         substantially more than that sum was paid. That is, I find
         inconsistent with the appellant's claim that his business was
         deliberately destroyed by fire along with his home. It has not been
         explained how the appellant's business partner was able to raise
         those funds so quickly from the business or why he was willing to
         do so when, with the destruction of the business, he would no doubt
         which (sic) to reconstruct something from the ashes."


   8. The FtT Judge considered the appellant's claim to have converted to
      Christianity at paragraphs [63] to [71] of the decision. I pause to
      note that at paragraph [42] of his decision, the FtT Judge records the
      following submission made on behalf of the respondent:


         ".. He emphasised that the respondent did not accept that the
         appellant had suffered problems in Iraq and his conversion to
         Christianity was also questioned. He agreed, however, that, if the
         appellant was found to be a Christian that might lead to
         persecution if returned. However, he had not prepared submissions
         on the point.".


   9. At paragraph [66] of the decision, the FtT Judge states that his
      conclusions about risk on return for the appellant and his family as
      converts from Islam to Christianity are guided by the principles set
      out by the Supreme Court in HJ (iran) 2010 UKSC 31.  The Judge states
      "... Having decided that the family are genuine converts to
      Christianity the decision requires me to ask myself whether I am
      satisfied, on the evidence available, that Christian converts who live
      openly would be liable to persecution in the country of nationality.".
       The Judge found, at [67], that the appellant and his family would
      wish to follow their faith openly if returned to Iraq, and,
      especially, their home region of the IKR. The FtT Judge considered the
      country guidance set out in AAH and having considered other background
      material, the FtT Judge concluded at paragraph [71], as follows:


         "I acknowledge that the information about Christian converts living
         in the IKR is relatively limited but leads me to conclude that a
         real risk of serious harm cannot be made out. In reaching this
         conclusion I should emphasise that any difficulties which might be
         experienced by the appellant and his family on account of their
         faith in other parts of Iraq can be avoided by their direct return
         to either the airport at Sulaymaniyah or Erbil. From there they can
         return to their nearby home region with assistance, if required,
         from relatives still living there."


The appeal before me


  10. The appellant advances four grounds of appeal.  First, the FtT Judge
      reached his decision as to the risk upon return by relying upon
      impermissible post hearing research. It is said that the FtT Judge
      referred to background material that was not relied upon by either
      party, and upon which neither party had any opportunity to comment.
      Second, the post hearing research relied upon by the Judge, lead the
      Judge to erroneously conclude that any difficulties which might be
      experienced by the appellant and his family on account of their faith
      in other parts of Iraq, can be avoided by their direct return to
      either the airport at Sulaymaniyah or Erbil. The respondent's
      unequivocal position at the hearing, was that the appellant would be
      returned to Baghdad, and would be expected to travel onwards from
      there. Third, the FtT Judge failed to properly apply the country
      guidance set out in AAH and in particular, failed to adequately
      address the requirements to obtain replacement documentation. Finally,
      the FtT Judge erred in his assessment of the evidence regarding the
      events of 25 October 2015.


  11. Permission to appeal was granted by FtT Judge Keane on 12th February
      2019.  The matter comes before me to consider whether the decision of
      the FtT involved the making of a material error of law, and if so, to
      remake the decision.


  12. Before me, Mr McVeety confirmed that having had the opportunity of
      considering the decision of the FtT Judge, the respondent accepts that
      the first three grounds relied upon by the appellant are established,
      and that in the circumstances, the decision of the FtT cannot stand.
      He concedes that the decision of the FtT contains a material error of
      law and should be set aside.


  13. The issue for me is whether the discrete findings made by the FtT
      Judge with regard to the events of 25th October 2018 can be preserved.




  14. Mr Holmes submits that the FtT Judge erred in concluding, at [60],
      that the evidence of the appellant in relation to the positioning of
      the two deceased, was muddled.  He submits that the inconsistency that
      is apparent at question 54 of the interview arises from an error made
      by the interviewing officer, who recorded the names in the wrong
      order.  He submits that by a letter dated 18th September 2018, within
      a week of the interview, the appellant's solicitors had confirmed that
      "..The interviewer has mixed the names around "While Yassin jumped
      into the water to rescue Salam..."  this should read "While Salam
      jumped into the water to rescue Yassin...".  Mr Holmes submits that
      the Judge also erroneously assumed that the appellant relies upon his
      claim to be illiterate to explain the discrepancy, and irrationally
      concludes that the appellant's claim to be illiterate is inconsistent
      with his claim to have run a successful business.  He submits that the
      appellant simply stored goods and did not need to be literate to run
      his business.  Finally, he submits that the Judge erred, at [58], in
      his conclusion that the incident involving the appellant's son and
      wife has not been credibly linked to the claimed incident involving
      the two fishermen, and that the incident could, relate equally to a
      business or family dispute.  Mr Holmes submits that the conclusion is
      based upon nothing more than speculation.


  15. I have carefully read the decision of the FtT Judge and his findings
      regarding the events of 25th October 2015.  The Judge rejected the
      appellant's account of events and in my judgement it was open to him
      to do so.  Although the Judge refers to an apparent inconsistency from
      what the appellant said at question 54 of the interview, and did not
      refer to the letter from the appellant's solicitors clarifying the
      answer given by the appellant, the Judge states, at [60], that "..I
      have not reached my conclusion that the appellant's main claims are
      incredible on that account alone..".  In reaching his decision, it is
      clear that the FtT Judge had regard to the evidence as a whole and in
      particular, the evidence given by the appellant's wife and son.  The
      Judge noted the evidence given by the appellant's son in particular,
      at paragraph [58] of the decision.  The appellant's son did not refer
      to his mother having been attacked in his witness statement of 3rd
      December 2018.  In his evidence before the Tribunal that is recorded
      at paragraph [33] of the decision, the evidence of the appellant's son
      was that "..he had seen his mother hit in Iraq as a result of which
      she was "not well and went to hospital..".


  16. Having concluded that the 'fishing incident' did not occur as claimed,
      the FtT Judge had to consider whether the appellant's wife had been
      attacked.  The evidence of the appellant with regard to the attack on
      his wife was very brief.  At paragraph [16] of his witness statement
      the appellant simply claims that he was told by Mr Latif that "My wife
      had also been attacked. My father-in-law had taken my wife back to
      their home.".  Surprisingly perhaps, the appellant provides no further
      information about the attack, or what he was told about his wife's
      injuries.  He does not even go so far as to say that she required
      hospital treatment.  The appellant's wife, in her statement refers to
      an incident at about 6-7pm, on 25th October 2015, when around 8 people
      came to their house and raided it.  She claims to have fainted after
      she was hit on the back of her neck and states that she "..wasn't sure
      what happened after that.".  She claims that "..Before the men hit me
      they were swearing and using very abusive words.", and that when she
      regained consciousness "..they were not around me anymore and my
      father and brother had taken me to my father's house".  The Judge
      noted, at [58], that whilst the evidence of both the appellants wife
      and son refers to an incident on 25 October 2015, neither witness has
      related the incidents to the circumstances which the appellant claims
      resulted in the attack.  It was in my judgement open to the FtT Judge
      to find, having considered the evidence as a whole, that there may
      have been a dispute affecting the appellant's family which led to the
      assault upon his wife, or she may have had an accident.


  17. Whilst the findings were perhaps not as well-expressed as they might
      be, that is not to say that the FtT Judge failed to consider the
      evidence or reached a conclusion that that was not open to him.  The
      obligation on a Tribunal is to give reasons in sufficient detail to
      show the principles on which the Tribunal has acted and the reasons
      that have led to the decision.  Such reasons need not be elaborate,
      and do not need to address every argument or every factor which
      weighed in the decision.


  18. In my judgement, the findings reached by the Judge were neither
      irrational nor unreasonable in the Wednesbury sense, or  findings that
      were wholly unsupported by the evidence.  The assessment of such
      matters is always a highly fact sensitive task.  The FtT Judge was
      required to consider the evidence as a whole.  In assessing the
      credibility of the claim advanced by the appellant, the Judge was
      required to consider a number of factors.  They include, whether the
      account given by the appellant was of sufficient detail, whether the
      account is internally consistent and consistent with any relevant
      specific and general country information, and whether the account is
      plausible.  On a proper reading of paragraphs [57] to [62] of the
      decision, he clearly did so.  On appeal, the Upper Tribunal should not
      overturn a judgment at first instance, unless it really cannot
      understand the original judge's thought process when he or she was
      making material findings.


  19. In the circumstances, it is appropriate to remit this appeal back to
      the First-tier Tribunal, because of the error of law regarding the
      second strand of the appellant's claim.  However, in my judgement, the
      findings set out at paragraphs [57] to [62] of the decision of FtT
      Judge Garratt are not tainted by any error of law, and those findings
      are preserved.


  20. The parties will be advised of the date of the First-tier Tribunal
      hearing in due course.


Notice of Decision


  21. The appeal is allowed and the appeal is remitted to the FtT for a
      fresh hearing of the appeal.


  22. The findings of FtT Judge Garratt set out at paragraphs [57] to [62]
      of the decision of FtT Judge Garratt, are preserved.


  23. I make an anonymity direction.





Signed                                  Date          24th May 2019


      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia




TO THE RESPONDENT


FEE AWARD

I have allowed the appeal and remitted the matter to  the  FtT  for  hearing
afresh.  In any event, no fee is payable and there can be no fee award.


Signed                                                24th May 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia

