
[pic]

Upper Tier Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12926/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Liverpool                         |Decision and Reasons Promulgated|
|On 16 February 2018                        |On 23 February 2018             |
|                                           |                                |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup


                                   Between

                                     SA
                         [Anonymity direction made]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Dr E Mynott, instructed by Latitude Law
For the respondent:    Mr C Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the appellant's  appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge McGinty promulgated 21.4.17, dismissing on  all  grounds
    his appeal against the  decision  of  the  Secretary  of  State,  dated
    4.11.16, to refuse his protection  claim  based  on  imputed  political
    opinion in Libya.

 2. First-tier Tribunal Judge  Bennett  refused  permission  to  appeal  on
    6.9.17.  However,  when  the  application  was  renewed  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal, Upper Tribunal Judge Coker granted permission on 17.10.17.

 3. Thus the matter came before me on 16.2.18 as an error of law appeal  in
    the Upper Tribunal.

Error of Law

 4. In the first instance I have to determine whether or not there  was  an
    error of law in the making of the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    such that the decision should be set aside.

 5. After hearing the submissions of the two representatives, I reserved my
    decision, which I now give.

Preliminary Matters

 6. The appellant's representatives had written to the Tribunal  requesting
    that counsel's note of  the  oral  evidence  be  agreed  as  admissible
    without the need for Dr Mynott to become a witness. Due to the lateness
    of the request, it was not possible for the matter to be considered  by
    a judge prior to the error of law appeal hearing. However, I considered
    Judge McGinty's typed note of the evidence in comparison to those parts
    of counsel's note relied on in the grounds and found that they accorded
    close enough so  that  the  matter  could  proceed  without  Dr  Mynott
    becoming a witness in the appeal.

 7. In respect of the  article  15(c)  risk  by  reason  of  indiscriminate
    violence, Judge McGinty noted that in FA (Libya) CG [2016]  UKUT  00413
    (IAC), the Upper Tribunal concluded that the country guidance of AT and
    others (Libya) CG [2014] UKUT 318 (IAC) was unreliable  and  held  that
    pending an analysis of current evidence, each case should be decided on
    its own evidence rather  than  relying  on  the  out  of  date  Country
    Guidance.

 8. That is what Judge McGinty did, from  [32]  onwards  of  the  decision.
    However, since promulgation of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal,
    the Upper Tribunal has now reviewed  the  article  15(c)  situation  in
    Libya and in ZMM (Article 15(c)) Libya CG [2017] 263  (IAC)  considered
    the  more  recent  country  background  information,   including   that
    considered  by  Judge  McGinty,  but  come  to  an  entirely  different
    conclusion, namely that  indiscriminate  violence  in  a  situation  of
    internal armed conflict in Libya has reached such  a  high  level  that
    there are substantial grounds for believing that a  returning  civilian
    would face a real risk of serious harm or death, solely  by  reason  of
    his presence there.

 9. In those circumstances, Mr Bates conceded that there was  an  error  of
    law and that the appeal  would  have  to  be  allowed  on  humanitarian
    protection grounds. However, there remains  a  contested  issue  as  to
    whether there is an error of law in  respect  of  that  part  of  Judge
    McGinty's decision relating to the asylum grounds.

10. After hearing submissions on the issue I reserved my decision, which  I
    now give.

11. For the reasons summarised below, and after considering the grounds and
    the respective oral  submissions  of  the  representatives,  I  am  not
    satisfied that there is any material error of law in  the  decision  of
    Judge McGinty relating to the asylum grounds.

12. The first ground asserts that the First-tier Tribunal failed to  accord
    the appellant the benefit of a positive factual finding in the previous
    Tribunal appeal decision of Judge Lever (AA/10389/2012). At [34] of his
    decision, Judge Lever was prepared to accept  "as  a  possibility"  the
    claim that the appellant's father and two brothers served in  the  army
    before and after the civil war but concluded  that  nothing  turned  on
    that issue and ultimately rejected the asylum claim that the  appellant
    was entitled to refugee status on the  basis  of  his  father  and  two
    brothers being loyal members of the Libyan Army supporting Gaddafi,  or
    that one of the brothers had been killed in the civil war in Sirte,  or
    that the appellant was from a specific tribe with a surname linking him
    to the Gaddafi regime.

13. In addressing this at [25], Judge McGinty recognised that  Judge  Lever
    had been prepared to accept the possibility that the appellant's father
    and two brothers served in the army before and after the civil war  but
    found that neither alone nor in combination with other factors did this
    create any real risk of persecution on return. The judge also took into
    account the additional evidence, said not to  have  been  before  Judge
    Lever.

14. Dr Mynott submission, reflecting the first ground, was that Judge Lever
    had found as a fact that the father and  two  brothers  served  in  the
    Libyan Army. The significance of that, it is argued, is that it infects
    Judge McGinty's consideration of the  new  evidence:  the  new  witness
    evidence, the documentary evidence including the  arrest  warrant,  and
    the country background evidence.  It  is  submitted  that  contrary  to
    Devaseelan, the judge had not taken  as  a  starting  point  a  factual
    finding in the appellant's favour.

15. I do not agree with Dr Mynott's interpretation of the decision of Judge
    Lever on this issue. This was not a positive finding  of  fact  in  the
    appellant's favour. Although at the end  of  [34]  Judge  Lever  stated
    that, "The fact that the appellant's father and two brothers served  in
    the military and were therefore seen as being overtly loyal to  Gaddafi
    is neither surprising nor an uncommon feature  for  Libya,"  I  do  not
    accept that the judge was there making a positive finding  of  fact  in
    the appellant's favour. A possibility does not discharge the evidential
    burden. Reading the paragraph as a  whole,  the  judge  was  in  effect
    saying that even if that had served in the army that fact would not  be
    material, for the reasons amply set out in [34] through [37], including
    the country background evidence.

16. I am satisfied that at [24] Judge McGinty had properly directed himself
    as to the Devaseelan principles  and  went  on  to  carefully  consider
    whether the additional evidence described at [25] was sufficient to  go
    behind Judge Lever's conclusion. I do not accept  that  there  was  any
    positive finding that was omitted and thus do not accept the submission
    that the other findings of Judge McGinty were "infected" as claimed. In
    effect, even taking the further evidence into  account,  Judge  McGinty
    reached the same conclusion as Judge Lever on the issue of  service  in
    the army and the  other  factors  relied  on  as  creating  a  risk  of
    persecution.

17. I have considered but reject as without  merit  the  second  ground  of
    appeal, which is to the effect that Judge McGinty was in factual  error
    in stating at [29] that, "...no explanation has been given as to how Mr
    Elfghi's cousin who was said to be  a  member  of  the  Tripoli  Rebels
    Brigade would be able to know or obtain details of  an  arrest  warrant
    issued by the Arada Martyrs Battalion, or how that information would be
    available to him." The grounds and Dr Mynott submitted that  the  judge
    ignored the oral evidence of Mr Elfghi on this issue.  In  response  to
    questioning as to how the  one  group  could  get  a  document  from  a
    different group, the witness explained, "They all part of  each  other.
    They all belong to the same area."

18. Reading [29] as a whole, I am not satisfied that  there  has  been  any
    material error on the part of Judge McGinty in this  regard.  The  very
    first sentence plainly explains that  the  judge  did  not  accept  the
    explanation of Mr Elfghi, which the judge  had  recorded  both  in  the
    record of proceedings and at [17] of the decision: "...  as  they  were
    all part of each other and  all  belonged  to  the  same  area."  Quite
    contrary to the submission, the judge had not ignored the evidence  but
    taken it into account, but gave reasons set out  within  [29]  for  not
    accepting that explanation. The ground is disingenuous  in  seeking  to
    criticise one phrase rather than applying a fair consideration  of  the
    paragraph as  a  whole  and  the  sense  of  the  judge's  meaning  and
    reasoning. Ultimately, as  the  judge  pointed  out,  it  was  for  the
    appellant to demonstrate the reliability of the document. The judge has
    given adequate reasoning for the conclusion that  no  weight  could  be
    placed on the document. That conclusion was open on the evidence.

19. Neither do I accept the complaint at  [13]  of  the  grounds  that  the
    finding was flawed because the judge did not put  to  the  witness  the
    objection that there was no evidence how the  Arada  Martyrs  Batallion
    would have been in  a  position  to  issue  an  arrest  warrant  to  be
    circulated in all land and naval access routes. Even if this  had  been
    put to the witness it was not an issue capable of being addressed by  a
    witness who was not responsible for the issue of the warrant, only  its
    obtaining. He was not a country expert witness on the  matter  and  any
    answer would have been entirely speculative with  no  probative  value.
    The judge was entirely correct in observing that there was no  evidence
    that the Battalion would have been  able  to  circulate  a  warrant  as
    widely as the wording is drawn. The  suggestion  in  the  grounds  that
    whether it was circulated as widely as intended  did  not  render  "A's
    account of his own actions in obtaining the  document  unreliable,"  is
    neither here nor there.

20. In the circumstances, I find no merit in the grounds in as far as  they
    relate to the Convention claim for asylum. The findings of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal were entirely open on the evidence and justified by clear
    and cogent reasoning. No error of law is disclosed.



Conclusion & Decision

21. It follows from the above that the making of the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal did involve the making of an error on a point of law such
    that the decision should be set aside, but effectively only in  respect
    of the humanitarian protection claim.

     I set aside the decision.

     I re-make the decision in the appeal as follows:

     I dismiss the appeal on asylum grounds.

     I allow the appeal on humanitarian protection grounds.

     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated



Anonymity

I have  considered  whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  any
anonymity direction. No submissions were made on the issue.  The  First-tier
Tribunal did not make an order  pursuant  to  rule  13(1)  of  the  Tribunal
Procedure Rules 2014.
Given the circumstances, I consider it  appropriate  to  make  an  anonymity
direction.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 13 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-
tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014

Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or  any  member  of  their  family.  This  direction
applies both to  the  appellant  and  to  the  respondent.  Breach  of  this
direction may result in proceedings for contempt of court.




Fee Award         Note: this is not part of the determination.

In the light of my decision, I have considered whether to make a  fee  award
pursuant to section 12(4)(a) of the Tribunals, Courts  and  Enforcement  Act
2007.

I have had regard to the Joint Presidential Guidance  Note:  Fee  Awards  in
Immigration Appeals (December 2011).

I make no fee award.

Reasons: No fee is payable and thus there can be no fee award.


     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated


