
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number:  PA/12264/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Heard at Birmingham    Decision & Reasons Promulgated
On 10th January 2019   On 15th February 2019


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY JUDGE UPPER TRIBUNAL FARRELLY


                                   Between

                                   Mr. H G
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Ms Imamovic, Counsel, instructed by Duncan Lewis
                    (Birmingham)
For the respondent:    Mr. D. Mills, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

   1. The appellant is a Kurdish national of Iraq born on 7 November 1999.
      He came from a village close to the city of Tuz Khrmatu in the Salah
      al Din Governate.

   2. He claimed that Isis took over their village in the middle of 2015 and
      demanded food from the appellant's parents. The family themselves were
      in dire straits and decided to leave for a camp outside Kirkuk. The
      appellant claimed that along the way they lost his mother. The
      appellant said he was an only child. In the camp his father remarried
      and the appellant did not get on with his stepmother and there were
      constant arguments with his father and stepmother. In the end his
      father arranged for him to leave the camp with an agent. In this way
      he travelled to the United Kingdom.

   3. His appeal against the refusal of his claim was heard by First-tier
      Tribunal Judge S.Aziz. The appellant had been cross-examined about his
      contact with the Red Cross in relation to his claim he did not know
      the whereabouts of his family. He said he was waiting on the Red Cross
      to contact him after an initial enquiry was made.  The judge did not
      find the appellant to be credible and rejected the underlying claim of
      leaving his home area. The judge was prepared to accept the
      appellant's account that in August 2015 Isis took control of his
      village. The judge did not accept his claim that the situation was so
      bad they relocated to a camp and that en route they lost his mother or
      that his father remarried. The judge did not accept the appellant's
      claim that his father had disowned him or that he had no family home.

   4. The respondent sought to argue that the country guidance decision of
      AA (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG [2015] UKUT 00544 and AA (Iraq) -v- SSHD
      [2017] EWCA Civ 944 no longer applied, based upon improvements in the
      country. First-tier Tribunal Judge Aziz did not agree and concluded
      the appellant would face an article 15(c)risk in his home area.

   5. At paragraph 67 onwards the judge considered the feasibility of the
      appellant being able to relocate within Iraq other than the IKR given
      that he came from a contested area. The judge concluded he could not
      relocate and live in Baghdad on the basis it would be unduly harsh for
      him. He was a Kurd and did not speak Arabic

   6. The judge did take the view that the appellant could reasonably
      relocate to Erbil or another part of the IKR. The judge did not accept
      the appellant's claim that he had never received any education or that
      he had never worked beyond occasionally helping on the family farm.
      The judge found that the appellant did have family in Iraq and
      rejected the appellant's claim that he had lost contact with his
      father. The judge concluded that if his father was able to assist him
      in travelling to the United Kingdom he could similarly assist them to
      travel from Baghdad to the IKR and to establish himself. The judge
      concluded his prospects of finding employment were good.

   7.  In summary, the judge did not find the appellant to be credible. The
      judge rejected the appellant's account of his own circumstances and
      the reason why he left his home village. The judge found the appellant
      continued to have family including his father to support him. The
      judge found the area he was from was still a contested area, that he
      could not reasonably relocate to Baghdad but he could reasonably
      relocate to the IKR.

The Upper Tribunal

   8. Permission to appeal was primarily granted on the basis it was
      arguable the judge erred in law by failing to make findings as to
      whether the appellant would be able to obtain a CSI D either in the
      United Kingdom or Iraq. The grounds had also taken issue with the
      judge's credibility findings and these were open to argument.

   9. At hearing, Ms Imamovic continued to rely on the grounds for which
      permission was granted. In particular, she said there was no finding
      as to the appellant's ability to get the necessary documentation. Mr
      Mills contended that the question of the return and documentation was
      linked to the credibility findings. He submitted that judge had given
      rational sustainable reasons for finding the account not credible. He
      submitted that it was in the appellant's interested claim he had no
      documentation. However, the burden of proof is upon the appellant and
      this in turn links with his credibility.

  10. I agree with Mr Mills' submission that the question of documentation
      is linked to the appellant's overall credibility. The judge did not
      accept his account of fleeing his home village and ending up in a camp
      along with his father and stepmother, having lost his own mother en
      route. Mr Mills makes the obvious point that if the family were really
      so desperately hard up that they could not share their food with Isis
      they would not be in a position to pay the inevitable expenses for the
      appellant's journey to the United Kingdom. The appellant has indicated
      this was done through traffickers through a series of moves. It is
      common knowledge that this is at a significant cost. If the appellant
      and his father were finding life together so difficult a much easier
      solution would be for the father to tell the appellant to go on live
      in another part of the camp. The judge in fact did not accept the
      claim they ever where in a camp.

  11. It is very easy to claim destitution; a lack of education and an
      absence of documentation or know the family registration details. The
      judge has not accepted these features. The judge did not find
      estrangement from the appellant's father. The judge was influenced by
      the apparent contradiction between the family being in abject poverty
      and fighting over food and not getting on with his father then paying
      smugglers take the appellant to the United Kingdom.

  12. Notwithstanding the adverse credibility findings the judge has
      demonstrated an even handed approach in the assessment of the claim.
      The Judge rejected the respondent's contention that the had been an
      improvement in the appellant's home area and found that a 15 C risk
      continued. The judge then went on to consider the question of
      relocation in the circumstance. The judge set out in detail at
      paragraph 67 the factors established by AA to be taken into account
      when assessing relocation within Iraq other than the IKR. The judge
      concluded it would be unduly harsh to expect the appellant to remain
      in Baghdad.

  13. The judge did find that he could reasonably relocate to the IKR. The
      subsequent decision of AAH (Iraqi Kurds - internal relocation) CG UKUT
      212 confirms that a CSID or a valid passport is equally necessary to
      travel onwards from Baghdad. AA stated that given the violence in
      Salah al Din alternative CSA offices operate in Baghdad. The judge
      rejected his claim of estrangement from his father. If he has no such
      documentation his father could assist him and if necessary go to
      Baghdad and vouch for him.

  14. I can find no fault with the judge's credibility assessment and for
      the same reason find the appellant has not demonstrated either he has
      no documentation or cannot obtain documentation. Therefore I find no
      error of law established in the decision.

Decision

No material error of law has been established in the decision of First-tier
Tribunal Judge Aziz. Consequently, that decision, dismissing the
appellant's appeal shall stand

Francis J Farrelly
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge.

10 February 2019
