
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12420/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Fox Court                            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 12th February 2019                         |On 7th March 2019             |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES


                                   Between

                                  Alan [a]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms E S King instructed by Elder Rahimi Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant, a national of Iraq, appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal
    against the decision of the Secretary of State dated 10th October  2018
    to refuse his application for asylum, humanitarian protection or  leave
    to  remain  on  human  rights  grounds.   First-tier   Tribunal   Judge
    Swinnerton dismissed the  appeal  in  a  decision  promulgated  on  6th
    December 2018.   The  Appellant  now  appeals  to  this  Tribunal  with
    permission granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Lever  on  9th  January
    2019.

 2. In granting permission First-tier Tribunal Judge  Lever  considered  it
    arguable that, when assessing risk on return to Iraq, the judge  needed
    to adapt a more  structured  approach,  that  he  should  firstly  have
    considered return to the home area and reached a finding on that matter
    and should then have considered the issue of relocation to  Baghdad  or
    the IKR.  It was considered  arguable  that  there  was  an  inadequate
    examination of the country material and case law such that an error  of
    law occurred.

 3. At the hearing before me Mr Duffy accepted that the  errors  complained
    of had been made out.

 4. Ms King submitted that events have moved on in relation to the  country
    guidance as regards the position of Iraqi Kurds and she submitted  that
    this case was essentially based on Article 15(c) grounds.  However, she
    submitted that the judge's findings  in  relation  to  the  Appellant's
    contact with his family members were  key  to  the  issue  of  risk  on
    return.

 5. In my view the judge erred  in  his  approach  to  risk  on  return  as
    identified in the grounds of appeal and grant of permission to  appeal.
    At paragraph 20 the judge considered the Appellant's evidence  that  he
    had not had contact with his mother since March 2015. The judge did not
    find it credible that the Appellant had not contacted the Red Cross  to
    seek to trace his family members and  rejected  the  Appellant's  claim
    that he had lost contact with his family members. I  accept  Ms  King's
    submission that in reaching this  finding  the  judge  failed  to  take
    account of  the  background  evidence  submitted  in  relation  to  the
    situation in the Appellant's home area. This  is  a  key  finding  from
    which the whole assessment of risk on return at paragraph 21 is  based.
    Given the importance of this finding in the  subsequent  assessment  it
    had to be adequately reasoned. I find that it was not.

 6. I accept Ms King's submission that the judge's assessment  of  risk  on
    return was based on his finding as to the Appellant's claim that he had
    lost contact with  his  family  members.   This  finding  informed  the
    judge's findings at paragraph 21 in relation to the feasibility of  the
    Appellant's return to Iraq.  I accept  that  the  judge's  findings  on
    credibility are inextricably linked with the findings  as  to  risk  on
    return.

 7. I take into account the grounds of appeal and Mr Duffy's concession and
    I find that the First-tier Tribunal Judge made a material error of  law
    in his findings as to the Appellant's family in Iraq and  his  approach
    to the assessment of risk on return in light of the country guidance in
    AA (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG [2015] UKUT  00544  (IAC),  BA  (Returns  to
    Baghdad) Iraq CG [2017]  UKUT  00018  (IAC)  and  AAH  (Iraqi  Kurds  -
    internal relocation) Iraq CG UKUT 00212 (IAC).

 8. For these reasons I agree with the proposal made by the parties that it
    is appropriate to remit the appeal to the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  be
    made again. In light of the Presidential Practice Statements the nature
    or extent of the judicial fact  finding  which  is  necessary  for  the
    decision in the appeal to be re-made is such that, having regard to the
    overriding objective  in  rule  2  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008, it is appropriate to remit the asylum  appeal  to
    the First-tier Tribunal.

 9. I preserve the findings of fact in relation to events  in  Iraq  before
    the Appellant's  departure  as  the  grounds  challenging  the  judge's
    findings as to the Appellant's credibility in relation to events before
    his departure have not been made out. These  findings  were  adequately
    reasoned and were open to the judge on the evidence.  The issues to  be
    determined on the remitted appeal are for findings to be made as to the
    Appellant's family circumstances in Iraq and  any  risk  on  return  in
    light of the background evidence and the case law.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains a  material  error  of  law
and I set it aside preserving the findings in relation  to  events  in  Iraq
before the Appellant's departure.

I remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal to be remade.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed                              Date: 5th March 2019

A Grimes
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is payable therefore there is no fee award.


Signed                              Date: 5th March 2019

A Grimes
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes
