

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12100/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House (remotely)             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On the 01st July 2021                       |On the 12th July 2021           |
|                                            |                                |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON

                                   Between

                                S E (MOROCCO)
                           [ANONYMITY ORDER MADE]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr Chengatai Mupara of Counsel, instructed by UK
Lawyers and                Advocates London, a firm registered with the
Office of the
                  Immigration Service Commissioner
For the respondent:    Mr Tony Melvin, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Anonymity order

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) The Tribunal has ORDERED that no one shall publish  or  reveal
the name or address of S E who  is  the  subject  of  these  proceedings  or
publish or reveal any information which would  be  likely  to  lead  to  the
identification of her or of any member of  her  family  in  connection  with
these proceedings.

Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise  to  contempt  of
court proceedings.



Decision and reasons

 1. The appellant appeals with permission from the decision of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal dismissing her appeal against the  respondent's  decision
    on 21 November 2019  to  refuse  her  refugee  status  under  the  1951
    Convention, humanitarian protection, or leave to remain in  the  United
    Kingdom on human rights grounds.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of  Morocco,  of  Bedouin  origin,  born  in
    November 1953, and is  presently  67  years  old.   She  has  an  adult
    daughter, who is married with a young child, who lives  in  the  United
    Kingdom and who was 13 years old when they arrived in 2002.   She  also
    has a sister living nearby.

 3. Mode of hearing.  A Skype hearing was listed in January 2021,  but  the
    appellant failed to attend and it was  adjourned.   The  hearing  today
    took place face to face at Field House.  The appellant was present  and
    was represented by Mr Mupara, who had helpfully accepted a brief on  30
    June 2021, at the last minute.

 4. The appellant's  representatives,  UK  Lawyers  and  Advocates  London,
    settled the grounds of appeal in this appeal but  were  not  instructed
    again until the day before the 1 July 2021 hearing.  At 10:52 am on  30
    June 2021, they asked for the hearing to be moved from 2.30 p.m.  on  1
    July 2021 to 10 am on the same day, because of a conflict in Counsel Mr
    Mupara's diary.   In the event, the hearing went ahead at 2.30 p.m.  as
    originally listed and Mr Mupara was able to represent the appellant.

Background

 5. The appellant entered the United Kingdom on 18 April 2002  on  a  visit
    visa which expired on 18 October 2002.  She has not had valid leave  to
    enter or remain since then.

 6. When her visit visa expired, the appellant did not embark for  Morocco.
    She made six further applications  on  non-protection  grounds  (mainly
    Article 8 ECHR) for leave to remain in the United Kingdom: on 7 October
    2002, 26 October 2010, 22 February 2011, 25 June 2014, 3 February  2015
    and 7 February 2016.  All of those applications were unsuccessful.

 7. On 21 January 2016, the appellant was served with form  RED.0001(c)  as
    an overstayer.  She made an asylum claim on 5 August  2016,  which  the
    respondent refused, and was appeal rights exhausted on that claim on 27
    March 2017. The decision of the First-tier Judge in the 2017 appeal  is
    the Devaseelan starting point for the present appeal.

 8. Also on 5 August  2016,  the  appellant  claimed  to  be  a  victim  of
    trafficking.   On  9  September  2016,  the  respondent  as   Competent
    Authority made a negative Reasonable Grounds decision, finding that she
    was not a former victim of trafficking.

 9. The present claim arises out of further  international  protection  and
    human rights submissions made on the appellant's behalf on 23 September
    2019.  The appellant asserted that she is at risk on return to  Morocco
    because she is a lone woman, that she would face destitution there, and
    that she has certain medical conditions, which would not be treated  on
    return, such that  she  would  be  subject  to  inhuman  and  degrading
    treatment contrary to Article 3 ECHR and unlawful breach of her private
    and family life contrary to Article 8 ECHR.

Refusal letter

10. In her refusal letter dated 21 November 2019,  the  respondent  refused
    the international protection and human rights claims and  also  refused
    to grant discretionary leave to remain.  She considered that  the  lone
    female ground had been considered and determined in the 2017 appeal and
    that there was no new evidence to enable the respondent to depart  from
    that decision as her Devaseelan starting point.

11. The respondent noted that the appellant's fears  as  expressed  related
    only to return to Casablanca, not all of Morocco, suggesting  that  she
    could avail herself of an internal relocation option and that surrogate
    international protection was not necessary.  She did not consider  that
    the asserted fear of destitution was proven: there was no more  than  a
    bare assertion by the appellant that she would be destitute and on  the
    streets if returned.

12. The appellant had shown considerable personal fortitude  in  relocating
    to the United Kingdom, and if she returned voluntarily,  could  benefit
    from the Voluntary Assisted Return and Reintegration  Programme,  which
    could include a  relocation  grant,  assistance  in  starting  a  small
    business, short term accommodation and vocational training.

13. The respondent was not satisfied that the  appellant  had  demonstrated
    that she had a well-founded fear of persecution, to the lower  standard
    appropriate in international protection claims, nor  that  humanitarian
    protection was appropriate on those facts.  Her claims under Articles 2
    and 3 ECHR fell with the international protection claim.

14. As regards private and family life, the respondent considered that  the
    appellant could not bring herself within the Immigration Rules  HC  395
    (as amended).  She had lived in  Morocco  for  about  48  years  before
    coming to the  United  Kingdom  and  there  were  no  very  significant
    obstacles to her reintegration there on return.

15.  The  respondent  then  considered  whether  there   were   exceptional
    circumstances for which leave to remain outside  the  Rules  should  be
    given.  The appellant had heart problems (mixed  mitral  valve  disease
    and aortic regurgitation), and asserted that she had severe  depression
    and anxiety, and painful joints, including chronic  back  and  shoulder
    pain.  A list of medication was provided.  Healthcare  in  Morocco  was
    not as sophisticated as in the United Kingdom but  nevertheless,  there
    was treatment available there. The 2018 CPIN on Morocco set out  MedCOI
    information about treatments available there.  The  appellant's  health
    conditions did not amount to exceptional circumstances. The  Article  3
    ECHR  medical  element  of  the  claim  fell   with   the   exceptional
    circumstances claim, being based on the same evidence.

16. The respondent refused the appellant any form of leave  to  remain  and
    she appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.

First-tier Tribunal decision

17. First-tier Judge Russell considered the  appeal  (the  2019  decision),
    taking as his starting point the decision of First-tier Judge Taylor in
    2017 (the 2017 decision), which was the  correct  approach.   He  noted
    that the grounds of appeal did not engage with  the  reasoning  in  the
    2017 decision,  which  included  what  he  described  as  'various  and
    specific negative credibility findings based on a comprehensive  review
    of her evidence' and including a rejection of her claim  to  have  been
    assaulted by a relative and to  be  at  continuing  risk  from  him  on
    return.  He also considered it 'an astonishing delay  by  any  measure'
    that the appellant had waited until 14 years after her arrival  in  the
    United Kingdom before claiming international protection.

18. At [26], the First-tier Judge said this:

         "26. I have been given no reason  nor  evidence  why  I  should  go
         behind Judge Taylor's findings.  In accordance with those findings,
         it follows that the  appellant  has  not  suffered  persecution  in
         Morocco, and that there is no  continuing  threat  to  her:  it  is
         extremely  unfortunate  that  the  representations  made  for   the
         appellant fail to address those findings at all in making the fresh
         claim.  The respondent has not explained why the representations in
         2019 were treated as a fresh claim at all, in light of  their  very
         generic nature, and I find that this current claim  can  barely  be
         differentiated from the claim already decided by Judge Taylor."

19. At [41], the First-tier Judge  accepted  that  women  in  Morocco  were
    capable of constituting a particular social group within Article  1A(2)
    of the Refugee Convention.   At  [42],  he  noted  that  there  was  no
    particularisation of the appellant's claim that  there  was  a  generic
    risk to her as a lone woman, from non-State actors, and that there were
    'no submissions or representations to identify any actor of persecution
    or to identify what form the persecution may take'.   A lack  of  equal
    treatment of women in Morocco was not enough to reach  the  persecution
    threshold,  absent  other  factors  and/or  past   persecution.     The
    international protection element of the appeal could not succeed.

20. At [46], the judge considered the appellant's private and  family  life
    claim. He noted that there was no new evidence to  show  an  Article  8
    ECHR risk on return to Morocco, over and above that already considered:
    her medical conditions had been considered in the 2017 decision:

         "46. ...there is no new evidence concerning  what  obstacles  there
         would be.  The material purporting to be background  evidence  from
         page 82 of the appellant's bundle is simply woeful  and  falls  far
         below the standards of evidence required  to  show  relevant  -  by
         which I mean relevant to a finding that  Article  3  is  engaged  -
         differences in treatment between Morocco and the United Kingdom.

         47.  ... I have no hesitation in adding to Judge Taylor's  findings
         on the appellant's human rights claim by saying that the removal of
         the appellant is an entirely proportionate  response  to  achieving
         the legitimate aim of  maintaining  confidence  in  our  system  of
         protection for refugees."

21. In conclusion,  the  First-tier  Judge  applied  section  117B  of  the
    Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  (as  amended):   the
    appellant had not paid tax or National  Insurance,  having  not  worked
    since 2002 when she arrived in the United Kingdom.  She  had,  however,
    made extensive use of the  National  Health  Service,  at  considerable
    expense to the  United Kingdom as  her  host  country,  and  her  human
    rights claim was based in part on being able  to  continue  to  do  so,
    without having ever contributed to  the  NHS.   Nor  was  she  able  to
    address the Tribunal in English, even after  18  years  in  the  United
    Kingdom, which spoke to her  lack  of  integration.  There  was  little
    evidence of a private life or engagement with the  wider  community  in
    the United Kingdom.

22. The appeal was dismissed. The appellant appealed to the Upper Tribunal.

Permission to appeal

23. The grounds of appeal did not challenge the protection element  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal's decision. The grounds  of  appeal  asserted  that
    exceptional  and  compassionate   circumstances   were   not   properly
    considered; removal of  the  appellant  would  separate  her  from  her
    sister, who lives here, and from the life  she  had  developed  in  the
    United Kingdom since her arrival.

24. The appellant contended that  the  First-tier  Judge  had  applied  his
    negative credibility finding  to  the  medical  evidence  (the  Mibangi
    error) rather than assessing all  the  evidence  in  the  round  before
    reaching a credibility conclusion.  The  appellant  accepted  that  the
    First-tier Judge had considered her mental health and the medical  care
    she receives; she had been dependent on NHS treatment and on her sister
    for 18 years and it would be a breach of Article 8 ECHR to separate her
    from either now.  There  was  only  limited  psychiatric  provision  in
    Morocco and the appellant had established family ties with  her  sister
    in the United Kingdom to which insufficient weight had been given.

25. On 21 April 2020, Upper Tribunal  Judge  Owens  granted  permission  to
    appeal.  She considered that 'although the grounds are  poorly  worded,
    it is just arguable that the Judge  erred  in  failing  to  assess  the
    appellant's Article 8  ECHR  claim  adequately  under  the  Immigration
    Rules'.

26. Permission was granted on all grounds.

Rule 24 Reply

27. There was no Rule 24 Reply by the respondent.   Triage directions  were
    given on 22 October 2020, having regard to  the  Covid  pandemic.   The
    respondent provided a response on 9 June 2020.

28. That is the basis on which this appeal came before the Upper Tribunal.

Upper Tribunal proceedings

29. For the  respondent,  Mr  Melvin  prepared  a  skeleton  argument.   He
    continued to rely on the respondent's 9 June 2020 response.   Mr Melvin
    noted that the grounds of appeal did  not  challenge  the  findings  of
    First-tier Judge Taylor in 2017 and that the present grounds of  appeal
    appeared to focus on private life between the appellant and her sister,
    the appellant's mental  health,  and  the  lack  of  available  medical
    treatment in Morocco.   The appellant did not claim to be able to  meet
    the requirements of Appendix FM or paragraph 276ADE of the  Immigration
    Rules.

30. The grounds of appeal did not engage with the reasoning in  either  the
    2017  or  2019  decisions,  and  were  very  general  in  nature.   The
    respondent urged the Upper Tribunal to  reject  the  challenge  to  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

31. In oral argument,  Mr  Melvin  relied  on  his  skeleton  argument  and
    contended that the First-tier Tribunal had made an adequate  assessment
    of Article 8 outside  the  Rules.   The  appellant  had  made  numerous
    previous Article 8 ECHR claims which had all failed.   The  two  asylum
    claims, made as a last resort, had been found to lack  credibility  and
    to be spurious.  There was very little evidence of private life and  no
    family life, nor any community engagement.  The Upper  Tribunal  should
    find that there was no material error of law and dismiss the appeal.

32. Mr Mupara had not been able to prepare a skeleton argument, nor had  he
    been  provided  with  the  First-tier  Tribunal  hearing  bundle.   His
    submissions were entirely oral.  He contended that  the  2019  decision
    showed a complete failure to consider Article 8 ECHR outside the Rules,
    relying on the decision of the Court of Appeal  in  GM  (Sri  Lanka)  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2019]  EWCA  Civ  1630  (04
    October 2019) at [34] in the judgment of Lord Justice Green, with  whom
    Lady Justice Simler agreed.

33. The appellant was a long-time  overstayer.   Mr  Mupara  accepted  that
    section 117B(4) and (5) were applicable to her and that the  Devaseelan
    starting point was the 2017  decision  of  Judge  Taylor.   He  further
    accepted, applying AM (Zimbabwe) v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2020] UKSC 17 (29 April 2020) that the slight extension  to
    the Article 3 test in Paposhvili, now applicable in the United  Kingdom
    following AM (Zimbabwe) would not avail this  appellant  and  that  she
    could not meet the Article 3 ECHR standard.

34. The appeal could succeed, if at all, only by reason of Article  8  ECHR
    considerations which fell outside the Rules: GM (Sri Lanka)  should  be
    seen as modifying the Supreme Court's guidance in R on the  application
    of Agyarko and Ikuga  v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home  Department
    [2017] UKSC 11 (22 February 2017)  such  that  proportionality,  rather
    than exceptionality, was the correct test.  The appellant had  asserted
    that she had no family support now  in  Morocco,  and  that  her  adult
    daughter provided assistance for her, although they are not  living  in
    the same household.  Mr Mupara had no instructions as  to  whether  the
    appellant had any family at all in Morocco, but his  instructions  were
    that there were none who would assist the appellant.   She also had  no
    home in Morocco.

35. Mr Mupara accepted that within the Rules, the appellant could not  show
    'very significant obstacles' to her reintegration in Morocco,  but  she
    had needed a heart operation, which she had in the United Kingdom,  and
    had some ailments due to her age.

36. He asked me to allow the appeal.

Analysis

37. The appellant's argument hinges on the asserted change in  the  Supreme
    Court's approach to Article 8 ECHR outside the Rules in GM (Sri Lanka),
    which Mr Mupara contended overtook the exceptionality test in  Agyarko,
    replacing it with a more general proportionality test.  That submission
    seems to be at odds with what is said in the judgment:

         "3.  The judgment under appeal was made in  2015.  Since  then  the
         Supreme Court has clarified a series of issues relating to the test
         to be applied under Article 8 in relation to  the  IR  and  section
         117B Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("the NIAA  2002"
         and "section 117B"). The main judgments are: Agyarko v SSHD  [2017]
         UKSC 11  ("Agyarko");  Ali  v  SSHD  [2016]  UKSC  60  ("Ali");  KO
         (Nigeria) v SSHD [2018] UKSC 53 ("KO"); and, Rhuppiah v SSHD [2018]
         UKSC 58 ("Rhuppiah").

         4.   These judgments clarify such matters as:  the  application  of
         the applicable proportionality test and the relative weight  to  be
         attached to various factors in the balancing and weighing exercise;
         the relationship between the IR, the NIAA 2002 and Article  8;  the
         meaning of "little weight" in sections 117B(4) and (5); the  extent
         to which the "little weight" test applies  to  family  rights;  the
         relevance of  a  person's  immigration  status  in  a  family  life
         assessment; and the  relevance  of  "insurmountable  obstacles"  to
         return in the family life context."

38. It is clear to me that the court in GM (Sri Lanka) was  not  purporting
    to depart from established caselaw.  The  passage  relied  upon  by  Mr
    Mupara at [34] appears under the sub-heading '(ii) The  nature  of  the
    rights that risk being relinquished if a person has to leave  in  order
    to retain a family life' and has no bearing on the  factual  matrix  in
    this appeal.   The court  in  GM  (Sri  Lanka)  was  concerned  with  a
    situation where a parent might be deported, and children might have  to
    leave with them in order to retain family life.

39. That is not the  situation  here:  there  is  no  question  of  someone
    accompanying the appellant on her return to her country  of  origin  in
    order to maintain family life.   Applying section 117B(4)(a)  and  (5),
    little weight can be given to her private life. The appellant's  sister
    and daughter are adults. The private life which developed  between  the
    appellant and her sister, with whom she does not live, developed  while
    she was here precariously (but only for the 6 months of her visit visa)
    and thereafter while she was here unlawfully.   Her private  life  with
    her daughter is not, apparently, extensive now.

40. Nor is there any merit in the suggestion that the First-tier Judge made
    the Mibangi error of  applying  his  own  credibility  finding  to  the
    medical evidence.  I asked Mr Mupara to identify where  in  the  First-
    tier Tribunal decision that had occurred, but he was unable to identify
    any such place, and I can find none either.

41. In conclusion, the grounds of appeal do not identify any material error
    of law in the assessment of the appeal  by  the  First-tier  Judge.   I
    decline to reopen the decision of First-tier Tribunal, which is upheld.

DECISION

42. For the foregoing reasons, my decision is as follows:


    The making of the previous decision involved the making of no error  on
    a point of law
    I do not set aside the decision but order that it shall stand.



Signed   Judith AJC Gleeson                           Date:     4 July 2021
         Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson



