
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/12440/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at George House, Edinburgh            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|by Skype for Business                       |On 11 December 2020            |
|On 2 December 2020                          |                               |
|                                            |                               |

                                   Before

                              UT JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                               KAZOE NDJAVERA
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr Farrell, of Peter G Farrell, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This determination is to be read with:

      i) The respondent's decision dated 9 December 2019.

     ii) The appellant's grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.

    iii) The decision of FtT Judge Conway, promulgated on 1 April 2020.

     iv) The appellant's  grounds  of  appeal  to  the  UT,  stated  in  the
         applications made to the FtT and then, in the same  terms,  to  the
         UT.

      v) The grant of permission by UT Judge Kamara, dated 2 July 2020.

     vi) The respondent's response under rule 24, dated 21 September 2020.

 2. I conducted the hearing from George  House.   Representatives  attended
    remotely. No members of  the  public  attended,  either  in  person  or
    remotely.   The technology enabled an effective hearing.

 3. The grounds of appeal are under the headings  (a)  medical  and  police
    evidence (b) sufficiency of protection and (c) internal relocation.

 4. Mr Farrell accepted that the appeal depends firstly on ground 1,  which
    is directed to setting aside the adverse credibility findings, and that
    if it is not made out, grounds 2 and 3 are immaterial.

 5. The medical evidence is a "Medical examination  report  in  a  case  of
    alleged assault or other crime", item E of the  SSHD's  bundle.  It  is
    accompanied by an affidavit by the medical practitioner, sworn before a
    police officer.  Mr Farrell said that  it  is  plainly  authentic.   He
    pointed out that the respondent's decision at [46]  accepted  that  the
    appellant had been the victim of a violent attack, but not that she had
    been the  victim  of  gender  based  violence,  and  that  neither  the
    respondent nor the FtT made any criticism  of   the  medical  evidence.
    However, neither the respondent nor the FtT placed any  weight  on  the
    police evidence.   Mr Farrell pointed out that the police report is  in
    a sworn statement by the same  police  officer  who  took  the  initial
    complaint and the affidavit.  He argued that the nature of the injuries
    made no sense unless linked to an assault and that there was  error  in
    treating the medical evidence and police report in isolation when  they
    should have been seen as inextricably linked, or indivisible, in  which
    light the FtT Judge would not have concluded that the appellant was not
    the victim of gender based violence.  Mr Farrell accepted that the  FtT
    made other adverse credibility points, which were not disputed, but  he
    said those did not overcome the importance of the error.

 6. I turn to the  specific  reasoning  on  credibility  in  the  decision,
    extracted from [15] - [23]:

      (i) the claim was consistent  with  evidence  of  tribal  practice  of
      cousin marriage, but inconsistent with evidence  of  grooming  from  a
      young age, as the appellant was not faced  with  this  until  age  25;
      merit in that criticism by the respondent;

      (ii) the appellant's response of disagreement,  and  saying  that  the
      situation arose because of her uncle's  funeral,  did  not  adequately
      address the criticism;

      (iii) the appellant said her family opposed  her  prior  relationship,
      but she had been free to cohabit and to have a child with this person;

      (iv) the appellant's response that her partner's name derived from his
      mother working for a white man, he was not wealthy, and  not  regarded
      as a proper member of  the  tribe,  did  not  adequately  address  the
      criticism;

      (v) it was unclear why her family would permit the prior  relationship
      then suddenly demand marriage to a cousin, especially as the appellant
      had a younger sister at the age for marriage;

      (vi) that her sister was in higher education, and the marriage was for
      financial reasons, was questionable;

      (vii) the appellant's response, that her sister grew up with her aunt,
      did not address the power and level of control she claimed her  family
      to have;

       (viii) the medical report was stamped on 21  January  2018,  and  the
      police report was dated 4 February 2018; she was in hospital  until  4
      February 2018; it was puzzling that her statement was not taken at the
      hospital, where the police have an office;

       (ix) "more significantly", the police report referred  twice  to  "my
      husband" and to the appellant having married  in  2016,  although  she
      made clear at interview that they were not married;

      (x) the explanation that there had been a traditional marriage was not
      in the appellant's earlier statement;

      (xi) the respondent's concerns over various addresses in a letter from
      the  Traditional  Authority  were  not  found  significant,  but   the
      reference in the letter to a complaint by appellant  in  October  2016
      was inconsistent with her claim that she made the report  in  February
      2017;

      (xii) the appellant provided  no  satisfactory  explanation  for  that
      discrepancy;

      (xiii) the appellant came to the UK as a visitor on 14 September 2018,
      with clearance for 6 months, overstayed, and sought asylum only on  22
      August 2019; the delay was adverse to credibility;

      (xiv) not credible that a woman who made the major decision of leaving
      her country for safety and who had no language  difficulties  did  not
      know about asylum until much later;

      (xv) for those cumulative reasons, appellant may have been the  victim
      of an attack, but "does not satisfy me that she was subjected  by  the
      cousin to gender based violence.  I  do  not  place  reliance  on  the
      contents of the documents."

 7. The FtT conducted its own careful examination of the evidence, agreeing
    with some but not all of the respondent's points, and recognising  that
    some points were stronger than others.  I am  not  persuaded  that  its
    conclusions turned on  overlooking  the  inter-connection  between  the
    medical and police documents.  It was undisputed that the appellant was
    hospitalised  following  an  assault,  but  the  FtT  gave  a  reasoned
    explanation for holding that the documentary evidence, along  with  all
    the rest, went no further than that.  Reading the decision  fairly  and
    as a whole, no legal inadequacy of reasoning is disclosed.

 8. Ground 2 stresses the shortcomings in the level of protection available
    to Namibian women.  The FtT Judge  was  aware  of  those  shortcomings,
    observing at [33] that the system was far from  perfect.   However,  he
    found that reasonable steps were being taken, and noted  that  even  on
    the appellant's account there had  been  an  intention  to  arrest  the
    perpetrator.  Ground 2 is only a disagreement with an assessment of the
    balance of the evidence which was open to the FtT,  and  for  which  it
    gave its reasons.

 9. No error is shown on the alternative of internal relocation.  The FtT's
    finding is said to be "airily" made, but it is  the  counter-suggestion
    that there would be any undue harshness which lacks any real substance.
     Ground 3 is also only disagreement.

10. In summary, ground 1 shows no error of factual analysis, and grounds  2
    and 3 show no error in the alternative conclusions.

11. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

12. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.

      [pic]

      3 December 2020
      UT Judge Macleman



                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS

1. A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must  make  a
written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any  such  application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:
2. Where the person who appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).
3. Where the person  making  the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).
4. Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is  outside  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if the notice  of
decision is sent electronically).
5. A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or  a  Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.
6.  The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on  the  covering
letter or covering email.
