
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12710/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester (via Skype)      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 06 April 2021                     |On 06 May 2021                       |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between
                                     MF
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Mustafa instructed by Diplock Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS


     1. The appellant appeals with  permission  a  decision  of  First-tier
        Tribunal Judge Abebrese ('the Judge') promulgated on  18  September
        2020, in which the Judge dismissed the appellant's  appeal  on  all
        grounds.
     2. Permission to appeal was granted by the Upper Tribunal on the basis
        it was said to be arguable the Judge did not give adequate  reasons
        for rejecting evidence from various  witnesses  and  did  not  make
        sufficient findings of fact.
     3. The appellant asserts the Judge made errors of fact in relation  to
        when elections in Bangladesh took  place,  erroneously  diminishing
        the appellant's credibility at [24] as a result  of  a  belief  the
        last election occurred in 2015 whereas in fact  it  was  2019.  The
        Judge held the delay  between  making  a  claim  in  2019  and  the
        election in 2015 as being relevant to the merits of the  claim.  It
        is  also  argued  the  Judge  erred  in  law  in  relation  to  the
        appellant's  immigration  history  in  finding  that  all  of   the
        appellant's application for leave were rejected when his  leave  to
        remain as a student was extended until 2015.
     4. The appellant also asserts the Judge erred in law in making  unsafe
        credibility findings contrary to SM (section  8:  Judge's  process)
        Iran [2005] UKUT 00016 in finding the appellant's delay in making a
        claim for international protection to impact upon  the  credibility
        of the claim  but  makes  very  few  other  findings  supported  by
        adequate reasons as to why it was appropriate to find the appellant
        lacked credibility.
     5. Whilst this may be the eventual outcome, the appellant was entitled
        to have the basis of his claim properly considered and if the Judge
        found him not to be credible to be  able  to  understand  why  when
        reading the decision. Mr McVeety  accepted  in  his  response  that
        there is merit in this argument, which he  did  not  feel  able  to
        adequately counter, for although a few other points are made by the
        Judge it was accepted the section 8 argument was treated  as  being
        determinative of the credibility issue.
     6. It is also argued the Judge erred by finding  that  documents  were
        not authentic when the genuineness of the documents had never  been
        raised by the respondent as opposed to the reliability of the  same
        and the weight that may be placed upon the documents. It was argued
        that it was unfair of the Judge to  make  such  a  finding  without
        properly addressing where the burden of proof lay or  raising  such
        concerns with the parties. Such complaint is made out.  It  is  not
        clear  whether  the  Judge  took  into  account   the   appellant's
        explanation for the documents, especially  as  the  explanation  is
        said to be incorrectly recorded at [20] and [26],  and  no  reasons
        for rejecting the explanation is given.
     7. The argument the Judge failed to adequately consider  the  evidence
        is also made out. Whilst the Judge  was  right  to  note  the  case
        papers referred to a land dispute there  is  no  reference  to  the
        country information suggesting that cases  are  fabricated  against
        opposition members and often contain broad and  vague  allegations,
        and how this was factored into the assessment of the evidence.
     8. It is also asserted the Judge erred in  law  by  referring  to  the
        appellant as "she" and to have originated from Nigeria,  but  I  do
        not find such errors material as the Judge was  clearly  aware  the
        appellant is male and  from  Bangladesh.  These  matters,  however,
        support  the  argument  of  lack  of   proper   checking   of   the
        determination  by  the  Judge  as  does  the  fact  there  are  two
        paragraphs 24 to 27.
     9. It is also argued the  Judge  failed  to  consider  when  assessing
        paragraph 276 ADE the fact the appellant belongs to  an  opposition
        party that  has  been  declared  illegal  and  failed  to  properly
        consider matters relevant to paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) and Article  8
        ECHR.
    10. I find the cumulative effect of the errors pleaded and accepted  by
        Mr McVeety are such that the determination cannot stand. There is a
        failure to properly consider the evidence, the sustainable argument
        in relation to the proceedings, numerous errors  disclosed  in  the
        grounds, and a failure to provide sufficient reasons such that  the
        reader is able to understand why they won or lost the appeal.
    11. For the reasons set out in the grant of permission  to  appeal  and
        the grounds drafted by Mr Mustapha dated 4  November  2012,  the  I
        find the Judge has erred  in  law  in  a  manner  material  to  the
        decision to dismiss the appeal such that the decision is set aside.
        I find there can be no  preserved  findings  as  a  result  of  the
        failure to properly consider  the  evidence  and  failure  to  give
        adequate and sufficient reasons in support of the findings made.
    12. Having regard to the guidance concerning remittal of appeals to the
        First-tier Tribunal, and in light  of  the  extensive  fact-finding
        require to be made to deal with all relevant issues in relation  to
        this appeal, I find it is appropriate in all the circumstances  for
        the appeal to be remitted to Taylor House to be heard afresh  by  a
        judge other than Judge Aberbrese.
    13. I record that Mr  Mustafa  submitted  that  the  statement  by  the
        Presenting Officer before the First-tier Tribunal that the party of
        which the appellant was a member has been declared illegal  by  the
        authorities in Bangladesh should be a preserved finding, but it  is
        not made out that a specific concession was made to that effect. Mr
        McVeety indicated he will do all he can to communicate this request
        to the First-tier Tribunal Presenting Officers unit and  to  advise
        them of this issue being raised. If the matter is  not  contentious
        and not in dispute the parties are advised to communicate such both
        to themselves and the First-tier Tribunal tasked to  consider  this
        matter fresh prior to the next hearing.

Decision

    14. The Judge materially erred in law. I set the decision  aside.  This
        appeal shall be remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  sitting  at
        Taylor  House  to  be  heard  afresh  by  judge  other  than  Judge
        Aberbrese.


   Anonymity.


    15. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)  of
        the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


I make such order pursuant to rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure     (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008.



Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson
                      Dated 7 April 2021


