
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12833/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 3 October 2018                             |On 15 October 2018            |


     Before

                 DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J F W PHILLIPS


                                   Between

                                     SM
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Islam, Counsel instructed by E1 Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I make an anonymity direction under Rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 in order to protect the  anonymity  of  the
    Appellant who claims asylum. This direction  prohibits  the  disclosure
    directly or indirectly (including by the parties) of  the  identity  of
    the Appellant. Any disclosure and breach of this direction  may  amount
    to a contempt of court. This direction shall  remain  in  force  unless
    revoked or varied by a Tribunal or Court.


 2. This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Henderson in which she dismissed the appeal of the Appellant, a citizen
    of Bangladesh, against the Secretary  of  State's  decision  to  refuse
    asylum and issue removal directions.

 3. The application under appeal was refused  on  24  November  2017.   The
    Appellant exercised his right of appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    The appeal came  before  Judge  Henderson  on  13  June  2018  and  was
    dismissed. The Appellant applied for permission to appeal to the  Upper
    Tribunal.  The application was granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Andrew on 13 August 2018 in the following terms

       I am satisfied that the Judge made an error of fact in that she said
       at paragraph 26 of her decision the Appellant accepted  he  returned
       to Bangladesh in 2009 and left again using his  own  passport.  This
       may well have led to an error  of  law  in  her  assessment  of  the
       Appellant's credibility. Further she did  not  assess  the  risk  on
       return to the Appellant  bearing  in  mind  his  political  profile,
       although it is far from clear from the decision as to  whether  this
       was accepted.

       I accordingly find arguable errors of law.




Background


 4. The history of this appeal is detailed above. The Appellant is a
    citizen of Bangladesh born on 21 June 1987. He arrived in the United
    Kingdom on 25 July 2009 as a working holidaymaker and overstayed when
    his visa expired on 8 July 2011. On 28 October 2014 the Appellant made
    an application for leave to remain on human rights grounds which was
    refused on 6 June 2015. The Appellant was placed on reporting
    conditions and detained off reporting for removal on 28 February 2017.
    Following further representations being rejected the Appellant
    submitted a claim for asylum on 31 May 2017. The basis of his claim was
    that his political activity in Bangladesh as a member of Jamaat E Islam
    would cause him to face persecution on return to Bangladesh.


 5. The Secretary of State refused the Appellant's claim not accepting that
    he was a member of Jamaat E Islam  and  therefore  that  he  had  faced
    persecution in the past or would face persecution on return. The  Judge
    dismissed his appeal finding the Appellant not to be a credible witness
    on the majority of the issues raised but concluding that the  Appellant
    "may have been a  member  of  the  JEI  but  he  had  not  demonstrated
    political activities of such a level as to make him  a  target  on  the
    basis of those activities."


Submissions

 6. At the hearing before me Mr Islam appeared for  the  Appellant  and  Mr
    Tarlow for the Respondent.

 7. For the Appellant Mr Islam said that there were  two  issues.  Firstly,
    the finding at paragraph 26 of the decision that the Appellant accepted
    that he had returned to Bangladesh on his own passport in 2009 and  had
    not been stopped at the airport and had no problems  returning  to  the
    United Kingdom. There was no such evidence, this is a mistake  of  fact
    which infects the credibility finding. Secondly the  Judge  appears  to
    find that the Appellant was a member of Jamaat E Islam but does not  go
    on to assess risk on this basis.  The  objective  evidence  shows  that
    Jamaat E Islam is a proscribed organisation whose members  are  subject
    to adverse attention from the authorities.


 8. For the Respondent Mr Tarlow accepted that there was an error  of  fact
    and that there was no assessment of the risk  to  the  Appellant  as  a
    member of Jamaat E Islam.


 9. I gave an extempore decision allowing  the  appeal  and  remitting  the
    matter to the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  rehearing  with  no  findings
    preserved.


Decision

10. It is clear and accepted that the  Judge  made  an  error  of  fact  in
    paragraph 26  of  the  decision  when  the  Judge  suggested  that  the
    Appellant had accepted that he had returned to Bangladesh  on  his  own
    passport in 2009 and had not been stopped at the  airport  and  had  no
    problems returning to the UK.  That is an error of fact which may  well
    have infected the Judge's  overall  credibility  findings  but  in  any
    event, it is my judgment the Judge's overall credibility  findings  are
    unclear and to that extent they are unsafe.

11. The Judge does not make a specific finding as to  whether  or  not  the
    Appellant was a member of Jamaat E Islam.  The judge says that  he  may
    have been a member but  suggests  that  even  if  he  was  he  has  not
    demonstrated political activities of such a level  as  to  make  him  a
    target on the basis of those activities.  The problem with that is  the
    Judge has not made a specific finding on membership, has  not  said  at
    what level the Appellant may have been a member and  has  not  examined
    whether or not any  activities  with  Jamaat  E  Islam  may  cause  the
    Appellant to  be  in  danger.   The  Judge  has  not  assessed  whether
    membership of Jamaat E Islam at any level may lead to adverse interest.
    The absence of findings is in my judgement an error of law.

12. For these reasons I find the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    unsafe.  It may or may not be that  the  Article  8  decision  is  also
    unsafe but in any event, as this matter is going to be remitted to  the
    First-tier Tribunal,  the  Appellant  will  be  able  to  give  further
    evidence as  to  the  state  of  his  marriage  and  if  necessary  the
    possibility of his spouse travelling to Bangladesh to join him  if  his
    protection claim appeal is unsuccessful.




Summary of decision


  13. Appeal allowed. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside,
      and the matter is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for rehearing
      with no findings preserved.






Signed                                  Date: 9 October 2018

[pic]
J F W Phillips
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


