
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12139/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|on 8th August 2017                     |on 11th August 2017                 |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WOODCRAFT


                                   Between

                                    [M R]
                          (Anonymity order not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:  Mr S. Muquit of Counsel
For the Respondent: Mr P. Armstrong, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS
The Appellant

   1. The Appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka born on [ ] 1980. She  appeals
      against a decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Quinn  sitting
      at Harmondsworth on 17th of February 2017 in which the Judge dismissed
      the Appellant's appeal against a decision of the Respondent dated 19th
      of  October  2016.  That  decision  was  to  refuse  the   Appellant's
      application for asylum and/or humanitarian protection.

   2. The Appellant entered the United Kingdom on 10th of April 2016 by  car
      using a fake passport and visa. She contacted the Respondent  on  14th
      of April 2016 to make an asylum claim. The Appellant's case  was  that
      she had been Active in the LTTE, a  Tamil  separatist  group,  between
      2003 and 2008 and after detention and ill treatment had  escaped  from
      detention in 2016. She feared that if returned to Sri Lanka she  would
      again come to the adverse attention of the authorities. The Respondent
      did not accept the Appellant's credibility and did not accept that the
      Appellant had been involved with the LTTE.


The Decision at First Instance


   3. The Judge did not find the Appellant to  be  a  credible  witness.  At
      paragraph 15 of his determination he indicated that he  did  not  find
      that the Appellant was even a low-level member  of  the  LTTE  between
      2003 and 2008. He did not accept that the Appellant  was  arrested  in
      January 2016 or that she was accused of helping and trying  to  revive
      the LTTE.  The  Judge  did  not  accept  that  the  Appellant  escaped
      detention through the payment bride by her father  nor  that  she  was
      actively involved in LTTE activities and demonstrations in the  United
      Kingdom. He accepted that the Appellant  had  attended  at  least  one
      demonstration but had not taken an active part  in  it.  He  found  at
      paragraph 18 that the Appellant had attended such a  demonstration  so
      that she could be photographed there to bolster her asylum claim.


   4. There were a number  of  reasons  why  the  Judge  did  not  find  the
      Appellant to be a reliable witness. It was not  the  Appellant's  case
      that she was on a wanted list at the airport. Having  left  Sri  Lanka
      there was no reason why the Appellant could  not  have  used  her  own
      passport as she passed through Europe. The effect of section 8 of  the
      Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of Claimants etc) Act  2004  was  to
      damage the Appellant's credibility as the Appellant had used a  forged
      passport and delayed making a claim in Europe.


   5. There were other credibility issues taken by  the  Judge  against  the
      Appellant. The Appellant had given two different dates  for  when  her
      brother had joined the LTTE, 2000 and 2002, in interview. She said she
      did not know where her brother was and yet  her  brother  was  in  the
      United  Kingdom  living  with   the   Appellant's   sister.   It   was
      inconceivable that the Appellant would not been told that her  brother
      was in the United  Kingdom.  The  Appellant's  sister  knew  that  the
      brother had come to the United Kingdom although he  had  not  attended
      court on 17th of February 2016  before  Judge  Quinn.  There  were  no
      details of the brother's asylum claim and it could not  be  taken  for
      granted that he had been given asylum because  of  membership  of  the
      LTTE.


   6. At paragraph  28  the  Judge  pointed  out  an  inconsistency  in  the
      Appellant's evidence between on the one hand saying that she  had  not
      sworn an oath of  allegiance  to  the  LTTE  and  that  she  had.  The
      Appellant in interview had said that she supported  the  LTTE  because
      they were fighting for a good cause rather than mentioning what  might
      be considered their primary  purpose  that  they  were  engaged  in  a
      struggle for independence. Indeed, at question 95 when asked if  there
      was any other reason why she wanted to  work  for  the  LTTE  she  had
      replied no. Such information as the Appellant had given about the LTTE
      was all information that could have been obtained via the Internet.


   7. The Judge criticised the vagueness of the Appellant's  evidence  which
      had said on the one hand that she had lived in the town of Kandy  from
      1995 to 2016 but then that she had moved from  Kandy  to  Vavuniya  in
      2003. In interview, she had said that she was  extensively  questioned
      by the police on her first visit to  a  police  station  but  in  oral
      evidence that it was on her 2nd visit. In contradiction  to  what  she
      had said in interview she said in oral  evidence  that  she  had  been
      interrogated on her 2nd visit.


   8. The Appellant's own case was that she had been involved with the  LTTE
      for 8 years and the Judge concluded that any involvement by her  would
      now be  considered  low  level.  Relying  on  the  country  of  origin
      information report on Sri Lanka of 2012 the  Judge  noted  that  those
      with low level LTTE involvement were released from custody starting in
      2010. The adverse interest which the Sri Lankan authorities had in the
      Appellant had not in the Judge's view been adequately explained. There
      was no statement from the Appellant's father  or  uncle  corroborating
      the Appellant's claim to be released from custody through payment of a
      bribe. The Judge did not believe that  the  Appellant  had  ever  been
      detained.


   9. In relation  to  the  Appellant's  sur  place  claim  the  Appellant's
      description of her own activities in the United Kingdom,  attending  4
      or 5 demonstrations but not taking an active role in  organising  them
      was characterised by the Judge at paragraph 37  as  being  "very  low-
      key". There was evidence before the Judge from  someone  who  did  not
      attend court to be questioned that the Appellant did  take  an  active
      role in organising events but that evidence was said by the  Judge  to
      be manifestly untrue in the light the Appellant's own evidence. In any
      event if it was true that the Appellant had taken an active  role  the
      Judge said he would have expected to see statements from other members
      of the organisation with whom the Appellant would be familiar.


  10. At paragraph 40 the Judge  turned  to  the  medical  evidence  and  in
      particular a report from  Dr  Izquierdo-Martin  noting  that  he,  the
      Judge, did not have the letter of instructions.  The  Judge  commented
      that he had more information to hand than Dr Izquierdo-Martin had  and
      in addition had the advantage of seeing how the Appellant  dealt  with
      matters under cross examination. The Appellant had scars but it was  a
      remote possibility that they could have been  caused  by  other  means
      (that is other than how the Appellant described they were inflicted).


  11. At paragraph 45 the Judge turned his attention to the report  from  Dr
      Dhumad noting again there was no letter  of  instruction.  The  doctor
      diagnosed a moderate depressive episode and although the Appellant had
      presented with symptoms of post-traumatic stress disorder  (PTSD)  the
      Judge noted that the Appellant had performed well at the Tribunal  and
      there  was  no  medical  report  on  the  Appellant's  medication   or
      treatment. The medication the Appellant was receiving was mild and  if
      the Appellant's depression  had  affected  her  badly  he  would  have
      expected the Appellant to be taking something  other  than  first-line
      treatment. There was no up-to-date medical report from the Appellant's
      GP.


  12. Having dealt with the two medical reports the Judge then  reverted  to
      his assessment of the Appellant's credibility  at  paragraph  50.  The
      Appellant had failed to mention that her cousin had been arrested  and
      that if the Appellant had been asked to report to the  police  station
      in Kandy she would have fled from the police at  that  stage.  If  the
      family had concerns for the Appellant, they  could  have  put  her  in
      hiding. There were no substantial grounds of believing  the  Appellant
      was at risk of serious harm. He dismissed the appeal.

The Onward Appeal

  13. The Appellant appealed on grounds  settled  by  counsel  who  had  not
      appeared at first instance but who did appear  before  me.  The  first
      ground argued that the Judge's approach to the assessment of  evidence
      and credibility was flawed.  That  the  Appellant  had  used  a  false
      passport to enter the United Kingdom should not have been taken  as  a
      point against her. The Appellant left Sri Lanka by boat illegally  not
      through the airport and thus without documents. The  use  of  a  false
      passport provided by the agent must have been thereafter. The issue of
      why she never claimed asylum on route through Europe was never  raised
      as an issue against her by the Respondent in the refusal  letter.  The
      2004 Act had been raised by the Respondent but in the context  of  the
      use of a false passport.


  14. The Appellant had referred to her brother in United  Kingdom  who  had
      refugee status. This was not the same brother who she said had  joined
      the LTTE in Sri Lanka in 2000 and who had  not  been  heard  of  since
      2004. The Appellant had made clear in interview that she had more than
      one younger brother. The Appellant had mentioned her  cousin's  arrest
      at interview. If the status of the Appellant's brother in  the  United
      Kingdom was considered  relevant  the  Judge  should  have  asked  the
      Respondent for details. That the injuries on the  Appellant  could  be
      caused by proxy with her permission was an unfair point  as  that  was
      not an allegation raised or put to the  Appellant  by  the  Respondent
      either in the refusal letter or at the hearing.


  15. The approach to the medical evidence was flawed.  Dr  Izquierdo-Martin
      had not simply accepted the Appellant's account but  by  marginalising
      the doctor's view (because of the  Judge's  view  on  the  Appellant's
      credibility) the Judge had acted contrary to  the  principles  in  the
      case of Mbanga both in relation to Dr Izquierdo-Martin's report and Dr
      Dhumad's. The relevance of the absence of a letter of instructions was
      not clear.  Dr  Izquierdo-Martin  had  said  that  the  scars  on  the
      Appellant were fully matured and therefore the Judge should  not  have
      said that Dr Izquierdo-Martin was unable to say whether  the  injuries
      were mature or immature.


  16.  The Judge did not appear to  reject  the  claim  that  the  Appellant
      suffered from symptoms of  PTSD  and  thus  should  have  treated  the
      Appellant as a vulnerable witness or otherwise heed the advice  of  Dr
      Dhumad at paragraph 19.5 of his report. I  pause  to  note  here  that
      paragraph 19.5, referred to in the grounds of  onward  appeal,  stated
      that it was Dr Dhumad's opinion that the Appellant was fit  to  attend
      court hearings or give evidence although her concentration was  likely
      to  be  worse  during  cross  examination.  He  recommended  that  the
      Appellant be given extra time to answer questions and be given regular
      breaks.


  17. The assessment of risk on return was  legally  untenable  the  grounds
      continued because the assessment of risk was contingent upon the  view
      taken of the Appellant's credibility. The Judge had failed to  address
      the risk from the Appellant's  diaspora  activities.  The  Appellant's
      association with TGTE had been accepted and in the case of  UB  [2017]
      EWCA Civ 85 it was held that membership of the TGTE could create  risk
      upon return.


  18. The application for permission to appeal came  on  the  papers  before
      Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Landes  on  15th  of  June  2017.  In
      granting permission to appeal she wrote that it was arguable that  the
      Judge should have treated the Appellant as a vulnerable witness and if
      he had that may have affected his  approach  to  credibility.  It  was
      arguable that the Judge approach the  medical  reports  based  on  his
      finding the Appellant was not credible  rather  than  considering  the
      Appellant's credibility and all the  evidence  including  the  medical
      reports. Failing to claim asylum in  Europe  was  not  raised  by  the
      Respondent and accordingly unless the Appellant was specifically asked
      about it the lack of an explanation should not be held to  damage  her
      credibility.


  19. The Judge had misunderstood the Appellant's case in the sense that she
      did not mean that she had never heard again from her brother  who  was
      in the UK she was referring to her other brother. However,  the  Judge
      was entitled under the provisions of Section 8 of the 2004 Act to take
      account of the production of a false passport as if it were a  genuine
      one but the Judge appeared to have misunderstood  the  nature  of  the
      Appellant's exit from Sri Lanka. It was not clear  whether  the  Judge
      was making a comment about the failure to provide him with a  copy  of
      the letter of instructions. It was not clear why copies of the letters
      were needed when instructions were replicated in  Dr  Dhumad's  report
      and apparently adequately summarised in Dr Izquierdo-Martins report.


  20. There was little merit in the remainder of ground 2 on its  own  (that
      is to say the risk from involvement with the TGTE) because  the  Judge
      had placed little weight on the evidence of Mr Yogalingam (who had not
      attended to give evidence himself but had provided a letter describing
      the Appellant's membership of and activities for TGTE). In  any  event
      the Judge considered  that  the  evidence  of  the  Appellant  and  Mr
      Yogalingam was mutually inconsistent.


  21. The Respondent replied to the grant of permission by letter dated 13th
      of July 2017 stating that she  opposed  the  Appellant's  appeal.  The
      grounds were primarily a disagreement with the findings of  the  Judge
      who had directed himself appropriately. The grounds relied on offering
      different interpretations of the evidence when matters of  weight  and
      interpretation were a matter for the Judge. It was for  the  Appellant
      to ensure that her evidence was clear and unambiguous. The  Judge  had
      carefully considered the medical evidence but found it wanting.  There
      were multiple serious credibility issues with the Appellant's  account
      and it was open to the Judge to find the Appellant not credible.

The Hearing Before Me

  22. The matter came before me in order  to  decide  whether  there  was  a
      material error of law in the First-tier decision. If  there  was  then
      the decision would be set aside and the appeal reheard. If  there  was
      not, the decision of the  First-tier  would  stand.  Counsel  for  the
      Appellant relied upon his grounds arguing that the Judge made  various
      errors in the approach to credibility  making  mistakes  of  fact  and
      generally. The Judge had failed to take note of Dr Dhumad's assessment
      of the  Appellant's  vulnerabilities  and  had  compartmentalised  the
      assessment of credibility distinct from Dr Dhumad's report which was a
      classic Mbanga mistake. He had evaluated the medical report by looking
      at the findings he had already made  about  credibility  in  isolation
      from that report. He was not looking at the Appellant's vulnerability.


  23.  There were a number of mistakes of fact beginning from  paragraph  20
      of the determination onwards. It was not clear that the Appellant  had
      passed through Europe. Section 8 was never put forward in the  context
      of failing to claim en route. It was an unfair point to  take  against
      the Appellant.


  24. There was no inconsistency  in  the  Appellant's  evidence  about  her
      brother in the United Kingdom that was a mistake of fact by the Judge.
      The Appellant had twin younger brothers Prathep and  Pardeep.  It  was
      the latter who had gone missing. She had not said in evidence that she
      did not know where her UK based  brother  was.  The  Appellant  talked
      about the twins in her statement.


  25. Even if the Appellant had been inconsistent about some  of  the  dates
      one  had  to  consider   whether   there   were   reasons   for   such
      inconsistencies. Contrary to what was said  in  the  determination  Dr
      Izquierdo-Martin had said that the Appellant's injuries  were  mature.
      One could not discount the possibility that a correct appreciation  of
      the medical evidence would have affected  the  Judge's  deliberations.
      The Judge was also in error in saying that the Appellant had failed to
      mention the arrest in interview.


  26. In reply for the Respondent it was observed  that  the  Appellant  had
      failed to mention her cousin in the  screening  form.  The  Respondent
      relied on the rule 24 response which  I  have  summarised  above  (see
      paragraph  21).  The  Judge  had  carefully  considered  the   medical
      evidence. It was not correct to say  the  Judge  was  unaware  of  the
      Appellant's mental state as he had referred to  the  medical  reports.
      The Judge had noted the change  in  background  circumstances  in  Sri
      Lanka and was correct to say that the Appellant  had  not  engaged  in
      activity in the United Kingdom which might bring her to the  attention
      of the authorities. As a low-level member of the  LTTE  the  Appellant
      was not at risk on return. There was no material error of law and  the
      determination was well reasoned. The  Judge  may  have  been  mistaken
      about the existence of the brothers but  if  so  it  was  due  to  the
      confused nature of the evidence which the  Judge  heard.  The  witness
      statement had failed to say which brother the  Appellant  was  talking
      about. The determination should stand.


  27. In conclusion for the Appellant it was accepted that it  was  for  the
      Appellant  to  make  her  evidence  clear  but  if  an  Appellant  had
      difficulties then it was a question of how much weight should be given
      to a lack of clarity or mistakes. The Judge had not made clear he  was
      taking the Appellant's vulnerabilities into account. In the  event  of
      the finding of  material  errors  or  errors  of  law  such  that  the
      determination should be set aside the proper venue for rehearing would
      be for the matter to be remitted back to the First-tier.

Findings

  28. Certain of the issues in this case turned on the  credibility  of  the
      Appellant. The Appellant's case was that she had been arrested and ill-
      treated by the authorities in Sri Lanka  because  of  her  involvement
      with the LTTE but had managed to escape from detention by payment of a
      bribe. The Judge did not find the Appellant to be a  credible  witness
      and did not accept any of the arguments put forward by the Appellant.


  29. The attack on the Judge's  assessment  of  credibility  falls  into  3
      categories. The first is to say  that  the  Judge  made  a  number  of
      mistakes of fact and misunderstood the evidence in certain places. The
      2nd category is to argue that even if the  Appellant  was  unclear  or
      vague at points of her evidence she was a vulnerable witness and  that
      should have been taken  into  account  in  the  consideration  of  her
      credibility. The 3rd category of attack on  the  Judge's  findings  is
      that the Judge had made up his mind about the Appellant's  credibility
      and dealt with the two medical reports as something of an afterthought
      rejecting  them  because  he  had  already  rejected  the  Appellant's
      credibility. In this way,  it  is  argued  the  Judge  did  not  place
      adequate weight on the medical evidence  which  the  Appellant  states
      support her case.


  30. The Respondent by contrast points to the sheer number of  difficulties
      with the Appellant's credibility and argues that the Appellant's  case
      on appeal amounts to no more than a disagreement with the result.


  31. It is important at this stage to make one further point which is  that
      although the Judge did not accept the Appellant's credibility, he  did
      in certain respects consider the Appellant's case at its  highest.  He
      found that on the Appellant's own evidence her  involvement  with  the
      LTTE had been at a minor level as had her sur place activities in this
      country.  Even  if  therefore  the  Appellant's  account  was  by  the
      Respondent as a person of interest.  Whilst  membership  of  the  TGTE
      could potentially bring a risk to an Appellant, see  the  case  of  UB
      that was not the case for  this  Appellant.  The  Judge  rejected  the
      evidence of Mr Yogalingam in part at least because it conflicted  with
      the Appellant's own description of her activities. That was the  point
      made by Judge Landes when she granted permission to  appeal  on  other
      grounds but not on the Appellant's claimed TGTE connections.  I  would
      respectfully agree with that; the Judge  gave  sound  reasons  why  he
      rejected the evidence of Mr Yogalingam who  had  not  attended  to  be
      questioned.


  32.  Although the Appellant sought  to  make  a  forensic  attack  on  the
      determination analysing the Judge's findings in considerable detail, I
      do not consider that the criticisms made of the determination disclose
      a material error of law. Although much  has  been  said  in  both  the
      grounds and the grant of permission about the reference by  the  Judge
      to the fact that he was not supplied with the letters  of  instruction
      to the two doctors, I  do  not  read  the  determination  as  being  a
      criticism of the reports in  consequence  of  the  failure  to  supply
      letter of instructions. It is worth bearing in  mind  what  the  Upper
      Tribunal have said in AS [2005] UKUT  172  about  the  instruction  of
      experts. If instructions to an expert contain an error of fact it  may
      be necessary to take this into account when assessing the weight to be
      attached to the expert report. This may be relevant for example  where
      an Appellant appears to relate more of their  account  to  the  expert
      than they did to the Respondent.  It was therefore appropriate for the
      Judge to note the absence of a letter of instructions. That he did not
      draw any adverse conclusions from  that  indicates  that  he  did  not
      consider that to be a matter to be pursued. That so much was  made  of
      this minor issue in the grounds of onward appeal underlines the  point
      that the challenges to the determination appear at times to be more an
      attempt to find errors than a demonstration of them.


  33. Although the Appellant argues that she should have been treated  as  a
      vulnerable witness, it  was  not  the  case  that  the  Appellant  was
      declared unfit to give evidence. What Dr Dhumad recommended  was  that
      the Appellant should be given breaks and time to answer  questions.  I
      have seen no complaint that breaks were withheld  from  the  Appellant
      during the hearing or that she was rushed  into  giving  answers.  The
      Judge by contrast noted that the Appellant had been able to  give  her
      evidence fully  during  a  lengthy  hearing.  I  also  note  that  the
      Appellant's interview with the Respondent consisted of  235  questions
      and took place over almost 6 hours (including breaks) I do not  accept
      the criticism  therefore  that  the  Judge  fell  into  error  in  his
      assessment  of  the  Appellant's  credibility   by   overlooking   the
      difficulties the Appellant might face in stating her case.


  34. The Judge's view was that the Appellant  was  vague  and  inconsistent
      because her account was not true and the Appellant  had  displayed  an
      incomplete grasp of it. That was a matter for the Judge and that  view
      was open to him on the evidence before him.  There  are  a  number  of
      details in the Judge's assessment of credibility that are queried  but
      in many cases the confusion arose because of the unclear way in  which
      the Appellant gave her evidence and the  inconsistencies  between  the
      Appellant's interview and what she later said in her witness statement
      for example the  Appellant  contradicted  herself  over  her  move  to
      Vavuniya and appeared unable to say  clearly  why  she  supported  the
      LTTE. It was for the Appellant to clarify these matters  but  she  did
      not do so to the Judges satisfaction. I remind myself that  the  Judge
      had the benefit of seeing and hearing the Appellant give her  evidence
      and was  entitled  to  form  an  impression  of  her  truthfulness  or
      otherwise.


  35. Where details could be  relatively  easily  checked  for  example  her
      claims to be involved in activities in this country, her evidence  was
      found to be wanting.  There was a lack of supporting witnesses such as
      the brother who was said to have been given status and was living with
      the  appellant's  sister.  There  was  nothing  in  writing  from  the
      Appellant's family in Sri Lanka confirming the account of  the  escape
      through a bribe. It was reasonable  to  have  expected  this  evidence
      which  could  have  been  easily  obtained  to  be  produced  but   no
      explanation for the failure to provide the evidence was given  to  the
      Judge beyond a claim that the brother was unwell. It was open  to  the
      Judge to draw the inference  as  he  did  at  paragraph  26  that  the
      Appellant could not establish an important part of her case.


  36.  Although  Dr  Dhumad  described  the  Appellant's  participation   in
      demonstrations as therapeutic  and  Mr  Yogalingam  characterised  the
      appellant's involvement in demonstrations as being at a high level the
      Judge noted at paragraph  39  that  the  Appellant's  account  of  her
      activities was vague. If she had been  organising  demonstrations  one
      could reasonably expect that the Appellant would give a clear  account
      of what she had done. If she was vague because she was not  organising
      them that raised questions over why she had submitted a false document
      in support of her case. If her participation  was  indeed  therapeutic
      some explanation why she could still not recount it clearly was needed
      but was not provided. In these circumstances, it was open to the Judge
      to conclude as he did that the Appellant was fabricating parts of  her
      case.


  37. Although the Appellant was taking medication  the  Judge  pointed  out
      that this was first line treatment and was not therefore  evidence  of
      serious mental difficulties that might affect the  way  the  Appellant
      gave her evidence. There was  no  up  to  date  information  from  the
      Appellant's treating doctor, her GP. The  Appellant  claimed  to  have
      entered  the  United  Kingdom  by  car  on  10th  of  April  2016.  By
      definition, given that Great Britain is an island, the Appellant  must
      have travelled through another European country prior to  her  arrival
      and in the light of what she said in interview potentially two. It was
      not therefore an unreasonable conclusion for the Judge  to  draw  that
      the Appellant had travelled through Europe before arriving  in  United
      Kingdom and yet had made no effort to  claim  asylum  en  route.  That
      conclusion arose from the Appellant's own account. If  she  wished  to
      clarify that further it was open to her to do so in her statement  but
      it is difficult to see how the Judge can  be  validly  criticised  for
      drawing a conclusion on the basis of the Appellant's own evidence.  No
      alternative explanation for her journey has ever been provided.


  38. One of the main criticisms made by the Appellant of the  determination
      is that the Judge dealt with the medical evidence as  an  afterthought
      rather than looking at all of the evidence  in  a  holistic  way.  The
      Judge of necessity had to set his conclusions  out  in  some  form  of
      order. The medical evidence indicated that the Appellant had sustained
      injuries at some point in the past but what the Judge  had  to  decide
      was whether  the  Appellant's  account  of  how  those  injuries  were
      incurred was or was not credible. It was not for the doctors to decide
      the issue of credibility. Inevitably they were likely  to  accept  the
      account of the Appellant since they were not in a  position  like  the
      Judge to probe the account to  establish  its  veracity.  Indeed  that
      would hardly be considered to be the role of  a  medical  expert.  The
      Judge was right therefore to  point  out  that  he  was  in  a  better
      position  than  the  doctors  to  establish  the  credibility  of  the
      Appellant's account.


  39. The credibility matters which troubled the Judge which he set  out  in
      some detail in his determination could not possibly  have  been  dealt
      with by the doctors. This is not to say that  the  Judge  ignored  the
      medical evidence rather that he  put  that  medical  evidence  in  its
      context. After dealing with the two medical reports he went on in  his
      determination to consider other  credibility  issues  suggesting  that
      even after considering the medical evidence there were  still  further
      credibility matters which troubled him. I do  not  consider  therefore
      that this is an Mbanga case.


  40.  At paragraph 44 the Judge noted Dr Izquierdo-Martin's view  that  the
      causation of the scars  by  means  other  than  as  described  by  the
      Appellant was remote and he acknowledged that comment on causation  by
      going on to say that it was not possible to rule that explanation out.
      What the Judge had to do was to weigh up the medical  evidence  as  to
      the consistency of the injuries with  the  alleged  causation  in  his
      general view on credibility. The wording of paragraph 44 shows that he
      did this.  The Judge was not  speculating  as  to  the  cause  of  the
      injuries he was merely pointing out that the  Appellant's  account  of
      how they were inflicted was not credible. Whether  the  injuries  were
      mature or otherwise was beside the point and it is  difficult  to  see
      why so much turned on this point that the Judge might  otherwise  have
      changed his conclusions on credibility.


  41. What the Judge went on to do at paragraph  53  after  considering  the
      medical evidence and taking the Appellant's case (particularly on  the
      sur place activities) at its highest was to note  that  the  objective
      evidence indicated  that  as  a  low-level  member  of  the  LTTE  the
      Appellant would no longer be of adverse interest  to  the  authorities
      because of the  changes  in  country  conditions.  I  say  taking  the
      Appellant's case at  its  highest  because  the  Appellant  had  given
      evidence which very much indicated that she  was  a  low-level  member
      while in Sri Lanka. It was her witness Mr  Yogalingam  who  sought  to
      suggest the Appellant's involvement (in this country) was greater than
      that but his evidence was properly discounted for the reasons  already
      given.


  42. Dr Izquierdo-Martin's view, that the Appellant's  overall  pattern  of
      scarring was not suggestive of  self-inflicted  injuries  was  as  the
      Judge pointed out at paragraph 44 merely the doctor's opinion.  It  is
      important to note that at page 8 of  his  report  Dr  Izquierdo-Martin
      indicated it  was  scientifically  impossible  to  differentiate  self
      infliction injuries by proxy  from  injuries  caused  by  torture.  Dr
      Izquierdo-Martin's view was that there were  no  presenting  facts  to
      make self infliction by proxy more than a remote possibility but  that
      was evidently felt by the Judge to  be  merely  an  expression  of  an
      opinion not grounded in  an  overall  assessment  of  the  Appellant's
      credibility. That was the place of the Judge to decide.


  43. In any event, even taking the Appellant's case  at  its  highest,  the
      background evidence did not suggest that the  Appellant  would  be  at
      risk upon return. It is incorrect as the grounds seek  to  argue  that
      the Judge failed to address the risk  from  the  Appellant's  diaspora
      activities. On the contrary the Judge considered that they were not of
      such a level that they would cause any  risk  to  the  Appellant.  The
      Judge took a dim view of the reason why the Appellant had  taken  part
      in the demonstrations although that of itself would not be  conclusive
      since sur place activities even if conducted in bad  faith  can  still
      give rise to a claim. The important point here was  that  the  Judge's
      finding was that the Appellant's activities would not bring her to the
      attention of the authorities.


  44. Even if one accepts that  the  Judge  did  make  some  errors  in  his
      determination, for the reasons I have given above I do not accept that
      they are of significance. The Appellant's claim was bound to fail  and
      the forensic examination of the determination is in many  ways  a  red
      herring since the Appellant's claim could not succeed. I do  not  find
      that the Judge made any error in dismissing the appeal and I therefore
      dismiss the Appellant's onward appeal against that determination.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of  an
    error of law and I uphold  the  decision  to  dismiss  the  Appellant's
    appeal

Appellant's appeal dismissed

I make no anonymity order as there is no public policy reason for so doing.



Signed this 9th day of August 2017

.......................................................
Judge Woodcraft
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge







TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee was payable and I have dismissed the appeal and therefore  there  can
be no fee award.



Signed this 9th day of August 2017


.......................................................
Judge Woodcraft
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge



