
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                   Appeal Number:
PA/12729/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 15 May 2019                          |On 22 May 2019                      |
|                                        |                                    |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHANA

                                   Between

                            Muhammed Komor Uddin
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Shah, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Miss A Everett, Senior presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a national of  Bangladesh  who  appealed  against  the
    respondent's decision dated 22 October 2018  to  refuse  to  grant  him
    asylum and humanitarian protection in the United  Kingdom.   The  judge
    did not consider the appellant's rights under Article 8 of the European
    Convention on Human Rights as he was of the view that article 8 was not
    raised. He stated at paragraph 42 of his decision  that  there  was  no
    Article 8 or private or family life claims pursued "before me".

2.    Permission  to  appeal  was  granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal   Judge
    Robertson in a decision dated 4 April 2019 stating  that  there  is  no
    merit in respect of the asylum and humanitarian protection  appeal  but
    it is of arguable merit that the Article 8 grounds were not  considered
    by the judge and the grounds of appeal clearly reference that Article 8
    is raised.

3.   At the hearing it was by consent  that  the  parties  agreed  that  the
    judge fell into material error by not considering Article 8 when it was
    clear that Article 8 had been raised on the grounds of appeal.  I  find
    that the judge's failure to consider Article 8 was a material error.

 4. Therefore I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  for  his
    failure to consider  whether  the  United  Kingdom  is  breach  of  the
    appellant's rights in respect of the Article 8 and  that  is  the  only
    ground in respect of the renewed hearing.


 5. I however preserve the First-tier Tribunal's decision in respect of the
    appellant's claim for asylum and humanitarian protection as  permission
    was not been granted and there is no  material  error  of  law  in  the
    decision relating to those claims.

Notice of Decision

 6. The appeal be remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  be  heard  in
    respect of the appellant and the children's rights under Article  8  of
    the European Convention on Human Rights only.


7. The appeal be set before any First-tier Tribunal Judge other  than  Judge
   Davey.

8. Anonymity direction not made.






Signed                                  Date 21th day of May 2019


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chana

