
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/12156/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decision made                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|Without a hearing                  |On 06 May 2021                     |
|Pursuant to Rule 34                |                                   |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN

                                   Between

                                     PS
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTIOn continued)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008
Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify the appellant or any member of the  appellant's  family.
This direction  applies  both  to  the  appellant  and  to  the  respondent.
Failure to comply with this  direction  could  lead  to  contempt  of  court
proceedings.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is appealing against a decision of Judge of  the  First-
      tier Tribunal Bagral promulgated on 27 November  2020  dismissing  his
      protection and human rights claim.

   2. The hearing before Judge Bagral proceeded in the appellant's  absence.
      In paragraph 5 of  the  decision  Judge  Bagral  stated  that  he  was
      satisfied that the notice of hearing had been properly served  on  the
      appellant.

   3. The grounds of appeal make a single argument, which  is  that  it  was
      procedurally unfair to proceeded with the hearing as it  was  possible
      that the appellant did not have notice of it. The grounds  state  that
      the appellant's (former) representatives came  off  the  record  on  2
      November 2020 (17 days before the hearing) and the appellant  was  not
      aware of the hearing date. The grounds  acknowledge  that  the  former
      representatives of the appellant stated that emails were sent  to  the
      appellant notifying him of the hearing date. With respect to this,  it
      is stated in the grounds that the current representatives "are in  the
      process  of  following  this  up   with   the   appellant's   previous
      representatives".

   4. On 1 February 2021, permission to appeal was granted by Judge  of  the
      First-tier Tribunal Parkes. Judge Parkes stated that if the  appellant
      was genuinely unaware through no fault of his own of the hearing  date
      there might be  procedural  unfairness  but  that  "considerably  more
      information is required". Judge Parkes stated  that  confirmation  was
      needed  from  the  appellant's  former  representatives   about   what
      information they had been provided with.

   5. On  8  February  2021  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Smith  gave  directions
      expressing the provisional view that it was appropriate  to  determine
      the question of whether Judge Bagral erred in law without  a  hearing.
      The parties  were  given  directions  in  respect  of  making  further
      submissions on the merits of the case and on whether a  hearing  would
      be necessary.

   6. On 5 March 2021 the respondent  submitted  a  brief  response  to  the
      grounds of appeal stating that the appellant  had  not  submitted  the
      further information identified by the Judge Parkes granting permission
      and inviting the Upper Tribunal to uphold the decision of  the  First-
      tier Tribunal.

   7. On 29 March 2021 Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan gave further directions.
      She noted that the appellant had not responded to Upper Tribunal Judge
      Smith's directions. She also noted that given the nature of the  issue
      highlighted  in  the  grounds  of  appeal  it  should  be   relatively
      straightforward for the  appellant  to  produce  evidence  that  might
      support his assertion that he  did  not  receive  the  notice  of  the
      hearing in the First-tier Tribunal  in  view  of  the  fact  that  his
      current representatives say that they have been in  contact  with  his
      former representatives. Judge Canavan's directions gave the  appellant
      7 days to respond. At paragraph 5 of her directions, she  stated  that
      in the event that there is a failure to comply the Upper Tribunal will
      consider whether, despite non-compliance, to proceed to determine  the
      appeal in the absence of any response from the  appellant  or  whether
      other action might be appropriate.

   8. The appellant has not responded to  the  directions  of  either  Upper
      Tribunal Judge Smith or Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan.

   Decision to Decide Appeal without a Hearing

   9. I have considered whether it is appropriate in this case to decide the
      appeal without a hearing pursuant to Rule 34 of the Tribunal Procedure
      (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008. I do not underestimate the benefits of an
      oral hearing, as set out in The  Joint  Council  for  the  Welfare  of
      Immigrants v The President of  the  Upper  Tribunal  (Immigration  And
      Asylum Chamber) [2020] EWHC 3103.  However,  I  am  satisfied  that  a
      hearing is not necessary in this appeal because the  appellant's  case
      has no reasonable  prospect  of  succeeding  in  the  absence  of  the
      evidence referred to in Judge Canavan's directions (and in  the  grant
      of permission). As the appellant  has  failed  to  comply  with  Judge
      Canavan's  directions  (by  either  complying   with   Judge   Smith's
      directions or applying for an extension of time) he would not be  able
      to rely on the evidence necessary for his claim to have a prospect  of
      succeeding at a hearing. In these circumstances, and noting  that  the
      appellant has not opposed Judge Smith's provisional view that the case
      can be determined without a hearing, I have decided to make a decision
      without a hearing.


   The Decision

  10. The appellant claims that he was not  informed  of  the  date  of  the
      hearing in the First-tier Tribunal before Judge Bagral.  However,  his
      representative who drafted the  grounds  of  appeal  states  that  the
      appellant's previous representatives maintain that emails were sent to
      the appellant to notify him of the hearing date. The grounds of appeal
      state that the current representatives are in the process of following
      this issue up with the previous representatives. Over  3  months  have
      elapsed  since  the  grounds  were   drafted   but   the   appellant's
      representatives have still not provided the Upper  Tribunal  with  any
      further information obtained from the previous solicitors.  They  have
      not done this despite (a) the grant of  permission  making  clear  how
      significant this  information  is;  and  (b)  Judge  Canavan,  in  her
      directions, emphasising the need for the appellant to produce evidence
      to support his assertion  that  he  did  not  receive  the  notice  of
      hearing.

  11. Given that (a) according to the grounds  of  appeal,  the  appellant's
      former solicitors notified the appellant about the hearing  date;  and
      (b) no evidence has been submitted by the appellant despite over three
      months elapsing and it being made clear to the appellant (in both  the
      grant of permission and Judge Canavan's directions) that such evidence
      was needed, I have no hesitation in finding that  it  is  more  likely
      than not that the appellant was informed by  his  previous  solicitors
      (as they claim) of the hearing date and that he  did  not  attend  the
      hearing despite being informed of  the  date.  It  was  not  therefore
      procedurally unfair for Judge Bagral to proceed with the hearing.

  12. The appeal is dismissed.

|                                   |                                   |
|Signed                             |                                   |
|                                   |                                   |
|D. Sheridan                        |                                   |
|Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan      |                                   |
|                                   |Dated: 28 April 2021               |




















