
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12708/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford Combine Court      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Centre                               |                                     |
|On 21 August 2019                    |On 5 September 2019                  |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                              HEVAR SALAH OSMAN
                       (Anonymity Direction Not Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss G Patel Instructed by Hallmark Legal
Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.



                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS




     1. The appellant appeals with  permission  a  decision  of  First-tier
        Tribunal Judge Drake promulgated on 6 June 2019 in which the  Judge
        dismissed the appellant's appeal on  protection  and  human  rights
        grounds.



Background


     2. The appellant is a national of Iraq of Kurdish ethnicity born on  2
        October 1999 who entered the United Kingdom on 5 September 2018 and
        claimed asylum and/or another form of international  protection  or
        leave to remain on human rights grounds which was  refused  by  the
        Secretary of State.
     3. The Judge noted the basis of the appellant's claim at [12 - 16].
     4. The Judge's findings are set out from [21] in which the Judge found
        the credibility of the appellant's claim was damaged as a result of
        a number of factors which emerged from the evidence which, overall,
        were found to warrant a conclusion the appellant had not discharged
        the burden of proof upon him to the required standard. The  Judge's
        reasons are set out  at  [22(1)  -  (12)]  of  the  decision  under
        challenge.
     5. Ms Patel asserts the Judge has erred in law in failing to  consider
        material matters, in failing to give any or any proper reasons, and
        in failing to properly apply relevant country  guidance  applicable
        to Iraq.
     6. Permission to appeal was granted by another judge of the First-tier
        Tribunal on 12 July 2019, the material parts of the grant being  in
        the following terms:


             3.   It is arguable that the Judge failed to consider material
                  matters. In paragraph [22.5]  he  states:  "the  appellant
                  doesn't assert that anybody in his immediate family  other
                  than him was subject to beatings and threats. This is  not
                  plausible." The appellant did state answer to question  93
                  in the interview that his sister had also  been  attacked.
                  The Judge has arguably made a mistake in law in  paragraph
                  [22.11]: "He has not been in  this  country  long  enough,
                  established family connections and is  not  of  sufficient
                  age to enable him  to  qualify  for  rights  protected  by
                  Articles 2 and 3 of the ECHR." As is argued in the grounds
                  the rights protected by Articles 2 and 3 are absolute  and
                  not qualified rights.


             4.   The decision and reasons  do  contain  arguable  material
                  error is of law. Permission to appeal is  granted  in  all
                  grounds argued in the application dated 19 June 2019.



Error of law


     7. Taking the grounds of challenge in the order  they  appear  in  the
        pleadings; the first challenge is to [22.12] in which the appellant
        asserts the Judge misunderstood the basis of the  appellant's  case
        so far as the Refugee Convention is concerned.  The  appellant  was
        not asserting that family members of former sellers of alcohol form
        part of a particular social group (PSG). The appellant's  case  was
        that he was being targeted by his maternal family  because  of  his
        father and that persecution based on membership of one's family can
        form part of a particular social group as per the  House  of  Lords
        decision in K and Fornah. The grounds assert the  Judge  failed  to
        consider this in his determination.
     8. At [22.12] the Judge writes: "Despite Councils eloquence, I  cannot
        find in any case law or other  source  a  basis  for  finding  that
        though family members can be part  of  a  PSG,  but  only  if  they
        satisfy the qualification that prime movers in that family  qualify
        as a PSG and that there is nothing in  case  law  defining  alcohol
        sellers as a PSG, at  least  of  all  anyone  indirectly  connected
        therewith, forming part of a Convention protected PSG."
     9. The Judge clearly understood  the  basis  on  which  the  appellant
        claimed international protection recording at [16] "Council for the
        Appellant made an eloquent case for categorising persons  who  sell
        alcohol as being members of a  Particular  Social  Group  (PSG)  as
        defined by and  for  the  purposes  of  being  thus  accessible  to
        Convention protection." The  grounds  assert  the  Judge  may  have
        misunderstood those submissions on the basis it is not claimed that
        a family member of a former sellers of alcohol  formed  a  PSG  but
        rather that the appellant was being  targeted  by  maternal  family
        members as a result of being his father's  son,  a  member  of  his
        father's family, and that it is the family which forms the PSG.
    10. In K and Fornah v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2006]
        UKHL 46 it was held that the family is the archetypal social  group
        and where one member of a family is persecuted, albeit  not  for  a
        Convention reason, persecution meted out because of  him  to  other
        members of his family may  be  "for  reasons  of  membership  of  a
        particular social group".  However, where some members of a  family
        face persecution, but not others, the issue of causation will  need
        to be closely scrutinized.  Lord Rodger of  Earlsferry  adopted  an
        Australian proposition that, while it is not necessary that all the
        members of a social group be persecuted before  one  can  say  that
        people are being persecuted for reasons of their membership of that
        group, it is generally necessary that all the members of the  group
        should be susceptible to persecution.
    11. In this appeal there was insufficient evidence before the Judge  to
        show that all members of the group are susceptible  to  persecution
        as there was no evidence those such as the  appellant's  father  or
        mother had been targeted or ill-treated in  the  same  way  as  the
        appellant.
    12. In Ahmedbekova (Common policy on asylum and subsidiary protection -
        Judgment) [2018] EUECJ C-652/16 the CJEU said that in carrying  out
        the assessment of an application for international protection on an
        individual  basis,  account  must  be  taken  of  the   threat   of
        persecution and of serious harm in respect of a  family  member  of
        the applicant for the purpose of determining whether the  applicant
        is, because of his family  tie  to  the  person  at  risk,  himself
        exposed to such a threat.
    13. The Judge was arguably correct to find that there is  no  authority
        that an alcohol seller or family  of  a  seller  of  alcohol  falls
        within a PSG per se, but  neither  can  it  be  disputed  that  the
        appellant possesses an immutable characteristic as a member of  his
        family unit. That is, however, not enough to entitle a person to  a
        grant of international protection.  It is settled law  that  in  an
        asylum case there is ultimately one single  question  to  be  asked
        which is whether there  is  a  serious  risk  that  on  return  the
        appellant will be persecuted for a Convention  reason.   Which,  in
        this appeal, required the appellant to prove he faces a  real  risk
        of  ill  treatment  sufficient  to  satisfy   the   definition   of
        persecution as a result of being a member of  the  family  unit  on
        return, which the Judge did not find was made out. The  finding  by
        the Judge on this  point  is  that  as  it  was  not  accepted  the
        appellant will face any risk of future beatings from  the  maternal
        family in the past as the circumstances prevailing did not  support
        a finding of such future risk. Any  error,  even  if  made  out  as
        pleaded in this ground, has not been shown to be material.
    14. Ground 2 challenges the findings at [22.1] in which the Judge found
        the appellant's account implausible and inconsistent, finding  that
        the appellant had failed to provide evidence of how he came  to  be
        injured. The Ground asserts the Judge refused  at  the  hearing  to
        admit video evidence on the appellant's telephone showing one  such
        instance when he had been beaten by members of his maternal  family
        which the appellant has already mentioned and attempted to show  at
        his asylum interview.
    15. Evidence recorded in social media is admissible in  the  First-Tier
        Tribunal, but directions were clearly given in this appeal  of  the
        time by which such evidence was to  be  disclosed.  The  appellant,
        despite mentioning the existence of footage on his telephone of his
        being beaten at interview failed to disclose such  evidence  within
        the time limit provided or to take steps  to  ensure  that  it  was
        possible to view such media within the Tribunal environment. Indeed
        it appears from the file that  it  was  only  the  day  before  the
        hearing the  appellant's  representatives  wrote  to  the  Tribunal
        indicating the appellant wished to rely upon pictures and video  on
        his telephone. The assertion the Judge refused at  the  hearing  to
        admit the evidence, the full extent of the pleadings, misrepresents
        the actual findings of  the  Judge  at  [22.1]  which  are  in  the
        following terms: "He has given accounts of his background and as to
        the  reasons  for  him  leaving  Iraq  which  are  implausible  and
        inconsistent. For example, he says he has been beaten but  provides
        no evidence of how he came to be  injured.  He  sought  to  provide
        evidence in the form of pictures and videos on his phone  but  with
        no evidence to  establish  the  provenance  of  such  evidence  and
        without credible corroboration of it to show that they depict  what
        he says they depict." This is a finding within the range  of  those
        clearly open to the Judge on the evidence. The  appellant  had  the
        opportunity to disclose this information prior to the  hearing  and
        to have provided the type of evidence envisaged by the  Judge.  The
        Judge's comments regarding the weight that could be placed upon the
        evidence on the appellant's telephone  clearly  shows  that  little
        weight would have been given to it; which is a finding clearly open
        to the Judge.
    16. Ground 3 asserts at [22.2]  the  Judge  stated  the  appellant  had
        provided no medical evidence to establish that he suffered injuries
        and such injuries were inflicted in the manner he asserted by those
        he accuses for  which  the  Judge  is  criticised  for  failing  to
        consider that the appellant left Iraq  in  July  2017,  nearly  two
        years ago, and thus any injuries  he  sustained  will  be  hard  to
        verify.
    17. The finding of the Judge in this  paragraph  is  in  the  following
        terms: "He provides no medical evidence to assist  in  establishing
        that it is reasonably likely he suffered  injuries  and  that  such
        injuries were inflicted in the manner he asserts and by  those  who
        he accuses. He provides no evidence  of  complaint  to  the  Police
        which he says he made nor of any absence of action by the Police in
        response  to  such  complaint.  Nothing  he  asserts  is  factually
        plausible and is vague, so thus damages his credibility." It is not
        disputed that after two  years  there  may  be  little  by  way  of
        evidence of injuries that a medical practitioner could comment upon
        but that does not make the Judge's comments legally erroneous.  The
        Judge's comment that the appellant had provided no medical evidence
        is factually correct. The Judge was therefore required to determine
        the merits of the appeal on the basis of the  other  evidence  made
        available, as he did.
    18. Ground 4 challenges the finding at [22.2] in which it  is  asserted
        the Judge found the appellant provided no evidence of complaints he
        made to the Police by him or evidence of any inaction by the Police
        for which the Judge is  criticised  for  failing  to  specify  what
        evidence he expected to see bearing in mind  corroboration  is  not
        required in this area of law.
    19. The content of [22.2] is set out above. The  Judge  does  not  seek
        corroboration and it is not made out that as a result  of  lack  of
        corroboration the Judge dismissed the appeal for this reason alone.
        It is not necessary for the  Judge  to  specify  what  evidence  he
        expected to  see.  It  is  factually  correct  that  the  appellant
        provided no evidence to support his claim that he had reported  the
        matters he alleged to the  Police  who  then  took  no  action.  No
        arguable legal error is made out in this ground.
    20. Ground 5 challenges the Judge's findings at [22.12]  asserting  the
        finding  by  the  Judge  that  nothing  the  appellant  asserts  is
        factually plausible and is vague and thus damaged  his  credibility
        is not supported  by  adequate  reasoning.  This  ground  fails  to
        establish arguable  legal  error.  It  is  necessary  to  read  the
        determination as a whole and when one does it is clear to a  reader
        why the Judge came to the conclusions  he  did.  Mere  disagreement
        with  the  Judge's  conclusions  does  not  establish  legal  error
        especially when the Judge had the benefit  of  seeing  and  hearing
        oral evidence being given.
    21. Ground 6 asserts the Judge erred when stating that the evidence did
        not support the appellant's assertion that his  father's  shop  was
        closed due to pressure from his maternal family; arguing the  Judge
        failed to consider documentary  evidence  from  the  Iraqi  General
        Directorate  of  Tourism  of  Sulamaniyah  which  showed  that  the
        appellant's father's business was closed on 16 September 2012.
    22. At [22.4] the Judge finds:  "According  to  the  Appellant  and  as
        indicated by the photo evidence, the father's  shop  traded  openly
        and for some considerable time before he closed it -  this  doesn't
        go as far as supporting the Appellant's  assertion  as  to  why  he
        closed or that it was as a result of maternal family pressure".  It
        is not disputed the shop was closed and the Judge does not find  in
        the alternative. The finding  is  that  the  evidence  provided  in
        support of the appellant's arguments as to  causation  showing  the
        business was closed was not enough to make out the claim. This is a
        challenge the weight the Judge gave to the evidence when that was a
        matter for the Judge.
    23. Grounds 6 and 7 assert that at [22.5] in which the Judge found  the
        appellant had been inconsistent about when he faced  problems  with
        his maternal family, he clearly had not, and that the Judge  failed
        to consider material evidence contained in his asylum interview  at
        questions 124 to 126 in which the appellant claimed he had had  the
        problem with the maternal family 6 or 7 years  and  that  the  last
        beating he received was a year ago (Ground 6) and that the  Judge's
        statement that the appellant did not assert that anyone else in his
        family was subject to beatings or threats and  that  this  was  not
        plausible,  illustrates  the  Judge  failed  to  consider  material
        evidence contained in the asylum interview at question 93 in  which
        the appellant claimed that his sister was also attacked.
    24. At [22.5] the Judge writes: "The Appellants  evidence  of  when  he
        first faced maternal family pressure is inconsistent materially. He
        says in interview that problems occurred over five years  but  then
        asserts that beatings started  in  2017,  not  before.  It  is  not
        reasonable to suppose that only the Appellant  faced  beatings  and
        pressure when he was not the prime mover in the  sale  of  alcohol,
        yet the Appellant doesn't assert  that  anybody  in  his  immediate
        family other than him was subjected to beatings and  threats.  This
        is not plausible."
    25. The appellant was asked in his asylum interview whether anyone else
        in his family was attacked to which he replied at Q93 "My  sister".
        The appellant was asked how many times she was beaten up  to  which
        the appellant replied at Q94 "she was scared she  wouldn't  go  out
        that much. My mum wouldn't allowed to go out because she was  child
        she was young. When asked how old  his  sister  was  the  appellant
        stated 13/14. Despite claiming his sister  had  been  attacked  the
        appellant failed to answer the specific  question  asked  regarding
        how many times she was beaten up. As there was no evidence that the
        sister was the subject to beatings  and  threats,  other  than  the
        appellants own assertions his  sister  was  attacked,  no  arguable
        error is made out in the Judge's assessment which is that there was
        no other evidence that other family  members  were  attacked.  This
        cannot be said to be outside the range of findings reasonably  open
        to the Judge in the evidence.
    26. In relation to the chronology at Q124 the appellant  was  asked  to
        explain how he had the same problems as he had lived in Erbil  over
        five years but the problems began a year previously  (in  2017)  to
        which the appellant claimed in his response "I had this problem for
        six or seven years doing this job for a long time now" but when  it
        was put to him at Q125 that the appellant was stating the  beatings
        only started one year ago (2017) the appellant's reply was to claim
        that the last beating he had was a year ago.  The  problem  is  the
        appellant's claims he had  the  same  problems  with  his  maternal
        family which he initially stated had started  six  or  seven  years
        previously which would  have  included  beatings.  The  appellant's
        evidence  considered  by  the  Judge,  who  had  the   benefit   of
        considering written and oral evidence, was that the appellant  also
        claimed that the beatings only started in 2017. Whatever  may  have
        been said in interview the Judge clearly identified  a  discrepancy
        in the appellants evidence. The conclusion the appellant  had  been
        materially inconsistent has not been shown to  be  finding  outside
        the range of those available to the Judge  when  the  evidence  was
        considered as a whole. The weight to be given to that evidence  was
        a matter for the Judge.
    27. Ground 7 refers the Judge's finding there were material gaps in the
        appellants evidence as to why he could not get a CSIDs document and
        why he could not move to Sulamaniyah to live with his  family.  The
        grounds assert the Judge failed to consider the appellants evidence
        in his witness statement which deals with these issues  and  failed
        to consider such evidence at [22.9 and 22.10] of the decision under
        challenge.
    28. At [22.6] the Judge writes: "He gave his evidence to me  relatively
        clearly but as mentioned above, there were material gaps as to  why
        cannot get CSID documentation to enable travel to  the  IKR  whilst
        his family currently reside there in Sulamaniyah and why  he  might
        still be at risk if he  lives  there  with  or  near  them  despite
        distance from his original home city of Erbil". The  appellant  had
        claimed that he could not return to Erbil as  his  maternal  family
        would find him there and could not go to Sulamaniyah as he will  be
        found by the maternal family despite his  immediate  family  living
        there. The appellant also claimed he had no identity  documents  to
        enable him to return anywhere else in Iraq or to gain  re-entry  to
        the IKR. The Judge found the appellant's evidence generally to lack
        consistency. At [22.9 and 22.10] the Judge writes:


             22.9     I find his account that he cannot now access a  means
                  of gaining a new CSID and that he cannot lay hands on  his
                  original is not credible given the  finding  that  he  has
                  been able through his  family  to  source  photos  of  his
                  father shop depicting both his father and himself;  if  he
                  is able to obtain such things for today's  hearing,  I  am
                  satisfied that also via family he  can  source  copies  of
                  documents necessary to verify his identity (which  require
                  patrilineal  verification  which  is  available  via   his
                  father) to enable movement within Iraq  and  also  to  and
                  from the IKR;


             22.10    He did not assert that his family are unable to  help
                  him, and this is borne  out  by  my  finding  above  about
                  sourcing copies of photos and  also  verification  of  the
                  closure of the  father  shop  as  recorded  by  the  local
                  authority in Erbil. Thus, I cannot and do  not  find  that
                  obtaining identity documentation will be impossible and/or
                  relocation is not a viable option.


    29. Whilst the appellant claimed in his witness  statement  not  to  be
        able to contact family or obtain such documentation the  weight  to
        be given to that evidence was a matter for  the  Judge.  The  Judge
        clearly took into account all  the  evidence  relied  upon  by  the
        appellant in support of his claim and did not  find  the  appellant
        credible. The appellant obtained documents from a relative  in  the
        IKR for use in the appeal as noted by the Judge The  weight  to  be
        given to the appellant's assertions  that  he  will  be  unable  to
        obtain the requisite documents has not been shown to be  irrational
        or outside the range of findings available  to  the  Judge  on  the
        evidence.
    30. The appellant also asserts that in finding  at  [22.10]  the  Judge
        failed to consider that the appellant's identity  has  to  be  pre-
        cleared with the  IKR  authorities  prior  to  return  and  without
        documentation the appellant cannot return to the  IKR.  This  is  a
        statement of the position accepted in the country guidance case law
        at the date of the hearing. The respondent will  no  doubt  provide
        the appellant's details to the  authorities  in  the  IKR  who,  if
        satisfied he is who he claims to be,  will  grant  preclearance  to
        enable the respondent to return  the  appellant  directly  to  that
        region of Iraq. Possession of a CSIDs  has  been  identified  as  a
        means of securing services within Iraq and not part of  the  return
        process. If the appellant cannot be pre-cleared he will be returned
        to Baghdad and it is not made out he will not be able to obtain his
        CSID either predeparture or within  a  reasonable  period  of  time
        thereafter to enable him to fly to the IKR. No arguable legal error
        is made out in the Judge's conclusions in relation to this issue.
    31. The appellant's final ground of challenge is to the Judge's finding
        at [22.11] which Ms Patel submitted disclosed  such  a  fundamental
        flaw in the Judge's reasoning it  was  sufficient  to  warrant  the
        entire determination being set aside. In this paragraph  the  Judge
        writes "He has not been in this country  long  enough,  established
        family connection and is not of an age sufficient to enable him  to
        qualify for rights protected by Articles 2 and 3 of the  ECHR."  It
        is not disputed that rights protected by articles 2 and 3  are  not
        qualified rights as they  are  absolute.  The  difficulty  for  the
        appellant with this ground is that the Judge  does  not  find,  for
        arguably sustainable reasons, that the appellant will face  a  real
        risk on return of harm sufficient to breach either articles 2 or 3.
        This is specifically confirmed at [28] in  which  the  Judge  finds
        "Given the findings I have made I accept there is not a  real  risk
        that his Article 2 and 3 rights will be breached if he is  returned
        to Iraq". While some aspects of the wording  in  [22.11]  are  more
        appropriate to an article 8 ECHR assessment the appellant fails  to
        establish arguable legal error material to the decision  sufficient
        to warrant a finding of legal error and especially not of a  nature
        that justifies the entire decision being set aside. The reality  is
        that the appellant had not established an entitlement to succeed on
        any basis on the evidence.


Decision

    32. There is no material error of law  in  the  Judge's  decision.  The
        determination shall stand.

   Anonymity.


    33. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005.


I make no  such  order  pursuant  to  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.



Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 29 August 2019












