
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12058/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 29 November 2019                  |On 03rd December 2019                |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                     A A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Howard
For the Respondent:    Mrs Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant was born in 1960 and is a non-Arab Darfuri from Sudan. By
    a decision  dated  30  November  2017,  he  was  refused  international
    protection. He appealed to the First-tier Tribunal which, in a decision
    promulgated on 20 December 2017, dismissed his  appeal.  The  appellant
    now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. At the initial hearing at Bradford on 29 November 2019,  Mrs  Pettersen
    who appeared for the Secretary of  State,  drew  my  attention  to  her
    letter by way of a Rule 24 response dated 25 November 2019, the text of
    which reads as follows:

         "The above named has a case listed for a resumed hearing before the
         Upper Tribunal at Bradford on 29th November 2019.

         Given it has been accepted that the appellant is a member of a non-
         Arab Darfuri tribe the case has been reviewed by the Respondent  in
         the light of the recent CG case and the CPIN.

         The Tribunal are invited to allow the appellant's protection appeal
         without the need for further evidence."

 3. In the light of the Secretary  of  State's  letter,  I  set  aside  the
    decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  have  remade  the  decision
    allowing the appeal against the refusal of international protection.



    Notice of Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside. I have remade the
    decision. The appellant's appeal against the decision of the  Secretary
    of State dated 30 November 2017 is allowed on asylum and Article 3 ECHR
    grounds.


Signed                              Date 2 December 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.
