
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/ 12287/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 29 May 2019                                |On 4 June 2019                |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                  ARESH [A]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Bashow, instructed by Parker, Rhodes Hickmotts
For the Respondent:    Mrs Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Iran who born  on  3  April  1990.  By  a
    decision dated 9 October 2018,  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the
    appellant's application for  international  protection.  The  appellant
    appealed to the First-tier Tribunal which, in a decision promulgated on
    2 January 2019, dismissed the appeal. The appellant now  appeals,  with
    permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The chronology surrounding the hearing  and  the  promulgation  of  the
    decision is not in dispute. The hearing before the First-tier  Tribunal
    took place on 11 December 2018. The  decision  was  promulgated,  as  I
    recorded above, on 2 January 2019. On 12  December  2018,  the  country
    guidance case of HB (Kurds) Iran (illegal exit: failed  asylum  seeker)
    CG [2018] UKUT 430 was promulgated by the Upper Tribunal. The appellant
    submits that the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Kelly) should  have  sought
    submissions from the parties as to the relevance  of  the  new  country
    guidance, reconvening the hearing if necessary, before promulgating his
    decision. At [41], Judge Kelly wrote:

         "The appellant claims, in the alternative, that he is  at  risk  of
         being questioned on  return  about  his  attendance  at  a  protest
         outside Sheffield City  Hall  and  are  being  ill-treated  by  the
         Iranian authorities as a result. I am not  however  satisfied  that
         the appellant has substantiated his claim that the  photographs  of
         his participation in that protest had been posted on his (or anyone
         else's) Facebook page given that he did not produce any documentary
         evidence at the  hearing  to  support  that  claim.  Moreover,  the
         protest he attended appears to been related to a Kurdish  political
         prisoner held in Turkey and  does  not  therefore  appear  to  have
         involved any direct or indirect criticism of the Iranian regime."

 3. Ms Bashow, who appeared before the First-tier Tribunal  and  the  Upper
    Tribunal, submitted that Judge Kelly's  failure  to  address  the  most
    recent country guidance of HB had led him into material  error  as  the
    guidance made it clear that the Iranian authorities may  be  interested
    to receive evidence of any of their citizens abroad advocating  Kurdish
    rights in any form, and not just in direct opposition  to  the  Iranian
    state. HB at [93]  refers  to  the  likely  hostility  of  the  Iranian
    authorities  to  anyone  brandishing  a  Kurdish  flag  or   literature
    advocating Kurdish rights. The photographs produced  by  the  appellant
    and shown him holding a flag associated with PJAK, an  Iranian  Kurdish
    political party. In a broader attack  upon  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    decision, the grounds of appeal  also  criticise  the  judge's  alleged
    failure to follow country guidance concerning illegal  exit  from  Iran
    and also  raise  the  issue  of  the  likely  interrogation  which  the
    appellant, a Kurd who has left the country  illegally,  may  face  upon
    return.

 4. I am satisfied that Judge Kelly has produced  rigorously  analysed  and
    thorough decision. I see  no  reason  at  all  to  interfere  with  his
    principal findings of fact. Further, I am satisfied that  the  decision
    is not at odds with the country guidance of SSH (illegal  exit:  failed
    asylum seeker) Iran CG [2016] UKUT 308 (IAC) or  BA  (Demonstrators  in
    Britain - risk on return) Iran CG [2011] UKUT 36  (IAC).  Moreover,  Ms
    Bashow's submission, summarised above, that the judge's decision is not
    consistent with  the  most  recent  country  guidance  of  HB  somewhat
    tenuous. However, the fact remains that the appellant  wishes  to  make
    further submissions in  the  light  of  HB  and,  by  promulgating  his
    decision without providing an opportunity to the parties to make  those
    submissions, the judge has fallen into error. It cannot be said that HB
    is unarguably wholly irrelevant to the circumstances of this appellant.

 5. I discussed with the representatives the possibility of remitting  this
    appeal to be remade in the First-tier Tribunal by  Judge  Kelly.  Given
    that, save as identified in [4] above, his decision and, in particular,
    his findings of fact are entirely sound, I consider that returning  the
    appeal to Judge Kelly to remake the decision is the best way  in  which
    to proceed. I preserve all of the findings of fact, save for  what  the
    judge states at [41]. Ms Bashow told me that the  appellant  has  fresh
    evidence which he wishes to adduce concerning his  recent  activity  on
    Facebook. Initially, I was minded not to allow any fresh evidence to be
    put before the First-tier Tribunal. On reflection, however, I  consider
    that it is in the interests of justice that Judge Kelly considers  this
    fresh evidence also; if he does not do so, it  seems  likely  that  the
    appellant will make  representations  to  the  Secretary  of  State  in
    respect of a fresh claim with all the delays to  the  determination  of
    his claim which such a course of action would inevitably entail.



Notice of Decision

    The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  is  set  aside.  All  of  the
    findings of fact shall stand save for the contents of paragraph [41] of
    the decision. The appeal is returned to the First-tier Tribunal  (Judge
    David Kelly) for that tribunal to remake the decision. Both parties may
    rely upon fresh evidence provided copies of any  documentary  evidence,
    including witness statements, are sent to the First-tier  Tribunal  and
    to the other party no less than 10 days prior to the next hearing.


Signed                              Date 29 May 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane















