

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                   Appeal
Number: PA/12404/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: City Tower, Birmingham    |Decision and Reasons Promulgated      |
|On: 10th August 2017                |On: 22nd August 2017                  |
|                                    |                                      |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

                                     SA
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:           Mr Sidhu, Harbans Singh & Co
For the Respondent:    Mrs Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS



 1. The Appellant is a national of Iran born  in  1989.   He  appeals  with
    permission[1] the decision of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge C.  Burns)
    dated 16th December 2016 to dismiss his appeal on protection grounds.










    Anonymity Order


 2. This case involves a claim for  international  protection.  Having  had
    regard to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
    and the Presidential Guidance Note No 1 of  2013:  Anonymity  Orders  I
    therefore consider it appropriate to make an  order  in  the  following
    terms:


         "Unless and until a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
        Appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
        shall directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his
        family.  This  direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  both  the
        Appellant  and  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply  with   this
        direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings"






    Background and Decision of the First-tier Tribunal


 3. The Appellant claimed to have a well-founded  fear  of  persecution  in
    Iran for reasons of his imputed political opinion. It is his case  that
    his brother was a member of the Komala party  who  was  killed  by  the
    government.   A  cousin  who  was  also  involved  had   enlisted   the
    Appellant's help in  distributing  propaganda.  When  that  cousin  was
    arrested, and his family home searched, the  Appellant  fled  to  Iraq.
    All of these events are said to have taken place between 2002 and 2005.
    The Appellant remained in Sulaymaniyah,  Iraq,   until  coming  to  the
    United Kingdom in 2016. Since the Appellant's arrival here he has  been
    actively posting material on the  internet  that  is  critical  of  the
    Iranian regime. He fears that if returned to Iran today  this  material
    will expose him to a risk of arrest. He further fears that there is  an
    outstanding warrant for his arrest dating from 2005.


 4. This claim was considered by  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department and rejected by way of letter dated 1st November  2016.  The
    Secretary of State did not find the account  to  be  credible.  It  was
    found to be vague, and undermined by the failure of  the  Appellant  to
    claim asylum in a safe country en route to the United Kingdom.

 5. The First-tier Tribunal heard live  evidence  from  the  Appellant.  He
    testified that he had wanted to help Komala because the authorities  in
    Iran had killed his brother and he felt strongly that there  should  be
    an independent Kurdistan. He had not wanted to join because he did  not
    want to carry a gun. At paragraph  30  the  determination  records  the
    Appellant as having said that Kurds in  Iraq  were  not  interested  in
    helping Kurds in Iran.  He had started a Facebook account about a month
    before the hearing. He now wanted to join Komala.

 6. The Tribunal found that the Appellant would face no risk of persecution
    arising from his Facebook page. Its contents had  not  been  translated
    and in any event it was in a different name.  It found that he had  not
    produced all of the evidence available to  him.  He  had  not  produced
    copies of the correspondence nor details of the contact  that  he  said
    that he had with Komala representatives. He had not produced the arrest
    warrant, or if it was not available he  had  not  explained  why.   The
    limited knowledge displayed by the Appellant was  not  consistent  with
    the background material  about  Komala.  This  included  evidence  that
    Komala will provide letters of support for persons they perceive to  be
    at risk due to association with  the  party.   Overall,  he  failed  to
    discharge the burden of proof, even to a lower standard, and the appeal
    was dismissed.




    The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal


 7. The grounds of appeal are that the First-tier Tribunal erred in law  in
    the following material respects:


              i) In failing to take the  country  background  material  into
                 account when considering the plausibility of the claim;  in
                 particular


                    a) In drawing adverse  inference  from  the  Appellant's
                       failure to produce the arrest  warrant  the  Tribunal
                       has  failed  to  take  into   account   the   country
                       background material indicating that  arrest  warrants
                       are "not handed over" in Iran;


                    b) In drawing adverse  inference  from  the  absence  of
                       supporting evidence  from  the  Komala  the  Tribunal
                       failed to take into account the fact that this  is  a
                       banned organisation, and that all of the  Appellant's
                       associates from the group are now dead;


             ii) Misunderstanding/misconstruing the evidence; in  particular
                 in respect of the relationship between Kurds  in  Iran  and
                 Kurds in Iraq

            iii) In general, applying too high a standard of proof.




 8. The Secretary of State for the Home Department opposed  the  appeal  on
    all grounds.










    Errors of Law




 9. At a hearing on the 12th May 2017 the parties  made  submission  as  to
    whether the grounds of appeal were made out. The  Respondent  was  that
    day represented by Senior Presenting Officer Mr Mills.  Following  that
    hearing I issued the following written decision.




    Ground (i)(a)


10. The central plank of the appeal is that the Tribunal acted unreasonably
    in making the following finding [at 54]:


         "He has not provided a copy of the arrest warrant he referred to at
         page 22 or if it is not available he has not explained why".


    This finding is one of the three reasons  given  for  not  finding  the
    Appellant to be a credible witness.


11. 'Page 22' would appear to be a reference  to  the  first  page  of  the
    statement that the Appellant made in response to  the  refusal  letter.
    This asserts that the Appellant faces a risk on arrival where screening
    will reveal that he has been out of Iran for a long time, that he  left
    illegally and that "there is  a  warrant  for  me".    No  warrant  was
    produced in evidence.


12. What then was the error of law, if  any,  in  placing  weight  on  this
    lacuna in the evidence?


13. Mr Sidhu submits that the Tribunal erred in failing to weigh in to  its
    reasoning the evidence on the service of warrants  in  the  Country  of
    Origin Information Report, published on the 26th September 2013.   This
    cites a report published by the  International  Committee  of  the  Red
    Cross in 2006 to the effect that where the accused is not available  to
    receive the warrant himself, it will not be served on  family  members,
    unless they know where the accused can be found, and undertake to serve
    him themselves. Since it would appear  unlikely  that  the  Appellant's
    parents would have agreed to this course of action, there was no reason
    to suppose that they would have been given any arrest warrant. This was
    the objective material before the Tribunal, and Mr Sidhu  says  it  was
    manifestly unfair to ignore it.

14. Mr Mills pointed out that the COIR does not say that warrants are never
    served. There are circumstances in which they will be handed over,  and
    since the Appellant was asserting that one had been issued, it  was  up
    to him to explain where it was.

15. I am satisfied, having regard to the extracts of the  COIR,  that  this
    was material evidence that should have been weighed in the balance. The
    effect of it was that arrest warrants are  not  routinely  provided  to
    family  members.  This  should  have  been  considered  before  adverse
    inferences were drawn from the failure to produce the document in these
    proceedings.

16. I am further satisfied that  there  was  another,  more  obvious  error
    arising here. That is that the Tribunal appears to have taken  a  point
    against the Appellant without giving  him  a  chance  to  respond.  The
    Respondent did not raise this as an issue in  the  refusal  letter,  in
    cross-examination or in submissions. It was therefore  unfair  for  the
    Tribunal to have placed it at the centre of  its  credibility  findings
    without putting the Appellant  on  notice  that  it  was  a  matter  of
    concern.




    Ground (i)(b)


17. The  second  of  three  reasons  given  for  doubting  the  Appellant's
    credibility related to the lack of evidence from the Komala party.  The
    Tribunal had regard to evidence in the COIR that  Komala  will  provide
    letters of support for party members  and  known  sympathisers  in  the
    context of asylum proceedings. The Appellant had asserted that  he  had
    contacted Komala to ask for such support but  had  been  told  that  he
    could not get confirmation because, in effect,  his  involvement  could
    not be verified: "he couldn't have a letter because all the  people  he
    worked with were killed".  Mr Sidhu submits that it was unfair to  take
    the absence of such evidence against the Appellant since Komala  is  by
    its nature  an  underground  organisation.  The  Tribunal  should  have
    considered these circumstances.

18. I am  not  satisfied  that  Mr  Sidhu's  complaint  is  made  out.  The
    background evidence clearly indicates that Komala has the  capacity  to
    issue letters  of  support,  and  will  do  so  where  an  individual's
    connection with the organisation can be verified.  The  point  made  at
    paragraph 54 of the determination does not run contrary to  that.  Here
    the Tribunal simply observes that the Appellant has failed  to  produce
    "copies of the correspondence or details of the contact he said he  had
    with the representative of  the  Komala  party"  (my  emphasis).    The
    Appellant did not therefore state that the underground  nature  of  the
    party made the procurement of such evidence impossible. He says he  was
    told that his involvement could not be verified because the  people  he
    had worked with have all died.   If that information was passed to  him
    for instance by email, then that email should have been produced. If it
    was by telephone, the details could have been recounted  in  a  witness
    statement.





    Ground (ii)

19. At paragraph 58 the determination notes the objective evidence that  in
    1983 Komala relocated its leadership to Iraqi Kurdistan.  It  concludes
    from  this:  "this  is  relevant  because  it  does  not  support   the
    Appellant's account in oral  evidence  that  those  in  Iraq  were  not
    sympathetic to the cause of Iranian Kurds".


20. The grounds complain that this was a misunderstanding, and gross  over-
    simplification, of the Appellant's evidence. I accept that this  ground
    is made out.   Paragraph 30 records the Appellant's  evidence  on  this
    matter as follows:

         "He said that in the Kurdish part of Iraq there were a lot of their
         own political parties and he did  not  try  and  persuade  them  to
         follow Komala as it was obvious that they follow their  own  agenda
         and would not help Kurds in Iran".


21. This statement was, it seems to me, wholly consistent with the  country
    background material.  The Komala are not a party that pursue  a  policy
    of a united Kurdistan. At 9.1.1 of the COIR the aims of both  wings  of
    Komala are described as "replacing the  theocratic  central  government
    [of Iran] with a secular, federal and democratic republic that provides
    autonomy  for  Iran's  ethnic  minorities".  There  is   therefore   no
    conceivable reason why an Iraqi Kurd would want  to  join  Komala,  and
    little incentive offer them material  support.   The  fact  that  Iraqi
    Kurds (and indeed the Iraqi central government at the time of  the  war
    with Iran) permitted Komala to relocate to the north of Iraq  does  not
    impact at all on the Appellant's evidence on this point. I am satisfied
    that the Tribunal has here misunderstood the evidence.






    Ground (iii)


22. I do not propose to address this ground in  any  detail  since  neither
    party dealt with it in oral submissions. There is no  clear  indication
    on the face of the determination that the Tribunal  applied  the  wrong
    standard of  proof.  Indeed  the  determination  contains  the  correct
    direction to the lower standard at paragraph 11.  This  ground  is  not
    made out.




    Decision on the First-tier Tribunal Determination


23. Although two of the four grounds were found to be without merit  I  was
    satisfied, having heard the  submissions  of  the  parties,   that  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal must, to a limited extent,  be  set
    aside. That is because I cannot be satisfied that  the  decision  would
    have been the same absent the errors in respect of the warrant and  the
    relationship between  the  Iranian  and  Iraqi  Kurds.  Although  other
    reasons were given in this determination, these matters  do  appear  to
    have played a central role in the Tribunal's decision making process.


24. The First-tier Tribunal has made findings about the Appellant's alleged
    activities on Facebook. It rejected the claim that he would face a risk
    as a result of any online activity.  This finding is  unchallenged  and
    undisturbed.



    The Evidence

25. The Appellant's evidence is set out in his asylum interview dated  20th
    October 2016,  two witness statement dated  8th  November  2016  and  a
    further short statement dated 1st August 2017.


26. The consistent evidence to emerge from those documents is as follows:

               . The Appellant grew up in  a  village  near  Bukan,  in  the
                 Azerbaijan region of Iran. [This small town is in the strip
                 of Azerbaijan running parallel to the Turkish  border  that
                 is principally populated by Kurds]


               . He lived with his parents and elder  brother  and  at  that
                 time, had no involvement in politics

               . His brother was often away from home for extended  periods.
                 The Appellant assumed that he was visiting friends


               . One day in the Spring of 2002, when the  Appellant  was  13
                 years old, the security services arrested  the  Appellant's
                 brother.

               . The Appellant was told that he had  been  arrested  by  the
                 authorities as a result of his activities with Komala,  the
                 Kurdish wing of the  Iranian  Communist  Party.  About  one
                 month after he was detained the Appellant learned that  his
                 brother had been "martyred", that is to say he was executed
                 by the Iranian authorities. The family were not  given  his
                 body, but  they  held  a  memorial  service  for  him.  The
                 Appellant recalls the sadness in the house  and  a  lot  of
                 people he did not know coming to pay their respects

               . Each year the family would  mark  the  anniversary  of  his
                 brother's death with a memorial  service.  It  was  on  the
                 third of these anniversaries, in the Spring of  2005,  that
                 the  Appellant  was  approached  by  his  cousin  'S'.   He
                 explained to him why  his  brother  had  been  involved  in
                 Komala,  and  revealed  that  he  too  was  a  member.  The
                 Appellant was keen to help because of what had happened  to
                 his brother. He did not know much about  the  organisations
                 aims, just that they were struggling for the rights of  the
                 Kurdish people. S spoke with him at length about the crimes
                 that the Iranian  government  have  committed  against  the
                 Kurds, and how they deprive Kurds  of  basic  services  and
                 privileges. In his interview the  Appellant  was  asked  to
                 give an example of how Kurds are treated in Iran.  He  said
                 that a friend had been arrested and  imprisoned  for  three
                 years,  just  for  having  a  photograph  of  Nasir  Rezazi
                 [leftwing Kurdish folksinger] in his shop.  He  also  spoke
                 about how the Kurdish language is suppressed  for  instance
                 through a ban on Kurdish media

               . 'S' recruited the Appellant to help him. On four  occasions
                 the Appellant started putting leaflets  through  doors.  He
                 knows that they promoted Komala (they bore  its  logo)  but
                 since he was illiterate at the time can  say  little  about
                 what they said. He did this in his village  and  in  Bukan,
                 always at night. The appellant stored the leaflets  he  had
                 not yet delivered in a shelter in a nearby walnut orchard

               . The Appellant was able to tell the officer  at  his  asylum
                 interview that Komala  had  split,  and  which  faction  he
                 supported. He identified their aim as democracy for  Kurds,
                 and said that they are influenced by Maoism. He  said  that
                 its headquarters in Kurdistan were in Sulaymaniyah. He said
                 that he had not wanted to formally 'join' the  organisation
                 as this would mean taking up arms, which he did not want to
                 do

               . On the 3rd September 2005 the Appellant's  aunt  and  uncle
                 came to the family home. They were crying and  telling  the
                 Appellant's  parents  that  'S'  had  been  arrested.   The
                 Appellant's father, who knew that the  Appellant  had  been
                 helping him,  was concerned that 'S' might give information
                 under torture. He was afraid for the Appellant so  he  sent
                 him to Mariwan to stay with a relative

               . About 15 days after 'S' was arrested the  authorities  came
                 to the Appellant's home and searched  it.  They  asked  his
                 parents where he was and told  them  that  they  wanted  to
                 speak with him.  They were  not  given  an  arrest  warrant
                 [Q148 interview] The Appellant's family heard  that  a  few
                 other people around Bukan had been arrested as part of  the
                 same investigation

               . The Appellant's father contacted him and told him to leave.
                 He travelled to Iraq. He went to Sulaymaniyah where he  got
                 work, first in a restaurant and then as a block-layer

               . The Appellant's family had no further problems  because  of
                 him since he left Iran

               . He did not have formal permission to  remain  in  Iraq.  He
                 tried to get a  'support  paper'  but  could  not  get  one
                 because you need to have a person from Kurdistan to support
                 you, and he did not know anyone. He would sometimes be able
                 to get a paper authorising stay for  6  months  if  someone
                 with connections helped him. This meant it was difficult to
                 obtain any accommodation. He would  usually  sleep  on  the
                 building site that he was working on.

               . There was one friend whom he could stay with  when  he  was
                 not in work/had nowhere to stay. In 2015  this  friend  was
                 stabbed and killed. The Appellant does not know why.  There
                 are two theories. One is that he was involved with a  girl,
                 the other that it was because he was involved in  politics.
                 The  Appellant  describes  his  state  of  mind  after  his
                 friend's murder as "panicked" and  "completely  collapsed".
                 He could not face living in building sites in  Sulaymaniyah
                 any more. He decided to leave. He took a small bus back  to
                 Iran,  to  his  relative's  house  in  Mariwan.  Asked   at
                 interview to clarify why he did  this  the  Appellant  said
                 that even if he died in Iran it would be better  than  life
                 in Sulaymaniyah. His father contacted an agent.  He  stayed
                 in Mariwan two nights, and then went to  Oromiyeh  [Kurdish
                 town on Iranian/Turkish border]. He spent one  night  there
                 before crossing into Turkey and onwards over  land  through
                 Europe

               . The Appellant states that he has, since his arrival in  the
                 UK, resumed contact with  Komala  and  wants  to  help  the
                 struggle because of his martyred relatives. He did not  get
                 involved in Iraq because he had no status and no protection
                 there  and  the  Iranian  security  services  could  easily
                 identify people and get to them there. Etalaat have a large
                 presence in the city. He  was  concerned  that  if  he  got
                 involved there could be problems, if not for him, then  for
                 his family in  Iran.  Also  he  did  not  want  to  receive
                 military training, which would have been expected there.

27. In his live evidence before me the Appellant was  able  to  talk  in  a
    confident and straightforward manner about all of  the  above.  By  the
    date of the resumed hearing he had managed to obtain a letter from  the
    Komala in Sulaymaniyah (summarised below).  He  explained  that  he  is
    living in a shared flat in the UK with someone who is a member  of  the
    KDP. This man has friends on Facebook from other Kurdish parties and he
    was able to supply the Appellant with a contact who works  with  Komala
    in Sulaymaniyah, a man named Ata. The Appellant called Ata and gave him
    details about his brother and cousin. Ata told  him  he  would  conduct
    some checks and get back to him. When he did Ata informed the Appellant
    that he would be able to provide him with help. The Appellant asked him
    to write a letter and he did.


28. The Appellant confirmed that he has maintained regular contact with his
    parents. He last spoke with them two days  before  the  hearing.   They
    have always denied having received any other visits  or  communications
    from the Iranian authorities. This may be because there  have  been  no
    other visits; it may be because his parents do not want to worry him.

29. The documentary evidence consists of three items. First, there  is  DHL
    envelope showing the sender to be a named individual who has posted the
    letter to the Appellant from Malik Mahmood Main Road  in  Sulaymaniyah.
    Second, a letter written primarily in Farsi, with some of the  text  in
    English. Third, there is a letter written in English.  At  the  hearing
    the court interpreter was able to tell me that  the  text  in  the  two
    letters was the same, but for  an  error  in  the  translation  on  the
    letterhead. The English version (produced in  the  original)  says  the
    'Komala Party of Kurdistan' on it. The interpreter said that the  Farsi
    text should more properly have been translated as the  'Komala  Toilers
    Party of  Kurdistan'.   That  aside  the  translation  appeared  to  be
    accurate. The Appellant explained that  the  English  language  version
    came with the Farsi one in the envelope. He believes it  to  have  been
    sent by the aforementioned Ata. The text reads:

         "He first joined the Komala in the spring of 2005. As  a  supporter
         and subordinate of Komala, he has efficiently carried out his party
         duties like distributing and transporting Komala publications. Four
         months into starting his duties, the Iranian intelligence  (Itlaat)
         identified him. Before being apprehended by them, he was forced  to
         flee Iran. We give [the Appellant] our full support and confirm the
         fact that he cannot return to Iran as his life will be  in  danger.
         We earnestly ask you to help him for the purpose  of  granting  him
         the right to seek asylum".




    Findings


30. Having read the interview record, the detailed witness  statements  and
    having had an opportunity to hear the Appellant's oral evidence I found
    that his evidence was internally consistent.  This  is  a  matter  that
    weighs in the Appellant's favour in my assessment of his credibility as
    a witness.


31. I accept Mr Sidhu's submission that the Appellant's  evidence  did  not
    appear to be exaggerated on inflated. He bases his claim on events that
    occurred a long time ago; he states  that  there  have  been  no  other
    (known) visits from the security services since 2005; he does not claim
    that any action has been taken against him in the  courts,  or  towards
    his parents.   The Appellant admits that he returned to  Iran  in  2015
    and that he did not face any difficulties (albeit that  he  only  spent
    three days there). This is a matter  that  weighs  in  the  Appellant's
    favour in my assessment of his credibility as a witness.


32. I have considered the account in the context of the country  background
    information.  I have had regard to the Respondent's Country Information
    and Guidance note entitled Iran: Kurds  and  Kurdish  political  groups
    (Version 2.0, published July 2016) [the CIG].  I note  that  Kurds  who
    become involved in opposition groups are targeted for severe repression
    by the state, up to and including execution [2.3.1-2.3.5].  Kurds  make
    up a disproportionate number of those facing  execution  in  Iran,  and
    those executed for political reasons are often accused  of  involvement
    in drug smuggling to make it appear that it is a criminal sanction.  In
     the context of this information the Appellant's  claim  is  plausible,
    and that is a matter that weighs in his favour in my assessment of  his
    credibility as a witness.

33. Having had regard to the CIG I further note that it  lends  support  to
    the Appellant's account in  specific  areas.  Section  5  confirms  the
    Appellant's evidence about discontent in Kurdish areas (including  West
    Azerbaijan) arising from human rights abuses  and  the  suppression  of
    Kurdish identity. At  9.1.1  the  fact  that  there  was  a  particular
    military offensive in 2005 is recorded.  Section 9  generally  confirms
    that Komala has split and that one section, the 'Toilers' of  Kurdistan
    is based in the IKR.  At [5.2.5] his  claim  that  Etelaat  operate  in
    Sulaymaniyah is confirmed:

          'An NGO working with asylum seekers and refugees in Iraq stated
         that the Iranian intelligence agents are present in KRI, and they
         have good relations with some of the Iraqi Kurdish political
         parties in KRI. Formerly, the Iranian intelligence service
         assassinated Iranians living in KRI but since 2009 this has no
         longer taken place.' [...] Sardar Mohammad and Asos Hardi (Awene
         Newspaper) pointed to the strong presence of the Iranian
         intelligence in KRI and their ability to monitor Iranian nationals
         and their activities in the area. The source added that many
         Iranians residing in KRI have received threats from the Iranian
         intelligence service or have had their telephones tapped.


    That elements of  the  Appellant's  account  are  consistent  with  the
    country background material is a matter that weighs in his favour in my
    assessment of his credibility.


34. The Respondent submits that the Appellant's evidence has been vague, in
    particular about the Komala and why he supports them. I accept that the
    Appellant has been unable to articulate what in particular  Komala  can
    offer over and above that offered by other Kurdish  opposition  groups.
    When I asked him to clarify this  matter  in  hearing  his  answer  was
    straightforward and plausible; he supports this group  because  it  was
    the group that his martyred brother fought for.  I  find  that  in  the
    context of his claim his evidence has been sufficiently detailed.  This
    is a matter that lends some weight to his case.


35. I have attached some weight to the letter from Komala. I note  that  it
    was posted from Sulaymaniyah but  I  also  recognise  the  Respondent's
    point that such documents are easily fabricated.  Overall I agree  with
    Mrs Aboni that this document must be assessed in  the  round  alongside
    the remaining evidence, per Tanveer Ahmed.

36. The only matter that I have found weighs against the  Appellant  in  my
    assessment of his credibility is his evidence that in 2015 he chose  to
    return to Iran. I bear in mind that this would tend to indicate that he
    did not have a subjective fear as claimed.

37. Having considered all of these matters in the round  I  find  that  the
    Appellant has discharged  the  burden  of  proof   in  respect  of  his
    historical account. I accept that it is reasonably likely that he  fled
    his home town in 2005 after he  was  implicated  in  Komala  activities
    following his cousin's arrest.  I accept that he lived  in  Sulamaniyah
    for ten years, surviving by working on building sites. I accept that as
    someone with no sponsor he would not have  been  able  to  gain  formal
    status in the IKR. I accept that the Appellant felt compelled to  leave
    the IKR in 2015 partly out of desperation at his situation, and  partly
    because he panicked after his friend was  murdered.  Whilst  return  to
    Iran at that time would ordinarily serve  as  an  indication  that  the
    Appellant held no subjective fear, having heard  his  live  evidence  I
    accept that he felt "collapsed"  and  that  he  no  longer  cared  what
    happened to him. I accept that he crossed the border near  Mariwan  and
    managed to  avoid  any  contact  with  the  authorities.  He  travelled
    straight to Omomiyeh and out of Iran.

38. I now turn to assess objective risk. Mrs Aboni pointed to the following
    salient features of the case. By the Appellant's own admission  he  was
    never a member of Komala, nor can  the  Iranian  authorities  have  any
    evidence indicating that he might be. That must be assumed  from  their
    apparent lack of interest in him and his family since the early  summer
    of 2005. He would be returned to Iran as a failed asylum seeker with no
    "particular problems". I have  given  careful  consideration  to  those
    submissions. I have had regard to  the  findings  in  the  most  recent
    country guidance case on Iran, SSH and HR (illegal exit: failed  asylum
    seeker) Iran CG [2016] UKUT 00308 (IAC).  At  paragraph  23  the  Upper
    Tribunal says this:


         "In our view the evidence does not establish that a failed asylum
         seeker who
         had left Iran illegally would be subjected on return to a period of
         detention or
         questioning such that there is a real risk of Article 3 ill-
         treatment. The evidence in
         our view shows no more than that they will be questioned, and that
         if there are any
         particular concerns arising from their previous activities either
         in Iran or in the
         United Kingdom or whichever country they are returned from, then
         there would be a risk of further questioning, detention and
         potential ill-treatment. In this regard it is relevant to return to
         Dr Kakhki's evidence in re-examination where he said that the
         treatment they would receive would depend on their individual case.
         If they cooperated and accepted that they left illegally and
         claimed asylum abroad then there would be no reason for ill-
         treatment, and questioning would be for a fairly brief period. That
         seems to us to sum up the position well, and as a consequence we
         conclude that a person with no history other than that of being a
         failed asylum seeker who had exited illegally and who could be
         expected to tell the truth when questioned would not face a real
         risk of ill-treatment during the period of questioning at the
         airport".

39. The question is them whether  any  "particular  concerns"  would  arise
    during the Appellant's on arrival interview such that would  give  rise
    to  a  risk  of  further  questioning,  detention  and  potential  ill-
    treatment.  The  answer,  on  the  facts  that  I  have   found,   must
    incontrovertibly be yes.  The  features  immediately  apparent  to  the
    interviewing officer  would  be  that  this  is  a  Kurd  from  Western
    Azerbaijan who left  the  country  shortly  after  the  aborted  Komala
    uprising in 2005[2] and who has not lived in Iran since.  He  left  the
    country illegally and would be returning on a laissez-passer that would
    identify him as a failed asylum seeker. At that  point  I  consider  it
    reasonably likely that the  interviewing  officer  would  conduct  some
    background checks. These would reveal his  connection  to  Komala,  via
    both his brother and his cousin. Further questioning would reveal  that
    the Appellant spent ten years in Sulaymaniyah, the very town in the IKR
    where Komala is based. I find it to be  reasonably  likely  that  these
    factors alone would result in further questioning, detention  and  ill-
    treatment.   The fact that the Appellant continues to be a supporter of
    Komala  would  only  increase  that  risk.  The  burden  of  proof   is
    discharged.




    Decisions and Directions


40. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error of  law  such
    that the decision must be set aside to the extent identified above.


41. The decision is remade as follows:


    "The appeal is allowed on protection grounds.


    The appeal is allowed on human rights grounds".


42. There is a direction for anonymity.


                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                            21st August 2017


                           -----------------------
[1] Permission was granted on the 10th January 2017 by First-tier Tribunal
Judge Gillespie

[2] CIG at 2.1.5

