
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-SAR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12399/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 23 October 2020                   |On 28 October 2020                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                     SM
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Not present or represented
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. By decision promulgated on 7 August 2019, I found that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal had erred in law such that its decision fell to be set  aside.
    My reasons were as follows:

         "1.  The appellant, who was born and  1  January  1997  is  a  male
         citizen of Iraq. He appealed against a decision of the Secretary of
         State  dated  16  November  2017  which  refused  his   claim   for
         international protection. The First-tier Tribunal,  in  a  decision
         promulgated on 19 January 2018, dismissed his appeal. Permission to
         appeal to the Upper Tribunal was refused  in  both  the  First-tier
         Tribunal and Upper Tribunal.  Following  proceedings  for  judicial
         review, permission was granted on 9 October 2018.

         2.   At the initial hearing at Manchester on 30 July 2019, Mr Bates
         appeared for the Secretary of State. The appellant did  not  appear
         nor was he represented. I am satisfied that the notice  of  hearing
         was served by first class post upon the appellant at his last known
         address in Salford on 25 June 2019. The appellant has not given any
         or any adequate reason for  his  failure  to  attend  and,  in  the
         circumstances, I  proceeded  with  a  hearing  in  the  appellant's
         absence.

         3.   Mr Bates conceded that the First-tier Tribunal  had  erred  in
         law. Notwithstanding the Secretary of  State's  current  policy  to
         return failed asylum seekers to Iraq only via  Baghdad,  the  judge
         had considered it possible that  the  appellant  could  be  removed
         directly from the United Kingdom or Turkey to the IKR. That finding
         was not supported by  the  existing  country  guidance  (AA  (Iraq)
         [2017] EWCA Civ 944) and the judge had failed to give any  adequate
         reasons for departing from that guidance. It is the case  that  the
         judge found that the appellant had failed to prove that he  had  no
         family ties in Iraq but the judge's finding that he would  be  able
         to obtain a CSID after arriving in  Iraq  with  the  assistance  of
         family members was speculative.

         4.   In the light of Mr Bates is helpful submissions, I  set  aside
         the decision of the First-tier Tribunal. The Upper  Tribunal  shall
         remake the decision  at  or  following  a  resumed  hearing.   That
         resumed hearing will not be listed before 1 November 2019; by  that
         date, fresh country guidance on the issues in this appeal should be
         available. Finally, I agree with  Mr  Bates  that  the  grounds  of
         appeal do not seek to challenge the judge's findings of fact on the
         appellant's account of past events in Iraq. Those findings shall be
         preserved. The only issues remaining to be determined in the  Upper
         Tribunal are: (1) whether it is safe for the  appellant  return  to
         his home area of Iraq and; (2) if it is not safe, whether it  would
         be unduly harsh for him to exercise internal flight  by  relocating
         in the IKR.

         Notice of Decision

         The decision of the First-tier Tribunal which was promulgated on 19
         January 2018 is set-aside. Save for the judge's findings as  regard
         the safety of the appellant returning to his home area of Iraq  and
         internal flight, the findings of fact  are  preserved.  The  appeal
         will be remade by the Upper Tribunal (Upper Tribunal Judge Lane) at
         a resumed hearing in Manchester not before 1  November  2019.  Both
         parties may adduce fresh evidence provided that they serve on  each
         other and file at the Upper Tribunal copies  of  such  evidence  no
         later than 10 days prior to the resumed hearing."

 2. At the resumed hearing at Bradford on 23 October 2020,  the  respondent
    was represented by Mr Diwnycz. The appellant did not appear nor was  he
    represented. A previous hearing had been adjourned after the notice  of
    hearing had been sent to an incorrect address. However, I am  satisfied
    that the address to which the notice of hearing for today had been sent
    was the correct address of the appellant. There is nothing on the  file
    to indicate that the appellant had not received the notice of  hearing.
    In the circumstances, I proceeded with the hearing in  the  absence  of
    the appellant.

 3. Country guidance has developed since the First-tier Tribunal  made  its
    decision in this appeal in  January  2018.  In  particular,  the  Upper
    Tribunal has promulgated its decision in AAH (Iraqi  Kurds  -  internal
    relocation) Iraq CG [2018] UKUT 00212 (IAC). Further  country  guidance
    has appeared in SMO, KSP & IM (Article 15(c); identity documents)  Iraq
    CG [2019] UKUT 400 (IAC).

 4. The Upper Tribunal is hampered to some extent in  this  appeal  by  the
    failure of the appellant to attend and, more particularly,  to  advance
    his case with the assistance of legal representation. I have  preserved
    findings of fact from the First-tier Tribunal decision of 2018 but  all
    that can now be said about this appellant is  that  he  is  of  Kurdish
    descent, he does not have a CSID or passport and that he has failed  to
    prove that he does not have family members in Iraq at the present time.
    Mr Diwnycz told me that the Secretary of State  acknowledged  that  the
    appellant cannot obtain identity documents or a passport from the Iraqi
    Embassy in the United Kingdom.  We  know  nothing  of  the  appellant's
    knowledge of his family's registration details in Iraq such that  would
    enable him to obtain documentation or whether  his  family  members  in
    Iraq would  have  those  details  would  be  able  to  obtain  identity
    documents for him prior to his return to Baghdad. On the  very  limited
    information which we  do  have,  and  applying  the  appropriate  lower
    standard of proof, I find that it is likely that this  appellant  would
    return to Baghdad  (there  are  still  no  prospect  of  him  returning
    directly to any other city in Iraq from the United Kingdom)  without  a
    CSID or its modern equivalent or  a  passport  and  that  he  would  be
    exposed to a real risk of ill-treatment as a consequence  and,  without
    the identity documents he requires, he would be  unable  to  travel  by
    land or air to relocate in the IKR. Accordingly, I allow his appeal  on
    Article 3 ECHR grounds.

    Notice of Decision

    I remake the decision. The appeal against the decision of the Secretary
    of State dated 16 November 2017 is allowed on Article 3 ECHR grounds.




    Signed   Date 23 October 2020
    Upper Tribunal Judge Lane



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

