
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/12936/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons promulgated       |
|On 16 August 2019                    |On 17 September 2019                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY


                                   Between

                                      N
                             (Anonymity DIRECTED)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Greer (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. On 11 March 2008 the claimant  entered  the  United  Kingdom  (UK)  as  a
   domestic worker. She was granted leave to do so but that leave expired on
   10 March 2009. Successive applications for further leave were refused. On
   06 June 2017 she claimed asylum. That claim was refused  on  22  November
   2017. She appealed but on 22 October 2018 the  First-tier  Tribunal  (the
   tribunal) dismissed her appeal. In so doing, it rejected  her  contention
   to be a refugee. It rejected arguments under Article 3  of  the  European
   Convention on Human Rights (ECHR) and under Article 8.  It  also  decided
   she could not successfully rely upon paragraph  276  (ADE)  (vi)  of  the
   Immigration Rules. Permission  to  appeal  the  tribunal's  decision  was
   granted and on 01 May 2019 I set aside the  tribunal's  decision  on  the
   basis it had applied the wrong legal test  when  deciding  matters  under
   paragraph 276 (ADE) (vi). But I preserved its  findings  and  conclusions
   concerning asylum and Article 3 of the ECHR. I directed that there  be  a
   further hearing before the Upper Tribunal so  that  I  could  remake  the
   decision. I indicated that the issues would be whether she  was  able  to
   succeed under paragraph 276 (ADE) (vi) and, if  not,  whether  she  might
   succeed under Article 8 of the ECHR outside the Immigration  Rules.  That
   hearing took place on 16 August 2019 and  representation  was  as  stated
   above. I am grateful to each representative for the  helpful  submissions
   which I received.

2. The claimant had been granted anonymity by the tribunal. I had  continued
   that grant when setting aside its decision. I have decided,  once  again,
   to continue the grant of anonymity. That is because the  claimant  has  a
   particular medical condition (see below) which, as I understand  it,  she
   would not wish to become public knowledge.

3. In fact, Mr Greer did not seek to argue the case under Article 8  of  the
   ECHR outside the rules. So, the issue for me is a narrow  one.  Paragraph
   276 (ADE) relevantly provides as follows:

       Requirements to be met by an applicant for leave to  remain  on  the
       grounds of private life

       276 ADE (1). The requirements to be met by an applicant for leave to
       remain on the grounds of private life in the UK are that at the date
       of application, the applicant: ...

       (vi) subject to sub-paragraph 2, is aged  18  years  or  above,  has
       lived continuously in the UK for less than 20 years (discounting any
       period  of  imprisonment)  but  there  would  be  very   significant
       obstacles to the applicant's integration into the country  to  which
       he would have to go if required to leave the UK.

4. Paragraph 276 ADE (2) relates to persons whom it is  proposed  to  return
   to a third country and has no application in this case.

5. It is for a claimant to demonstrate that he/she  meets  the  requirements
   of the above Immigration Rule. That  is  to  be  done  to  a  balance  of
   probabilities.

6. By way of background, the claimant is a national of Malawi  and  she  was
   born on 06 October 1962. When she claimed asylum she said that all of her
   close family members had passed away, that she had been  sexually  abused
   by an uncle, that that uncle had threatened her, that the family  members
   of the person who had brought her to the UK as a domestic worker had also
   threatened her, and that she had then been abandoned in the UK.  She  was
   disbelieved about all of that by the Secretary of State and then  by  the
   tribunal.

7. As to difficulties she may have in seeking to integrate  into  Malawi  if
   returned there, the claimant points out that she is HIV positive  and  is
   taking anti-retroviral therapy provided to her in the UK; that she has no
   family remaining in Malawi or at least  no  close  family;  that  she  is
   otherwise in ill health; that she would be stigmatised as a person who is
   HIV positive in Malawi; and that she has been in the UK for an  extensive
   period.

8. When setting aside  the  tribunal's  decision  I  indicated  that  I  was
   preserving what I characterised as  being  'pure  factual  findings'  (as
   opposed  to  conclusions  drawn  from  findings)  as   contained   within
   paragraphs 39-52 of its written reasons. I explained that I was doing  so
   on the basis that those findings were correct at the time they were  made
   on the basis of the material then available. But I made it plain I  would
   not shut out the possibility of reaching different findings on the  basis
   of further evidence I might subsequently receive. So,  in  effect,  those
   findings, I had decided,  would  represent  my  starting  point  but  not
   necessarily my end point. But as to those findings, it had  been  decided
   that the claimant suffers from depression, has bladder  dysfunction,  has
   osteoarthritis of the right knee, has a recent history of spinal surgery,
   and is HIV positive. It was accepted that discrimination  against  people
   who are HIV positive is common in  Malawi  but  that,  whilst  there  are
   difficulties with respect to medical treatment for  such  persons,  anti-
   retroviral therapy is available and, if necessary, the appropriate  drugs
   could be supplied free of charge. The tribunal also  concluded  that  the
   claimant would, once she had recovered from  recent  spinal  surgery,  be
   able to gain some employment in Malawi and would,  in  any  event,  'have
   some support from family and friends  were  she  to  have  to  return  to
   Malawi'.

9. The claimant's solicitors provided a supplementary  bundle  of  documents
   for the purposes of what I shall call the re-making hearing. Included  in
   that bundle is a letter of 18 July 2019 from  the  claimant's  consultant
   spinal and orthopaedic surgeon to her solicitors. It  is  noted  in  that
   letter that the claimant had originally presented in  October  2016  with
   acute onset symptoms related to her lumbar spine. It  is  explained  that
   she had surgery in October 2016 but continued to experience  difficulties
   and consequent physical restrictions such that she had  to  have  further
   surgery in August 2018. Nevertheless, it was said that she  continued  to
   experience significant back pain which restricted her mobility though she
   was able to walk with a stick. As to her current prognosis, it  was  said
   that she would continue to experience  back  pain  but  that  such  would
   'hopefully gradually improve as time passes'. In a letter of 24 July 2019
   written by a social worker, it was explained that the claimant receives a
   morning visit from a person employed by a homecare agency to  assist  her
   'with having a wash and changing her clothing,  preparing  breakfast  and
   drink for her, preparing food to be left for her to access later  in  the
   day'. It is said that a recent assessment had confirmed the ongoing  need
   for such assistance. The supplementary bundle also  contained  an  expert
   report by one Dr E Venables  regarding  or  primarily  regarding  country
   conditions in Malawi, and  some  background  country  material.  It  also
   contained a witness statement made by the claimant in which she said  she
   had not, in fact, been a business woman in the past but had said she  had
   been because of a need to put something on her passport application.  She
   said she is not currently in contact with anyone in Malawi and  that  her
   family members in Malawi are all deceased (I think that is intended to be
   a reference to close family). She said her sister had  two  children  who
   are now both adults and who are in Malawi though she has not had  contact
   with them. She said there is a woman she attends church with  in  the  UK
   called Emily who has family in Malawi and that she might,  if  desperate,
   contact them.

10. The claimant gave oral evidence but what was said did not seem  to  take
   matters very much further in terms of the factual background.

11. So, I must now decide  whether  the  claimant's  appeal  should  succeed
   under paragraph 276 (ADE) (vi) or not. I agree with Mr Greer that what is
   required of  me,  with  respect  to  an  assessment  as  to  whether  the
   requirements are satisfied, is a broad evaluation of  the  circumstances.
   But my focus, of course, given the wording of the rule is upon the extent
   of any obstacles to the claimant's integration, and whether they would be
   very significant obstacles, if she were returned to Malawi.

12. The claimant has been in the UK for a period of approximately 10  years.
   There is nothing to suggest that she has been  back  to  Malawi  for  any
   visits during that period and no preserved finding that she has.  I  find
   that she has not undertaken any return visits to Malawi.  The  fact  that
   she has not lived as part of Malawian society for something a  little  in
   excess of 10 years, on any view a  lengthy  period,  does  suggest  there
   would be some difficulties with respect  to  readjustment.  But  she  has
   experienced life there as an adult and has spent the majority of her life
   there so this matter, of itself,  is  not  overly  significant.  But  the
   passage of time and the length of time she has not been part of  Malawian
   society is a factor which I will consider amongst other  factors  and  is
   not, in my view, to be characterised as lacking in significance.

13. The claimant is HIV positive. The tribunal found, in  findings  which  I
   have preserved, that discrimination  with  respect  to  such  persons  is
   common (see paragraph 41 of its written reasons). In any event, a Refugee
   Documentation Centre (Legal Aid Board Ireland) report  on  Malawi  of  15
   February 2016, contained within the supplementary bundle,  confirms  that
   such societal discrimination  remains  a  problem.  References  are  made
   therein, to a report from a Malawi based radio station called Capitol  FM
   which had indicated that young people who are  HIV  positive  have  faced
   discrimination from their peers which has been 'negatively  impacting  on
   their day to day life'. There is no reason to suppose that  the  position
   will be any different with respect to older persons.  Reference  is  also
   made therein to a report published by an organisation called  the  Malawi
   Network  of  People  Living  with  HIV  and  AIDS  which  indicates  that
   relatively large percentages  of  HIV  positive  persons  questioned  had
   reported being 'gossiped about', 'insulted/harassed/threatened' and  that
   lower proportions of persons had been physically harassed or assaulted. A
   number had reported being excluded from social gatherings and  family  or
   religious activities. Mr McVeety did not seek to argue, before  me,  that
   the claimant would not face some societal discrimination. I find that she
   would and that it is likely that, to some extent, that  will  impair  her
   ability to seek  to  integrate  or  become  an  insider  within  Malawian
   society. I also accept Mr Greer's submission that since the claimant  has
   been  residing  in  the  UK  for  some  time  where   such   stigma   and
   discrimination is, relatively speaking, less of a problem, she would have
   difficulty in adjusting to having to face such treatment upon return.

14. The tribunal found, in effect, that she  would  recover  from  her  back
   surgery relatively quickly (paragraph 47 of the written reasons) and that
   once she had fully recovered it was possible she would be able to  obtain
   some form of employment in Malawi (paragraph 49 of the written  reasons).
   I preserved the findings on the basis that they were correct at the  time
   in light of the evidence then available. The  current  evidence,  though,
   suggests the situation is somewhat less  promising.  As  I  have  already
   mentioned, the letter from the consultant spinal and orthopaedic  surgeon
   indicated that she will probably continue to experience back pain  though
   after two years "she should be able to mobilise with less  pain,  perhaps
   just with one stick in her hand and undertake normal  activities  without
   requiring medication". But that does not paint a  rosy  prospect  of  the
   claimant being able to obtain employment if she were to  be  returned  to
   Malawi now or, perhaps, for some considerable time afterwards.  There  is
   no evidence of her having any particular skills or education  which  will
   aid her in the job market in Malawi and against that  background  and  in
   light of the current  evidence,  I  would  find  that  her  prospects  of
   obtaining work upon return would now be very limited indeed.  Of  course,
   the ability to take and hold down a job is not, of  itself,  a  necessary
   requirement for re-integration into a society but it is, nevertheless,  a
   factor to consider.

15. The evidence I have set out above from the social worker makes it  clear
   that the claimant requires physical assistance regarding  her  self-care.
   Certain of that appears to be quite intimate care involving  washing  and
   changing her clothing. Broadly speaking it seems to me that a person  who
   requires such care from another is less likely  to  be  readily  able  to
   integrate into society, due to  consequent  dependency  on  others,  than
   would a person without such a need.

16.  The  tribunal  found,  Mr  McVeety  appropriately  stresses,  that  the
   claimant would not be entirely friendless or without  contacts  and  that
   she 'would have family and friends to provide her with support'.  I  have
   preserved those findings but I accept as Mr Greer  in  effect  submitted,
   that they are vague though I recognise that vague findings are  sometimes
   inevitable. But those findings do not, as I  see  it,  preclude  me  from
   concluding that the claimant does not have what might be characterised as
   close family in Malawi. In fact, what she now says in effect acknowledges
   that she does have  some  family  in  Malawi  being  her  sister's  adult
   children. I would accept that there is  some  prospect  that,  if  called
   upon, they would afford her some assistance. But I suppose it  is  all  a
   question of degree. As matters stand the claimant  requires  considerable
   assistance including assistance of a personal nature to enable her to  do
   the basics such as washing and dressing. That is the evidence.  I  accept
   her evidence that she does not have close family in Malawi and so I would
   conclude it is most unlikely she would find someone in that  country  who
   is prepared to do all of that for her.

17. There is also the matter of the claimant suffering from depression.  The
   tribunal did accept that she suffers from that condition which, again, is
   a finding I have preserved. I do note that there is no up to date medical
   evidence before me regarding the nature and extent of  that.  I  do  not,
   therefore, attach a significant amount of weight to this  but  the  point
   that she has some degree of mental health difficulty as well as her other
   significant physical difficulties is not  something  I  would  completely
   disregard.

18. Mr McVeety sought to persuade me  that  the  claimant's  argument  under
   paragraph 276 ADE was, essentially, no more than a health claim which did
   not reach the thresholds for her to succeed under Article 3 or Article  8
   of the European Convention on Human Rights (ECHR). As  he  put  it,  with
   respect to health based arguments, there is  not  a  three-stage  process
   under which one might  succeed  under  Article  3  if  the  situation  is
   extremely severe, or under Article 8 if a little less  severe,  and  then
   under 276 ADE if not so severe. I agree that there is not  that  sort  of
   hierarchical potential basis for success where health arguments are made.
   But that does not mean health issues are irrelevant  to  the  ability  or
   otherwise to reintegrate such that they are not to be taken into account.
   There are, here, health concerns of some significance  which  I  do  take
   into account whilst  acknowledging  the  preserved  findings  that  anti-
   retroviral drugs are available, free of charge if needed, in Malawi.

19. Clearly Paragraph 276ADE(vi) sets a high threshold. It does seem  to  me
   that claimants will not often succeed on this ground. But, ultimately,  I
   accept Mr Greer's submission that in the particular circumstances of this
   case  there  is  a  constellation  of  factors  which  come  together  to
   demonstrate that  the  requisite  test  is  met.  That  constellation  of
   factors, as set out above, includes but is not limited to health  issues.
   Accordingly, in remaking the decision,  I  allow  the  claimant's  appeal
   against the Secretary of State's decision of 22 November 2017. I do so on
   Article 8 ECHR human rights grounds within the Immigration Rules.

Decision

The tribunal's decision has already been set aside.

In re-making the decision I allow, on Human Rights grounds,  the  claimant's
appeal against the Secretary of State's decision of 22 November 2017.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal granted the  claimant  anonymity.  I  continue  that
grant pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
2008. Accordingly,  no  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  identify  the
claimant or any member of her family. This applies to  all  parties  to  the
proceedings. Any breach may lead to contempt of court proceedings.




      Signed

            M R Hemingway
            Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                   Dated                                    10 September
2019


To the respondent

Fee award

Since no fee has been paid and no fee  is  payable,  there  can  be  no  fee
award.




      Signed

            M R Hemingway
            Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                   Dated                                   10 September
2019

