
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/12840/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 9 October 2019                      |On 05 November 2019                   |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN

                                   Between

                                     E A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J. Greer, counsel instructed by Ison Harrison
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms H. Aboni, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    The Appellant is a national of Azerbaijan, born on 23.8.87. He
arrived     in the United Kingdom on 29 December 2017, accompanied by his
wife  and two children and claimed asylum on arrival. The basis of his
claim       is that he would be at risk on return to Azerbaijan as he had
published   a number of anti-government blogs and articles and had been
detained    and ill-treated by the police in December 2017 because of his
activities  and the police had also attended his children's nursery in
order to    intimidate him.

2.    The Appellant's asylum claim was refused in a decision dated 25
October 2018. He appealed against this decision and his appeal came
before First tier Tribunal Judge Grimmett for hearing on 30 April 2019.
In a decision and reasons promulgated on 13 May 2019, the Judge
dismissed the appeal.

3.    Permission to appeal was sought, in time, on the basis that the Judge
      erred materially in law:

(i)   In making a mistake of fact in respect of the arrest of [IM] when
      there was clear evidence before the First tier Tribunal on this
      matter;

(ii)  in making a mistake of fact in respect of the chronology of the
Appellant's account by taking against the Appellant for not claiming
asylum in October 2017 when his fear of the state did not begin until
December 2017;

(iii)       in displaying faulty reasoning in respect of the value of
corroborative    evidence issued by the Appellant's persecutors by (i)
considering its  reliability independently of the background evidence and
(ii) relying     on purported irregularities on the face of the document
without having   raised such matters with the Appellant or his advisors;

(iv)  in displaying faulty reasoning in respect of the value of the
corroborative medical evidence by appearing to take it in isolation,
rather than in the round and by appearing to consider its value having
already discounted the Appellant's credibility as a witness;

(v)   in failing to resolve a material dispute between the parties by
failing to  consider whether the Appellant might be at risk upon return,
should      be continue engaging in political blogging.

4.    Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Stephen Smith in
a decision dated 4 July 2019 on the basis that:

      "1. It is arguable that the Judge fell into the error identified in
Mibanga v   SSHD       [2005] EWCA Civ 367 through reaching her conclusions
on the      credibility of the appellant's account before engaging with the
medical     evidence. See [10]-[14] in which the judge analyses the
credibility of the     Appellant's case before finding that he had no
involvement in exposing the  scam involving high ranking officials (at
[14]). She also [15] where the Judge    dismisses the court judgment as a
document of relevance. When turning to the   medical report at [16] the
Judge ascribes minimal weight to it "as the  appellant has been
inconsistent about the reasons for the judgment and there     is nothing to
show how his injuries were caused."

      2. It is also arguable that the Judge's adverse credibility findings
under section    8 of the Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of Claimants)
Act 2004 were    infected by a misunderstanding of the chronology of the
appellant's claim. The       international travel pre-dated the incidents
which he says caused him to flee.

      3. It is arguable that the Judge fundamentally misunderstood the
appellant's      reference at [8] of his witness statement to the website
in question: he was    refuting the respondent's reliance upon it, not
attempting to cite it in positive       support of his case. The quoted
extract from the website did seem to support       the appellant's case in
any event."

      Hearing

5.    At the hearing before the Upper Tribunal, Ms Aboni informed me that
no rule 24 response had been lodged by the Respondent but the appeal
was opposed.

6.    Mr Greer provided copies of the original grounds of appeal dated 19
May 2019, which set out in more detail his challenges to the Judge's
decision. In respect of the second ground of appeal at [6]-[7], he
submitted that the Judge misunderstood the case before her at [17]. The
Appellant's case was that he is a blogger who was critical of the
government and it was wrong for the Judge to find that there had been
no attempt to block his posts in light of the responses in interview in
RB at F15, Q50 and Q82 at F22, which make clear that he stated that the
State threatened him not to blog anymore. On another occasion they
arrested him and deleted his posts whilst he was detained and thus  clearly
blocked him from posting. Thus the Judge's finding at [17] that     "he
does not suggest there has been any attempt to block his posts" is based
on a misunderstanding of the Appellant's evidence. As to the  Appellant's
motives and travel history and the fact he had visited a      number of
countries in 2017, he was not in fear of his life at that time      and
everything that happened post dated this.

7.    In respect of Ground 3 at [8]-[12] of the grounds, the Appellant
sought      to rely on a verdict of the Sabayil district court at AB A10-
A11 which   found his guilty of an offence under the Criminal Law Article
310.1       and imprisoned the Appellant for 7 days on the basis that he
was said    to have organised an illegal, anti-government rally in the
centre of   Baku. The Appellant's case was that this was a trumped up
charge      because of his blogging: see B71 and B73.

8.    At this point in the proceedings, Ms Aboni stated that now that Mr
Greer is going through the grounds of appeal and referring to specific
items of evidence, she accepted that there were material errors of fact
in the decision and reasons and the Judge did appear to have  misunderstood
the Appellant's case. She expressly accepted that  grounds 1 and 2 were
made out and with regard to ground 3 that the      Judge has not engaged
with the background evidence, thus the Judge's     credibility findings are
flawed.

      Decision and reasons

9.    In light of Ms Aboni's concession, which I accept was correctly made,
I     find material errors of law in the decision of First tier Tribunal
Grimmett. I remit the appeal for a hearing de novo before the First tier
Tribunal at Birmingham. I make the following directions:


                             DIRECTIONS

1. The appeal should be listed for 2 hours.

2. An Azerbaijani Azeri speaker (as opposed to an Iranian Azeri speaker)
will be required.

3. Any further evidence upon which the parties wish to rely should be
served 5 working days before the remitted hearing.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Rebecca Chapman

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman          dated 3 November 2019
