
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12288/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 11 January 2018                           |On 22 January 2018            |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    S J-K
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. P. Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms A. Patyna, Counsel, instructed by Montague
Solicitors LLP


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Wright, promulgated on 8 May 2017,  in  which
    she allowed the Appellant's appeal against  the  Secretary  of  State's
    decision to refuse a grant of asylum.


 2. For the purposes of this decision I refer to the Secretary of State  as
    the Respondent and to  Mr.  J-K  as  the  Appellant,  reflecting  their
    positions as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.


 3. Permission to appeal was granted as follows:


         "The conclusions reached by the Judge are inadequately reasoned  as
         is his conclusion that the "Dorodian" witnesses evidence  was  such
         that he was satisfied the Appellant was a genuine convert.


         In relation to the "Dorodian"  witness  the  Judge  seems  to  have
         ignored evidence that the Appellant  and  his  witness  would  have
         difficulty communicating.


         The grounds and the decision do disclose an arguable error of law."


 4. I  heard  submissions  from  both  representatives  following  which  I
    reserved my decision.


Submissions


 5. Mr. Duffy submitted that there were two grounds  of  appeal  identified
    but that they spoke to the same  point.   The  Judge  had  set  out  in
    evidence that there were some problems with the Appellant's  claim  and
    had failed to give adequate reasons for her  findings  regarding  these
    problems.  It was only in paragraph [30] that any reasons  were  given.
    Essentially she had found that, as she could not tell  whether  or  not
    the Appellant was a Christian, she accepted  that  he  was.   This  was
    inadequate.  There were various problems with the Appellant's  evidence
    which had not been factored in to her assessment.  The outcome was  not
    "impermissible" but it was inadequately reasoned.  The decision  should
    be set aside and remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.


 6. In response, Ms Patyna relied on her skeleton argument.  She  submitted
    that there was no conflict.  She referred to paragraphs [3] onwards  of
    the decision.  Paragraph [13] was the material paragraph in relation to
    the Dorodian witness.  The evidence spoke to  the  ways  in  which  the
    witness  had  communicated  with  the  Appellant.   They  had  overcome
    language difficulties.  The witness's view was that the Appellant was a
    genuine convert.  He did not have to be 100%  persuaded.   The  crucial
    Dorodian evidence was from a representative of  the  church  who  could
    confirm the Appellant's ongoing commitment to  the  church.   Paragraph
    [30] addressed the issue.


  7. Ground 2 had no  merit.   The  Judge  only  needed  to  find  that  the
     Appellant was a Christian.  The Judge took account of Mr. E's evidence.
      There was a letter and written evidence before the Judge.  The witness
     believed that the Appellant was a practising  Christian.   The  grounds
     sought to reargue a point regarding language.  The submissions  as  set
     out at [14] to [22] did not indicate that the credibility of Mr. E  had
     been questioned during the hearing.  Neither had his ability to act  as
     a Dorodian witness.


  8. The assessment at [30] was an  assessment  in  the  round.   The  Judge
     referred to the evidence of the Appellant's commitment and the evidence
     of the witness.   Paragraph  [30]  was  brief  but  complied  with  the
     guidance for such cases.  It was not material  if  there  had  been  no
     assessment of the Appellant's credibility.   He  was  now  a  committed
     Christian convert.


  9. The Judge had confused matters by raising the case of YB.  This  was  a
     sur place Christianity claim.  The Appellant's previous conduct did not
     matter.  The Judge had not ignored  the  evidence  of  the  Appellant's
     activities prior to coming to the United Kingdom.  She  had  noted  it.
     Paragraph [30] was an  assessment  of  credibility.   Enough  had  been
     presented in evidence for the Appellant  to  discharge  the  burden  of
     proof.  The Judge had given adequate reasons.  There was  no  error  of
     law.


Error of law


 10. The Judge's findings are set out at paragraph [30].  This states:


         "Applying these principles to this appellant,  the  Tribunal  found
         that although his activities  regarding  which  it  heard  evidence
         prior to arriving in the UK may not be convincing, he has, since he
         arrived in the UK demonstrated his commitment to his conversion  to
         Christianity.  It is not accepted that he has acted in  bad  faith.
         The Tribunal takes  account  of  his  baptism,  his  attendance  at
         church, the support offered by his church, Mr E's evidence and  his
         conviction of the claimant's faith.  There is no "test" by which he
         can demonstrate his faith.  The evidence which  the  appellant  did
         produce  in  respect  of  his  Christian  faith  was  accepted  and
         therefore the Tribunal finds the appellant is a  convert  and  that
         his evidence in respect of that was credible."


 11. This is the full extent of the Judge's findings.  Her assessment of the
     evidence and her findings in relation to all the evidence before her is
     summed up in just one paragraph.


 12. The Judge finds that the Appellant's evidence of events before he  came
     to the United Kingdom "may not be convincing".  She has not  given  any
     more detailed reasons as to what she means by  this,  or  set  out  any
     reasons for why it is not convincing, but this finding  indicates  that
     she has concerns about the credibility  of  the  Appellant's  evidence.
     However, this is as far as she takes it.   She  does  not  factor  this
     adverse finding into her assessment of the evidence as a whole.


 13. Instead she turns to focus on the evidence of the  Appellant's  current
     commitment to Christianity.  She states that it is not accepted that he
     acted in bad faith, but gives no reasons for this finding.   Especially
     given that this statement follows on immediately after her finding that
     some of his evidence has not been credible, reasons need  to  be  given
     for the finding that the Appellant has not acted in bad faith.


 14. The Judge then states that the Tribunal  has  taken  into  account  his
     baptism.  No further details are given at  [30].    However,  when  the
     Judge set out the evidence, she recorded that the Appellant "said  that
     he did not know in advance he was going to be  baptised.   He  met  his
     friend, went to church and then he  was  baptised"  [12].   Given  this
     evidence, which does not  indicate  any  active  participation  of  the
     Appellant in his baptism, it is not enough for the Judge  to  say  that
     she has taken into account his baptism without giving reasons as to why
     this baptism, given the circumstances, adds to the credibility  of  his
     account of being a committed Christian.


 15. The Judge then states that she has taken into account his attendance at
     church and the support offered him by the church, "Mr. E's evidence and
     his conviction of the claimant's faith".  It was submitted by Ms Patyna
     that essentially this was enough.  Mr. E was a Dorodian witness and his
     evidence could be relied on to find that the Appellant  was  a  genuine
     Christian convert.


 16. The Judge has set out the evidence of Mr. E at [13].  She states:


         "Mr E gave evidence that the appellant was a regular worshipper  at
         his church, having started attending just over a  year  ago.   They
         communicate as best they can and use technology  to  translate  for
         the appellant.  Mr E was absolutely convinced  that  the  appellant
         was a genuine convert and his faith was authentic.  He said that he
         had contacted the church of  the  appellant's  baptism  as  it  was
         important to establish there had been a  Farsi  translator  present
         who could ensure  the  appellant's  understanding.   Mr  E  had  no
         concerns that had the appellant not  been  baptised;  he  would  be
         baptised at his church."


 17. This evidence has not been expressly referred to at [30].   I find that
     there are some  questions  raised  by  the  record  of  this  evidence,
     especially in relation to the issue of baptism.  The Judge has recorded
     that the witness had "no concerns that had the Appellant had  not  been
     baptised" and that "he would be baptised at his  church".   It  is  not
     clear whether the witness has  concerns  about  the  baptism  that  the
     Appellant underwent previously.  If he does not, it is difficult to see
     why the witness would need to baptise the Appellant again.  It  is  not
     clear from this whether the answer to the witness'  question  was  that
     there had been a Farsi interpreter present when the Appellant had  been
     baptised.


 18. In relation to the issue of language.  At [21] it states:


         "It was the appellant's  case  Mr  E  was  a  credible  and  honest
         witness, who does not claim to fully understand the  appellant  due
         to the linguistic difficulties.   He  is  however  assured  of  the
         appellant's commitment and supports his case."


 19. This follows the record of evidence at [13] that they  communicate  "as
     best they can".   Even if the Respondent had not expressly  raised  the
     issue of communication between the Appellant and  the  witness  in  the
     First-tier Tribunal, if the Judge is going to place as much reliance as
     she does on Mr. E's evidence, there needs to be  no  doubt  as  to  the
     ability of Mr. E and the Appellant to communicate.


 20. Paragraph [21] indicates that it was accepted that  the  Appellant  and
     Mr. E did not fully understand  each  other.   Further,  there  are  no
     details given of the kind of  conversations  that  they  had,  and  the
     nature of any discussions.  There is insufficient reasoning given as to
     why, in these circumstances, the  Judge  was  prepared  to  accept  the
     evidence of Mr. E and attribute it  so  much  weight,  outweighing  the
     adverse credibility finding made in relation to the Appellant's account
     of events in Iran prior to coming to the United Kingdom.


 21. The Judge states  that  the  evidence  of  the  Appellant's  faith  was
     "accepted"  yet  the  evidence  of  the   Appellant's   conversion   to
     Christianity as set out by the  Judge  is  not  without  its  problems,
     especially in relation to his baptism.  The evidence of Mr.  E  appears
     to suggest that the Appellant may be baptised again,  which  puts  into
     doubt the Appellant's baptism on which the Judge relies.


 22. I find that the Judge's reasoning is inadequate.   She  has  failed  to
     consider the evidence in the round.  She has given no  explanation  for
     her finding that the Appellant has not acted in bad  faith,  given  her
     adverse credibility finding relating to his evidence.   She  has  given
     inadequate reasons for her reliance on the evidence of Mr. E, given the
     evidence  as  set  out  in  the  decision  of   the   difficulties   in
     communication.  She has given  inadequate  reasons  for  accepting  the
     evidence provided.


 23. I have taken account of the Practice Statement dated 10 February  2010,
     paragraph 7.2.  This contemplates that an appeal may be remitted to the
     First-tier Tribunal where the effect of the error has been to deprive a
     party before the  First-tier  Tribunal  of  a  fair  hearing  or  other
     opportunity for the party's case to be put to  and  considered  by  the
     First-tier Tribunal.  Given the nature and extent of  the  fact-finding
     necessary to enable this appeal to be  remade,  having  regard  to  the
     overriding objective, I find that it is appropriate to remit this  case
     to the First-tier Tribunal.


Decision


 24. The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  involves  the  making  of  a
     material error of law and I set the decision aside.


 25. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be re-heard.


 26. The appeal is not to be heard by Judge Wright.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date 19 January 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain
