
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12316/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Centre                               |                                     |
|(via Skype for Business)             |                                     |
|On 24 July 2020                      |On 6 August 2020                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                           HARDI MOHAMMAD ABDULLAH
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Holmes, instructed by Broudie, Jackson & Canter,
solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant was born on 18 July 1990 and is a male citizen  of  Iraq.
    He entered the United Kingdom in September 2019. By a decision dated 29
    November 2019, the appellant was refused  international  protection  by
    the respondent. He appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  which,  in  a
    decision promulgated on  12  March  2020,  dismissed  the  appeal.  The
    appellant now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The appellant had argued before the First-tier Tribunal that he was  at
    risk of return to Iraq on account of his  fear  of  militias  operating
    there and also because he claims to be an atheist.  Those  claims  were
    rejected by the judge and that rejection is not now disputed before the
    Upper Tribunal. The only issue remaining to be determined concerns  the
    judge's conclusions regarding the appellant's present risk on return to
    Kirkuk, the appellant's home area.

 3. There are three grounds of appeal., It is asserted that the judge  made
    findings without evidential foundation. The appellant asserts that  the
    judge found that the appellant is in possession of his passport and his
    CSID identity document. There was  no  evidence  before  the  judge  to
    justify those findings. The appellant would  have  been  searched  upon
    being encountered by the authorities in  the  United  Kingdom  and  the
    judge has failed to explain how the appellant had been able to  conceal
    his identity documents through that process.

 4. Mr Bates, who appeared for the Secretary of State,  accepted  that  the
    appellant may not have been able to have hidden a passport and identity
    document from those searching him in the United  Kingdom.  However,  he
    pointed out that the judge had found  that  the  appellant  either  had
    these documents with him in the United Kingdom or that he could  access
    those documents with the assistance of family or others from abroad. At
    [231], the judge writes that, 'the appellant claims that  he  does  not
    have a CSID card. I found him to be generally incredible.  I  therefore
    find that I am not satisfied, even to the lower standard of proof, that
    the appellant is not in possession of a CSID card or that he could  not
    retrieve his CSID  card  within  a  reasonable  period  of  time.'  [My
    emphasis]. I agree with  Mr  Bates  that  the  judge  has  not  made  a
    categorical finding that the appellant has the identity documents  with
    him here in  the  United  Kingdom.  However,  he  has  found  that  the
    documents have not  been  destroyed,  that  they  exist  and  that  the
    appellant could, if required  to  do  so,  obtain  the  documents  from
    abroad. That was a finding available to the judge on the evidence.

 5. The second ground of appeal complains about the form of expression used
    by the judge, in particular his use of double negatives  at  [221]  and
    [231]. The appellant relies on ME (Sri Lanka) [2018] EWCA Civ  1486  at
    [18]:

         "I also consider that it is unsatisfactory in a case of  this  kind
         for the fact-finder to express findings of fact  in  the  negative.
         For example, at [35] the FTT said (more than once) "I do  not  find
         that he is now perceived as a threat." If the test were that of the
         balance  of  probability,  a  finding  expressed  in  that  way  is
         equivalent to a finding that he is not perceived as a threat.  That
         is because whether a fact has been proved  is  a  binary  question,
         which can only be answered "yes" or "no". But where the question is
         whether there is a real risk that ME is perceived as  a  threat,  a
         finding expressed in those terms does  not  squarely  confront  the
         relevant question."

 6. Whilst it is true that the Court of Appeal states that  the  expression
    of findings of fact in the negative is 'unsatisfactory'  the  complaint
    raised  in  the  paragraph  quoted  concerned  the  Tribunal's  failure
    consider whether there was a real  risk  that  the  appellant  was  now
    perceived as a  threat;  instead,  the  Tribunal  had  considered  only
    whether the appellant was 'now perceived  as  a  threat.'  The  passage
    quoted is not authority for finding that the expression of findings  of
    fact by way of double negatives  (whilst  it  may  make  for  inelegant
    prose) is per se an error of law. In the present  appeal,  the  judge's
    habit of using double negatives, whilst it  may  be  unhelpful  for  an
    individual, such as the appellant, who does not speak English, has  not
    led him into legal error. Further, the submission that  the  judge  had
    failed to confront the relevant question, that is whether it is  really
    likely that an asylum seeker, having  taken  the  refugee  Trail  cross
    Europe, arrived in the United Kingdom without  documentation  has  been
    addressed above; whether or not the appellant has  travelled  with  his
    identity documentation, it was the judge's clear finding  that  he  can
    access that documentation, if he needs to do so.

 7. The third ground of appeal concerns the assertion by the appellant that
    the judge has failed to follow the country guidance of SMO,  KSP  &  IM
    (Article 15(c); identity documents) Iraq CG [2019] UKUT 400 (IAC).  The
    Upper Tribunal found that 'mere knowledge of the book and  page  number
    family registration details are insufficient without an  assessment  of
    the 'state of the documents  available'  [headnote  13  of  SMO].  This
    ground again ignores the finding that  the  appellant  can  obtain  his
    documents from abroad. Arguably, the judge's discussion of  whether  or
    not the appellant can remember his book and  page  number  is  nugatory
    given that the appellant can obtain  documents  which  are  already  in
    existence from his family in Iraq. However, it is not a material  error
    of law.

 8. I find that the judge's conclusion, that the  appellant  has  not  lost
    touch with his family in Iraq, that he has identity documents including
    a passport and CSID and that he can contact his family members and  ask
    for these documents to be sent to him securely in  the  United  Kingdom
    was available to him on the evidence. His further finding that, once in
    possession of those documents, the appellant would be  able  to  travel
    safely to Baghdad and thence onwards to his home area was likewise open
    to him. In consequence, the decision is sound in law and the appeal  is
    dismissed.

    Notice of Decision

    This appeal is dismissed.




    Signed   Date 30 July 2020


    Upper Tribunal Judge Lane
