
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12193/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 15 April 2019                              |On 25 April 2019              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                     w h
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms R Bagral, Counsel, instructed by Sohaib Fatim
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr J McGirr, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Bowler ("the judge"), promulgated on 7 December 2018, in
    which she dismissed the Appellant's appeal against the decision of  the
    Respondent, dated 9 October 2018, refusing  his  protection  and  human
    rights claims.  The essence of his protection claim was that  he  is  a
    gay man and would be at risk on return to Afghanistan.

 2. The judge made a  number  of  adverse  credibility  findings  contained
    between [44] and [84] of her decision.  These related to aspects of the
    Appellant's claim relating to  past  experiences  in  Afghanistan,  his
    circumstances in the United Kingdom, and in respect of section 8 of the
    Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of Claimants,  etc.)  Act  2004.   In
    essence the judge did not  accept  the  core  factual  claim  that  the
    Appellant was gay.

 3. In challenging the  judge's  decision,  four  grounds  of  appeal  were
    initially put forward.   In  summary,  these  related  to  the  judge's
    consideration of the section 8 issue, the failure of the judge to  have
    regard to country information or a relevant country  guidance  decision
    of the Upper Tribunal, a failure  to  give  adequate  reasons,  and  an
    alleged  misinterpretation  of  the  facts  of  certain  parts  of  the
    Appellant's case.

 4. In granting permission to appeal, Deputy Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Mailer
    considered that there was little merit in grounds 1, 3 and 4, but  more
    so in respect of ground 2.



The parties' submissions

 5. At the hearing before me Ms Bagral, with her customary professionalism,
    accepted  that  certain  aspects  of  the  grounds   were   effectively
    unarguable.  She focused her attention on ground 2 and  one  particular
    aspect of ground 4.  She submitted that the judge had indeed failed  to
    take account of either the relevant country  information  and,  perhaps
    more  importantly,  the  country  guidance  decision  in  AJ  (Risk  to
    Homosexuals) Afghanistan CG [2009] UKAIT 00001 ("AJ").  The  particular
    aspects of the Upper Tribunal's consideration of the  relevant  country
    information related to the prevalence of homosexuality  in  Afghanistan
    (with reference to [35] of that decision).

 6. Ms Bagral submitted that it was imperative that any judge had regard to
    relevant country guidance decisions and that credibility  was  assessed
    in the  context  of  the  background  information  of  the  country  in
    question.  This had simply not been done in the present case and  as  a
    result the judge's credibility findings were fundamentally flawed.

 7. In respect of ground 4 she submitted that the  judge  had  appeared  to
    misconstrue the Appellant's evidence relating to the Sweatbox  Club  at
    which he said he had met a partner in the United Kingdom.  Although the
    Appellant had submitted evidence (contained in his appeal bundle),  the
    judge appeared to have taken an additional point against the  Appellant
    without having canvassed the issue at the hearing.

 8. For the Respondent, Mr McGirr submitted that a failure by the judge  to
    have expressly considered the country guidance case was, in the context
    of this  appeal,  immaterial.   It  simply  would  not  have  made  any
    difference to the judge's  credibility  assessment  when  viewed  as  a
    whole.  In respect of ground 4 he wondered what evidence  had  in  fact
    been put before the judge.  In essence he submitted that the judge  had
    found against whatever  evidence  had  been  offered  and  that  was  a
    conclusion open to her in all the circumstances.

 9. In reply Ms Bagral emphasised the importance of taking country guidance
    cases into account and referred me specifically to paragraph 21(e).  of
    the Court of Appeal's judgment in AM (Afghanistan) [2017] EWCA Civ 1123
    (incorrectly cited in the grounds as AM (Iran) [2018] EWCA  Civ  2706).
    She submitted that the error was indeed material.



My error of law decision

10. I conclude that there are no material errors  of  law  in  the  judge's
    decision.

11. Maintaining the focus on the grounds argued before me by Ms  Bagral,  I
    must of course have regard to the judge's decision as a  whole  and  to
    read what she has said in a sensible manner.

12. It is true that the judge failed to have specific regard  to  both  the
    Country Policy Information Note produced  by  the  Respondent  and  the
    decision in AJ.  On the face of it, and specifically in relation to the
    country guidance decision, this would appear to be  an  error  of  law.
    The core issue here is that of materiality.

13. It appears to me as though the only way in which the AJ decision  could
    have offered any potential support for the  Appellant's  claim  was  in
    relation to what was described as the "prevalence" of homosexuality  in
    Afghan society.  It would also appear that this "prevalence"  does  not
    necessarily  relate  to  individuals  having  a  confirmed   homosexual
    orientation, although I accept that  it  is  nonetheless  part  of  the
    background to a case involving such an assertion.

14. However, this potential support for the Appellant's  claim  has  to  be
    seen in the context of what the judge has  said  in  [46]-[55]  of  her
    decision.  There, as elsewhere in her findings and reasoning, she deals
    with specific aspects of the Appellant's account.  Clearly  it  is  the
    specifics of an account which will very often  be  the  most  important
    issues for a judge to reach findings on.  It is  clear  from  what  the
    judge has said in the paragraphs referred to that she has applied  care
    and adequate reasons to a number of particular aspects of evidence  put
    forward by the Appellant.

15. As I read the judge's consideration of these matters, I cannot see that
    a factoring-in of what is said in [35] of AJ (Afghanistan)  could  have
    made any material difference to the overall credibility assessment.   I
    say this not only in respect of the aspects of the  claim  relating  to
    past experiences in Afghanistan, but  also  when  viewing  the  judge's
    decision as a whole, something that I am bound to do.

16. In respect of the particular aspect of ground 4 relied on by Ms Bagral,
    I see a degree of merit in the way  she  has  put  the  point.   It  is
    difficult to ascertain whether or not the specific issue taken  against
    the Appellant was canvassed  at  the  hearing  itself.  However,  as  I
    pointed out during the course of argument, the judge was proceeding  on
    the basis of the evidence actually submitted by  the  Appellant.   This
    included documentary evidence contained in the bundle and  referred  to
    in [70] of the decision.  The judge properly considered this and  found
    that on its face, rather than supporting the Appellant's claim, it went
    to undermine it.

17. Even if there were a degree of confusion or misapprehension  as  to  an
    aspect of the evidence, it  is  likely  that  this  arose  out  of  the
    evidence put forward by the Appellant rather  than  any  error  by  the
    judge.  In addition, I cannot see that, even if such an error  existed,
    it would in the context of the judge's decision as a whole be  material
    to the overall outcome.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain material  error  of
law and it shall stand.

The Appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

I make an anonymity order





Signed   [pic]             Date: 19 April 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor
