
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12093/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 1 February 2021                           |On 15 February 2021            |
|                                             |                               |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between

                                 B R (Iran)
                            [NO ANONYMITY ORDER]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Ms Harleen Masih, Counsel instructed by Braitch
Solicitors
For the respondent:    Ms Julie Isherwood, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Anonymity order

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) The Tribunal has ORDERED that no one shall publish  or  reveal
the name or address of B R who  is  the  subject  of  these  proceedings  or
publish or reveal any information which would  be  likely  to  lead  to  the
identification of him or of any member of  his  family  in  connection  with
these proceedings.

Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise  to  contempt  of
court proceedings.

Decision and reasons

 1. The appellant appeals with permission from the decision of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal dismissing his appeal against the  respondent's  decision
    on 27 November 2019  to  refuse  him  refugee  status  under  the  1951
    Convention, humanitarian protection, or leave to remain in  the  United
    Kingdom on human rights grounds. The appellant is a Kurdish citizen  of
    Iran, born Muslim but now, on his account, an atheist.

 2. It is not disputed now that  the  appellant  has  an  American  Atheist
    symbol tattooed on his left arm or that his anti-Government  raps  are,
    or have been, uploaded to a number of online social media platforms.

Mode of hearing

 3. This appeal was heard remotely by Skype for Business.  There were  some
    technical difficulties for Ms Masih at the beginning  of  the  hearing,
    which were resolved with the help of the clerk.  All  parties  were  in
    quiet places, where they were not disturbed.

 4. I am  satisfied  that  the  hearing  was  conducted  fairly,  with  the
    cooperation of the parties.

Vulnerability

 5. The appellant  has  mental  health  difficulties  and  is  therefore  a
    vulnerable person.  He is entitled  to  be  treated  appropriately,  in
    accordance with the Joint Presidential Guidance No 2 of  2010:   Child,
    Vulnerable Adult and Sensitive Appellant Guidance.

 6. No specific adjustments were required for this hearing as  he  did  not
    give evidence.

Background

 7. The appellant was born in Iran in March 1991 and is now almost 30 years
    old.  In Iran, he was a shopkeeper.  He was Muslim by birth but  claims
    now to be an atheist, having changed his  religious  outlook  gradually
    between 2013 and 2015.

 8. The basis of the appellant's claim is that  he  is  an  atheist  and  a
    rapper musician, who recorded anti-Government raps on his mobile  phone
    while in Iran.  His phone was lost or stolen and he became  aware  that
    his anti-Government raps had been shared on  various  online  platforms
    (Facebook, YouTube and Telegram).

 9. The appellant considered that he was at risk and he left his home town.
     After he left, his account is that his home was raided by the  police,
    who confiscated his computer and some SIM cards.  His brother was taken
    to the police station and questioned about the appellant's whereabouts,
    on two occasions.

10. On 13 October 2015,  having  heard  what  happened  in  his  home,  the
    appellant left Iran.  He spent time in Iraq and Turkey on his  journey,
    before making an asylum claim in Germany, which was unsuccessful.   The
    appellant travelled through France to the United Kingdom.   He  arrived
    in the United Kingdom on 26 March  2019,  then  aged  28,  and  claimed
    asylum on arrival.

11. In her refusal letter of November 2017, the  respondent  accepted  that
    the appellant was an Iranian citizen of Kurdish ethnicity and  that  he
    had left Iran illegally.  She did not accept that he was an atheist  as
    claimed, or that he had rapped about the political situation  in  Iran,
    leading to his music being shared online, or that his raps drew adverse
    attention from the Iranian authorities.

12. The respondent  refused  international  protection  and  the  appellant
    appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.

First-tier Tribunal decision

13. By a decision promulgated on 7 September 2020, the First-tier  Tribunal
    dismissed the appellant's appeal.  The First-tier Judge noted that  the
    respondent accepted the existence of the  appellant's  atheist  tattoo,
    and that his anti-Government raps were available online on social media
    sites.  The  judge  was  not  shown  any  evidence  of  upload  of  the
    appellant's raps by persons unknown to him.

14. The First-tier Judge found that there were raps and posts  dating  from
    2016, when the appellant was in Germany, but  found  that  nothing  had
    been produced from his time in Iran.  The judge recorded that there was
    'no evidence' of anything  connected  to  the  appellant  being  posted
    before  then,  but  that  is  incorrect:  there  was,  of  course,  the
    appellant's own evidence, and it is clear from  the  documents  in  the
    First-tier Tribunal bundle that the videos uploaded while the appellant
    was in Germany were created while he was still in Iran.

15. The judge made the following relevant findings:

         "13. ...The posts that are in the  papers,  including  more  recent
         ones, are clearly critical of the [Iranian]  government.   If  they
         were to become known [to] the Iranian authorities, then it  appears
         that they would be a source of interest to the government. ...

         19.  A relevant consideration is  the  appellant's  bona  fides  in
         pursuing  his  rapping,  demonstrating  and  social  media   posts.
         ...Having regard to the danger that this would cause to his  family
         if it were to become known, I find that  the  appellant's  evidence
         does not show that the appellant has been  genuinely  motivated  in
         the posts downloaded and the demonstrations attended.

         20.  The fact that the appellant's activities are  not  underpinned
         by a genuine commitment to anti-Government sentiment or cause  does
         not answer the question.  The question  is  whether  the  appellant
         would be at risk on return to Iran.  The only way that could be  so
         is if the  posts  were  in  the  future  to  become  known  to  the
         authorities.

         21.   If the appellant were to be questioned on return and asked to
         provide access to his Facebook and any other  social  media  posts,
         then as matters stand, whatever  the  motivation  that  lay  behind
         them, the evidence in the papers would be a source of danger to the
         appellant.  However, posts can be taken down and altered,  settings
         can be changed between public and  private,  and  screenshots  only
         show the status shown on a page for the moment  of  the  photograph
         and may only show a temporary change to a page made for the purpose
         of the screenshot itself.

         22.  In finding that  the  appellant  is  not  motivated  by  anti-
         Government sentiment, the posts in the evidence before  me  do  not
         genuinely reflect the appellant's  own  personal  convictions.   In
         those circumstances, it would be reasonable to expect the appellant
         to take down the posts that have been put up to  assist  with  this
         claim and return his Facebook and any other affected  social  media
         accounts to reflect his non-committed position. "

16. As regards the American Atheist tattoo, the judge  said  there  was  no
    evidence to show it was a source of concern to the Iranian  authorities
    or that they would be aware of its significance, at the  'pinch  point'
    of return.  The American Atheist symbol was neither the reflection of a
    deeply held conviction nor was it a source of danger  on  return.   The
    appellant had not shown that he would be of interest on return.

17. Nor was the appellant's medical condition sufficiently serious.  He was
    not receiving medical treatment for his skin condition, but his  dosage
    of the antidepressant Sertraline had been increased.

18. The appeal was dismissed on all grounds and the appellant  appealed  to
    the Upper Tribunal.

Permission to appeal

19. Upper Tribunal Judge Martin granted permission to appeal on  6  October
    2020, on the basis of the contention  in  the  appellant's  grounds  of
    appeal that the First-tier  Judge  had  given  inadequate  reasons  for
    finding that the accepted social media profile and atheist tattoo would
    not put him at risk on return.

Rule 24 Reply

20. There was no Rule 24 Reply by the respondent.

21. That is the basis on which this appeal came before the Upper Tribunal.

Upper Tribunal hearing

22. For the appellant, Ms Masih relied on her grounds of appeal and on  the
    First-tier Tribunal evidence bundle, much of which was not  taken  into
    account in the First-tier Judge's decision.

23. Ms Isherwood accepted that even if the core account were considered  to
    lack credibility, the question of the appellant's tattoo,  and  of  his
    anti-Government raps, were established.   Taken  together,  she  agreed
    that those were sufficient to put the appellant at risk at  the  'pinch
    point' of return: see PS (Christianity - risk) Iran CG [2020]  UKUT  46
    (IAC) at (4) in the judicial headnote.



Evidence before the First-tier Tribunal

24. The First-tier Judge's  decision  made  no  reference  to  the  country
    evidence in the bundle,  nor  to  the  assessment  by  the  applicant's
    general  medical  practitioner  that  he  has   post-traumatic   stress
    disorder, gets 'constant terrible nightmares, flashbacks of  his  past'
    and had expressed suicidal ideation and was very  anxious  when  around
    people.  The attached prescription for 29 January 2020 shows  repeating
    prescriptions for Mirtazapine 15mg (2 each night) which is  a  medicine
    to treat depression and anxiety disorders, and for Sertraline 100 mg (1
    daily), which is another type of anti-depressant, a selective serotonin
    reuptake inhibitor.

25. Nor did he consider the Austrian Red Cross/ACCORD report dated 12  June
    2017 which appears at  page  85  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  hearing
    bundle. The external evidence there summarised is that in  Iran  it  is
    illegal and/or unrecognised to identify as an atheist or non-religious.
     Iran is one of only 13 countries in the world where being  an  atheist
    is punishable by death.   The Constitution of the Islamic  Republic  of
    Iran does not address the right of Muslim Iranian citizens to change or
    renounce  their  religious  beliefs.   Atheists  cannot  express  their
    beliefs in public, and often use the internet to present their  beliefs
    anonymously.  There are a number of active atheist internet  pages  and
    blogs, including a Facebook page with more than 187000 followers.

26. An article from The Guardian newspaper dated 14 May 2012  records  that
    Shahin Najafi, a Germany-based Iranian singer, was  the  subject  of  a
    fatwa for blasphemy, based on the content  of  his  songs.   The  fatwa
    described him as an apostate.

27. An article from The Guardian dated 4 February 2019  entitled  A  silent
    act of resistance: the hidden tattoo studios of Tehran,  recorded  that
    tattoo artists are regularly arrested in Iran and sentenced  to  fines,
    lashes, or even imprisonment.  Tattoos were not  illegal  nor  strictly
    forbidden in Shi'a Islam but 'the authorities strongly reject them as a
    western phenomenon harmful to Iranian values':

         "In some public places, such as swimming  pools,  there  are  signs
         warning that tattooed people are not welcome.  When  criminals  are
         arrested, newspapers would publish photographs of their body art to
         convey the message that tattoos and crime go hand in hand. Football
         players with tattooed arms have been forced to wear long sleeves."

28. Tattoos were nevertheless popular among the young, as 'a silent act  of
    resistance'.  The only form of tattooing the  authorities  allowed  was
    permanent makeup such as eyeliner.

Analysis

29. The First-tier Judge's reasoning is not  consistent  with  his  factual
    findings.  The appellant's tattoo signposts his atheist  leanings,  and
    he cannot be expected to lie about what it is, or why he has it, at the
    'pinch point' of arrival.  The judge's  finding  that  the  appellant's
    atheism is not genuine is of no assistance, given his tattoo, which  he
    would have to explain.

30. Nor is it reasonable to assume that the anti-Government Facebook  posts
    are not accessible to the Iranian authorities, even if they  have  been
    taken down.  The judge accepted that the content of the anti-Government
    raps (which are in the First-tier Tribunal bundle) was of such a nature
    that if they were known to the Iranian authorities, the appellant would
    be at risk.

31. The First-tier Judge's conclusions are perverse and the  decision  must
    be set aside.  On  the  basis  of  the  accepted  facts,  there  is  no
    alternative but to allow the appeal.

DECISION

32. For the foregoing reasons, my decision is as follows:


    The making of the previous decision involved the making of an error  on
    a point of law.


    I set aside the previous decision.  I remake the decision  by  allowing
    the appeal.




Signed   Judith AJC Gleeson                           Date:     2 February
2021
         Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson



