
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12563/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 18th July 2017                             |On 26th July 2017             |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD


                                   Between

                                     aK

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss A Patyna, of Counsel, instructed by Virgo
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr O Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of Turkey born on  [  ]  1997.   He  appeals
    against the decision of the respondent dated 28th October 2016 refusing
    to grant him asylum or other protection in the United Kingdom.
2.   The hearing of the appeal came before First-tier Tribunal Judge  Kainth
    on 15th December 2016.  For the reasons as set out in the determination
    promulgated on 16th January 2017,  the  appeal  was  dismissed  in  all
    respects.

3.   Challenge has been made to the findings of the Judge, in particular  it
    being said that undue weight was placed upon the screening interview to
    the detriment of other relevant material as  presented.   It  was  upon
    that matter that permission was  granted  and  thus  the  matter  comes
    before me to determine the issue.

4.   The claim of the appellant is that he suffered ill-treatment in  Turkey
    as a result of his association with the HDP ("The  Peoples'  Democratic
    Party") and sympathy towards common suspected links with the PKK  ("The
    Kurdistan Workers Party").  It was his claim that he  was  detained  on
    three occasions, namely 20th August 2012, 14th February 2015  and  13th
    February 2016.  It is his case, as stated in the substantive interview,
    that warrants for his arrest have been issued in relation to all  those
    matters, but no warrants or court documents were presented.

5.   It was the case, as advanced on behalf of the appellant,  that  he  had
    wished  to  leave  Turkey  since  2014  and  had  made  multiple   visa
    applications.  It is said that an application in August 2014  had  been
    refused, a further one in September 2014 had been refused, and an   one
    in September 2014 had been refused.  In the event he flew  from  Turkey
    to the UK without documents in May 2016 and claimed asylum upon  entry.
    Essentially the Judge did  not  accept  it  to  be  credible  that  the
    appellant had waited so long to flee, if indeed he was being sought  in
    such a manner as he has described.

6.   A particular feature of this case, however, is that having  arrived  in
    the United Kingdom and claimed asylum, he was made  the  subject  of  a
    screening interview, a brief nature of which is set out by the Judge in
    paragraph 27 of the determination.  The appellant was asked whether  he
    had ever been accused of any allegation  or  offence  or  detained,  to
    which he had said he had not.  He indicated there was  no  warrant  for
    his arrest.  He denied that he was an Alevi Kurd, but did give  details
    as to his uncle in the United Kingdom.

7.   On the face of the matter and common sense, having waited  so  long  to
    get to the United Kingdom to claim asylum, it is surprising he did  not
    give an account of his ill-treatment or fear.

8.   The appellant provides two explanations  for  that  matter:  the  first
    being that the interpreter at that screening interview  indicated  that
    he was from the Turkish Consulate which led the appellant not to  trust
    him.  There seemed to be however no indication given by  the  appellant
    to the interviewer that he would prefer a different interpreter, and as
    the Judge notes in paragraph 27, even if that were the  case,  it  does
    not explain why the appellant should lie about his circumstances in one
    sense and give details as to his family member, his uncle, in  another.



9.   A further explanation seems to be given by the appellant  that  he  was
    unwell having made the journey, he was hallucinating, having nightmares
    and his thought processes were not correct and that  he  was  therefore
    not able to explain himself correctly during the  screening  interview.
    The Judge noted at paragraph 35 of the determination that in  terms  of
    the screening interview the appellant was asked specifically whether he
    had any health problems and had  answered  in  the  negative.   In  any
    event, no report has been prepared to support his contention as to  his
    condition.

10.  It is to be recognised, indeed as has been indicated  in  a  number  of
    judicial decisions, a screening interview is precisely that.  It is not
    designed to be a full interview, but merely to have some indication  as
    to what the claim is about.  The appellant is therefore not expected to
    give a full explanation, but it is reasonable to expect, as indeed  the
    Judge comments, for him to give a truthful one.   In  contrast  to  the
    screening interview the appellant in his  substantive  interview  gives
    quite a different account of his fears and treatment.

11.  It seems to me, and I so find, that it was in  those  circumstances  it
    is entirely reasonable for the Judge to place significant  weight  upon
    that screening interview, particularly given that  the explanations  as
    to why the appellant had acted as he did  at  the  screening  interview
    were not accepted.

12.  There were a number of other findings which were made by the  Judge  on
    other matters of the claim.  As I have indicated, the Judge  considered
    that the delay in seeking to leave Turkey undermined the claim that  he
    was being actively sought by the authorities over a  number  of  years.
    In particular, in relation to the claimed detention in  February  2016,
    the appellant claims to have been released upon bail and was in  breach
    of his  bail  terms  in  leaving  Turkey.   The  whole  nature  of  the
    circumstances in which he came to find assistance in leaving Turkey  by
    a  member  of  the  public  just  happening  to  meet  him  was  not  a
    circumstance  which  the  Judge  found  to  be  credible  in  all   the
    circumstances.

13.  The Judge notes that it would be unlikely, given  the  profile  of  the
    appellant that he would be able to leave Turkey using a  passport  with
    his photograph and name on it.   Consideration was given to the case of
    IK (Returnees - Records -  IFA)  Turkey  CG  [2004]  UKIAT  00312  with
    specific reference to the GBTS system which records the entry and  exit
    of individuals.  Mr Clarke  drew  my  attention  to  the  decision,  in
    particular  to  paragraphs  25  onwards  dealing  with  the  ambit  and
    accessibility of the information systems maintained by the authority in
    Turkey.  The Tribunal recognised  the  difficulty  of  obtaining  clear
    details and set out the difficulties in the  course  of  the  judgment.
    The Tribunal considered that border control information was essentially
    geared to those coming in However regard was had to NUFUS  records  and
    the Tribunal found little reason to  doubt  that  those  who  were  the
    subject of warrants of arrest would have a record in  some  department.
    Indeed, as the appellant claims, he is the subject  of  three  warrants
    for arrest.  It would be surprising indeed if that  was  not  a  factor
    that was noted in the border control.  The Judge makes  reference  more
    to the bail aspect rather than to the warrant aspect.   It  seems  that
    having three warrants would clearly increase the implausibility of  the
    appellant being able to leave on his own passport.

14.  In addition,  the  decision  of  the  Respondent  in  refusing  asylum,
    highlighted certain disconcerting details as to language  and  lack  of
    cultural  awareness.   In  fairness  to  the  appellant  the  Judge  at
    paragraph 39 accepts that some of the replies were consistent with  the
    external evidence but not necessarily indicative that he was Kurdish.

15.  Miss Patyna seeks to argue that the Judge failed to  consider  properly
    the evidence that was presented and unduly dismissed it because of  the
    screening interview.

16.   In  that  connection  the  Judge  makes  reference  to  a  number   of
    photographs that were presented, particularly at pages 67 and 69 of the
    bundle, said to relate to Kurdish celebrations in March  2015  and  one
    taken outside the HDP building on 10th June  2015  with  the  appellant
    attending with two HDP MPs.  The Judge found that the photographs  were
    not  indicative  of  the  appellant's  claimed  political  involvement.
    Further  that  there  were  no  supporting  witnesses  concerning   his
    activities.

17.  There are other photographs which seem to  confirm  the  identification
    of Claldogan who is an HDP  MP,  showing  him  in  various  photographs
    during the course of his political activity.  Similarly, Mahmut Torgul,
    also an MP,  there  are  photographs  of  him  in  the  course  of  his
    activities.  The fact that  the  appellant  may  be  beside  these  two
    persons without more does not create the  political  profile  which  he
    claims there to be.  Although corroboration is not to be sought,  as  a
    requirement, it is perhaps surprising that there are no statements from
    those individuals speaking about the appellant, if indeed he had a more
    significant profile than merely a photograph.

18.  The Judge also considered  at  paragraph  33  of  the  determination  a
    document that is  set  out  in  translated  form  at  page  65  of  the
    appellant's bundle.  It seems to be a document from  the  Chief  Public
    Prosecutor, Political Party Membership Investigations with an ID number
    15734110710, seemingly to be attributable as a party membership to  the
    appellant.  There was an investigation conducted on 18th October  2016,
    produced  as  evidence  of  the  appellant's  membership  of  the  HDP,
    seemingly a copy having been obtained from the internet.   The  website
    address as a membership enquiry of political  parties.   The  appellant
    explained that simply entering a specific reference number provides the
    relevant information.  He claimed to be an active member and  supporter
    of the HDP.  The Judge found that that document  by  itself  being  one
    seemingly created from the website and without more was  not  of  great
    weight in determining the issue of membership.

19.  Miss Patyna indicates  there  was  also  a  report  from  The  Peoples'
    Democratic Party of Turkey setting out in general terms how it operates
    and the experience which it has of  the  authorities  interference  and
    there was a lot of generic information  about  the  difficulties  which
    those supporting the PKK or the HDP had in Turkey, but little of any of
    that makes any direct reference to  the  appellant  himself.   Although
    Miss Patyna accepts that there were other  matters  considered  by  the
    Judge, she submits that in essence credibility was  determined  by  the
    screening interview and by little else and that the  Judge  would  have
    come to a different conclusion had the Judge not been so  focused  upon
    that aspect.

20.  It seems to me, however, that the Judge was perfectly entitled to  give
    such weight to the documents as deemed appropriate.  The  appellant  is
    an individual who claims to have been at  the  forefront  of  political
    activities over a number of years in Turkey and who is  actively  being
    sought by the authorities.  He claims to be associated with MPs and  be
    the recipient of warrants for arrest.  None of that material  has  been
    presented. Given the length of time that the appellant  was  in  Turkey
    seeking to come to the United Kingdom to claim asylum,  it  is  perhaps
    reasonable to expect there to have been more  documentation  about  his
    activities or statements from colleagues to clarify the matter.  In his
    interview he claims to have taken an active part in events and meetings
    of the party and an active member since 2015 of the HDP.  He speaks  in
    his interview of many raids, both in Istanbul and elsewhere.

21.  If indeed the appellant is right in saying that he gave  an  inaccurate
    or untruthful account to the authorities when initially  questioned  it
    is understandable that thereafter what  he  says  or  produces  is  the
    subject of the utmost scrutiny.  In  this  particular  case  the  Judge
    formed the opinion, for the reasons set out, that the appellant was not
    credible as to the activities which he  subsequently  claimed  to  have
    been involved with.

22.  Although it is right that there is a very heavy emphasis placed by  the
    Judge upon the screening interview, I do not find that it  has  tainted
    all other considerations as is claimed.  It is clear that the Judge has
    viewed the matter from a number of perspectives, testing  the  evidence
    that was presented in the light of what the appellant had to say to the
    authorities, both in the screening interview and subsequently.

Notice of Decision

23.  I do not  find  there  to  be  any  material  error  of  law.   In  the
    circumstances the appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed
    and the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge shall  stand,  namely
    that the appellant's appeal for asylum is dismissed, that  in  relation
    of humanitarian protection is dismissed as well as that in relation  to
    human rights.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                 [pic]                 Date 26 July 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge King TD









