
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12008/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 1st November 2018                          |On 14th November 2018         |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal judge ROBERTS


                                   Between

                                   MR I.P.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss Jaquiss, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms Isherwood, Senior HOPO


Anonymity

Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
An anonymity direction is made. As a protection claim, it is appropriate to
do so.

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant a citizen of Sri Lanka (born 16th February 1985)  appeals
    with permission against the decision of a  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
    Cohen) dismissing his appeal against the Respondent's decision  of  2nd
    November 2017 refusing his claim to asylum/humanitarian protection.

 2. The Appellant's claim in summary is that he was arrested twice  in  Sri
    Lanka because of his association  with  the  LTTE.   The  first  arrest
    occurred in 2009 when he surrendered to the Authorities.  His claim  is
    that he was detained for nearly a year abused, beaten  and  burnt  with
    cigarettes.

 3. Following his release in 2010 he went to India where he  stayed  for  a
    year and a half.  He returned to Sri Lanka because of a fear  that  the
    Indian police were active against LTTE supporters.

 4. He claimed that he was arrested again in December 2014 when  Government
    officials came to his home, looking not for him but  for  his  brother.
    His brother had already left the home and the Appellant was unaware  of
    where he had gone. On failing  to  find  his  brother,  the  Government
    forces arrested the Appellant instead.  He was detained  for  over  two
    years, tortured and beaten.  He was released only after his father  had
    paid a bribe.  On his release arrangements were made quickly  with  the
    help of an agent, and the Appellant came to the UK.  He  sought  asylum
    straight away on arrival.  His brother now lives  in  Belgium  and  has
    been granted asylum by the  Authorities  in  that  country.   The  FtTJ
    disbelieved the core elements of the Appellant's claim and  accordingly
    dismissed it.

 5. An application for permission to appeal was granted by Designated First-
    tier Tribunal Judge McCarthy on 12th  September  2018.   The  grant  of
    permission summarises the five grounds seeking permission and sets  out
    the issues before me.  The relevant parts of the grant for the purposes
    of this hearing are set out below:

    "5.  The first ground alleges that Judge Cohen failed  to  engage  with
         the medical evidence relating to PTSD and contrary to binding  case
         law failed to have regard  to  the  professional  standing  of  the
         medical expert.  These failures meant Judge Cohen did not  consider
         the impact the appellant's mental health might have on his  ability
         to give evidence, contrary to Presidential Guidance  on  vulnerable
         appellants.  In addition, the grounds  complain  that  Judge  Cohen
         erred by putting the cart before the horse by finding the appellant
         not credible and then rejecting the medical evidence.

    6.   The second ground alleges that Judge Cohen  gave  disproportionate
         weight to the record of the screening interview, contrary to  Upper
         Tribunal guidance.  Judge  Cohen  failed  to  have  regard  to  the
         circumstances in which the screening interview  was  conducted  and
         the appellant's mental state at that time.

    7.   The third ground alleges that Judge Cohen made findings not  based
         on the evidence provided by the parties.   The  judge  accused  the
         appellant of not answering certain questions but that  is  contrary
         to the record kept by counsel at the hearing (and provided with the
         application for permission  to  appeal).  In  addition,  the  third
         ground complains about the summary  manner  in  which  Judge  Cohen
         addressed evidence of a witness,  merely  describing  it  as  self-
         serving but without explaining why it might be  self-serving.   The
         third ground complains how Judge Cohen failed to deal properly with
         the  evidence  of  another  witness,   the   appellant's   brother,
         dismissing his evidence as being discrepant but without considering
         the evidence as a whole.

    8.   The fourth ground argues that Judge Cohen failed  to  engage  with
         the appellant's case and presented in counsel's  skeleton  argument
         or submissions.  I find this ground to stand or fall with the first
         three grounds and that of itself it is not a ground of application.



    9.   The final ground alleges that Judge Cohen failed to apply  country
         guidance by taking an outdated view of the situation in Sri  Lanka.
         In addition, this ground alleges the judge failed to  consider  the
         risk factors identified in the current country guidance case, GJ.

    10.  Grounds 1,  2,  3  and  5  are  made  out  because  after  careful
         examination of  the  decision  and  reasons  statement  those  four
         grounds raise arguable legal errors.   The  fourth  ground  is  not
         excluded because it  stands  with  the  first  three  grounds.   In
         reaching this conclusion, I have had regard to the cases  cited  by
         Counsel in her grounds of application and to the case of SS, R  (on
         the application of) v SSHD ("self-serving" statements) [2017]  UKUT
         164.

    11.  I add that the appellant may require alternative counsel to attend
         the Upper Tribunal because a key part of the appeal  to  the  Upper
         Tribunal  involves  a  dispute  between  the  judge's   record   of
         proceedings and that of Counsel, who may have to give  evidence  in
         the Upper Tribunal.  The respondent should  be  prepared  to  share
         information from the presenting officer's record of proceedings.

    12.  I conclude permission to appeal should be granted."

    Thus the matter comes before me to decide  if  the  decision  of  Judge
    Cohen contains such error of law that it requires to be set  aside  and
    remade.

 6. No Rule 24 response was served by the Respondent.

Error of Law Hearing

 7. Before me Miss Jaquiss appeared for the Appellant and Ms Isherwood  for
    the Respondent.  At the outset of the hearing Miss Jaquiss, in response
    to paragraph 11 of the grant of permission, served a witness  statement
    from Ms B Jones, Counsel, who had appeared for  the  Appellant  at  the
    original hearing.   Ms  Isherwood  served  a  copy  of  the  Presenting
    Officer's Record of Proceedings again in response to  paragraph  11  of
    the grant of permission.  Both parties were given time to examine these
    documents.

 8. I heard submissions from both parties.  Miss Jaquiss's submissions were
    lengthy  following  the  grounds  seeking  permission.   Ms   Isherwood
    responded in detail defending the decision.

Consideration

 9. I find there is merit in the first three grounds which  were  in  issue
    before me.  For the purposes of this decision I will give  my  findings
    and reasons following the order outlined in paragraphs 5-7 of the grant
    of permission.

10. The first ground which  raises  concerns  centres  around  the  medical
    evidence produced in support of the Appellant's claim.   The  Appellant
    produced two significant medical reports

      1) a psychiatric report; and

      2) a scarring report.

11. The FtTJ deals with these reports at [35] and  [36].   The  psychiatric
    report concludes that  whilst  the  Appellant  is  not  suffering  from
    depression, he is suffering  from  PTSD.   The  diagnosis  of  PTSD  is
    further supported by a report from the Appellant's GP and from a senior
    psychotherapist at the Maudsley NHS Foundation Trust.

12. The FtTJ after noting that he had been provided with the above  reports
    said  the  following  in  analysing  the  medical  evidence  from   the
    consultant psychiatrist, Dr Hajioff:

         "I  secondly  note  that  DR  Hajioff   accepts   the   appellant's
         credibility at face value.  As  will  be  noted  from  my  findings
         above, I have found major discrepancies in the appellant's evidence
         going to the very core of his claim."

13. In a few sentences the FtTJ appears to effectively dismiss the expert's
    standing. Likewise I find that I cannot be satisfied that the judge has
    considered the evidence holistically as he is tasked to do.   Paragraph
    [35] gives the impression that the  FtTJ  has  considered  the  medical
    evidence after he has made his mind up about  Appellant's  credibility.
    I find that this is a material error in that the judge fails to  engage
    with  the  medical  evidence  as  independent  corroboration   of   the
    Appellant's claim (Mibanga v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 367).  Nowhere  do  I
    see that the judge has actually made a finding on  whether  or  not  he
    accepts that the Appellant is suffering from PTSD.   The  Appellant  is
    entitled to have evidence viewed in the light of any such finding.




14. One point that I consider I must mention at this stage is the criticism
    made of the judge that he  should  have  treated  the  Appellant  as  a
    vulnerable witness.  I find this criticism to be unfair.  There  is  no
    note that those representing the Appellant made any application for the
    Appellant to be treated as such.  The Appellant was legally represented
    throughout the hearing and as Ms Isherwood pointed out  to  me  in  her
    submissions, the psychiatric report indicated that  the  Appellant  was
    "fit to plead."

15. Similarly with the scarring, there was a detailed report  submitted  by
    Dr Martin covering six pages of detailed examination  showing  scarring
    consistent with the Appellant's history of ill treatment.  It  is  hard
    to see how after summing up the doctor's findings  in  two  lines,  the
    judge reaches a conclusion that the Appellant's scarring is:

         "... historic, was not caused during any claimed  recent  detention
         and would not bring him to the attention of the authorities." [36]

    Again a reading  of  [36]  gives  the  impression  that  the  FtTJ  has
    considered the scarring report only after reaching his  conclusions  on
    the Appellant's credibility.

16. The  second  ground  centres  on  the  assertion  that  the  FtTJ  gave
    disproportionate weight to  the  record  of  the  screening  interview.
    Building on this, Miss Jaquiss submitted that he had erred by making  a
    material error of fact.  It was said that this error then led the judge
    to follow an incorrect approach when dealing with  the  evidence  as  a
    whole.  I find there is merit in this submission on this basis:

17. The judge's decision and findings start at [26].   At  [27]  the  judge
    says the following:

         "There are substantial discrepancies which permeate the Appellant's
         claim and further discrepancies arose before me.  I  will  set  out
         the same herein."

18. The judge then sets out what he considers to be discrepancies with  the
    Appellant's screening interview and says at [30]:

         "In his screening interview, the appellant stated that he had never
         been detained or accused of an offence for which he could have been
         convicted whereas the appellant subsequently claimed to  have  been
         detained on two occasions, the latter for a three year  period  and
         accused of membership of a proscribed terrorist group which I  find
         to be a further discrepancy in the appellant's evidence."

19. In fact an examination of the screening interview at 4.1 shows that the
    Appellant made the following response  when  asked  why  he  could  not
    return to his home country.  He is recorded as saying:

         "One of my brothers was working for a Tamil organisation. While the
         police were searching for him, they were torturing me.   I  was  in
         prison from 25/12/2014 to 23/04/2017.  My parents arranged  for  my
         release through an agent.  They bribed someone.  I  fear  if  I  am
         returned to Sri Lanka I will be tortured and imprisoned".

20. Paragraph [30] gives the impression that the FtTJ found  a  discrepancy
    in the  Appellant's  account  and  therefore  disbelieved  the  account
    because the Appellant had made no mention  of  being  detained  at  the
    screening interview.

21. I find the judge was in error  to  find  that  the  Appellant  did  not
    mention his detention at the Screening interview.   It  is  a  material
    error because it has always been part of  the  Appellant's  core  claim
    that he was detained for a period of two and a half years before  being
    released through a bribe.  The judge held it against the Appellant that
    he had not mentioned his detention  at  the  screening  interview.   Ms
    Isherwood,  whilst  generally  defending  the  judge's  assessment   of
    credibility, accepted that the screening interview does show  that  the
    Appellant mentioned that he had been detained and tortured.

22. The third  ground  raises  concerns  that  the  judge  has  incorrectly
    recorded part of the evidence which was put forward at the hearing.  It
    mainly hinges  on  the  cross-examination  of  the  Appellant  and  the
    relevant paragraphs in the decision are contained  at  [15]  and  [16].
    The judge records the following:

         "The appellant was referred to  his  response  in  interview  (Q30)
         where he indicated that the authorities  would  know  that  he  was
         involved with the LTTE because of scars on his body and  was  asked
         how the authorities would know that he had scars and did not answer
         the question asked.  The question was repeated and he still did not
         answer the question."

23. Miss Jaquiss drew my attention to the contemporaneous notes recorded by
    Ms Jones who appeared at the hearing on behalf of  the  Appellant.   Ms
    Jones's contemporaneous note shows  that  the  Appellant  in  fact  did
    answer the question  albeit  in  a  discursive  manner.   Ms  Isherwood
    accepted that Ms Jones's note was correct in  that  the  HOPO  recorded
    likewise that the Appellant did answer the question albeit it had to be
    repeated.

24. Miss Jaquiss submitted that this was a material point because the  fact
    that the judge has mis-recorded the  evidence  taints  his  credibility
    evaluation.  I find that this point is well  made.   I  find  that  the
    judge was in error to record at [15] that the Appellant did not  answer
    the question.  This is a material error because I cannot  be  satisfied
    that it did not impact upon the judge's credibility assessment.

25. I find that the cumulative effect of these errors is such that I cannot
    be satisfied  that  the  FtTJ's  decision  concerning  the  Appellant's
    credibility is sustainable. That is sufficient to enable me to  dispose
    of this matter.  I find it is not necessary to consider ground 5 of the
    grant (failure to apply country guidance by taking an outdated view  of
    the situation in Sri Lanka). This is a matter which  will  need  to  be
    considered at the fresh hearing.  The decision  is  set  aside  in  its
    entirety with nothing preserved.  The decision will need to  be  remade
    afresh in the First-tier Tribunal, because of the  amount  of  judicial
    fact-finding required.  The matter will therefore be  remitted  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal (not Judge Cohen) for that Tribunal to  remake  the
    decision.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on 8th  August  2018  is
set aside for material error.  The decision is remitted  to  the  First-tier
Tribunal for the decision to be remade  there  before  a  judge  other  than
Judge Cohen.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   C E Roberts                    Date     06 November 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Roberts


