
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: pA/12723/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 23 May 2017                       |                  On  07 August 2017 |
|                                     |                                     |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BAGRAL

                                   Between

                                     FA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms L Turnbull, of Counsel, instructed by Charles
                 Simmons Solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr N Brambles, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh born on [ ] 1993. He  appeals,
    with permission granted on 11 April 2017 (by First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Grant-Hutchinson) against  a  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Callender-Smith (hereafter "the judge") who, in a decision  promulgated
    on 22 December 2016, dismissed his appeal against  a  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State following the refusal of his claim for international
    protection on 9 December 2015.

 2. Essentially, the Appellant's case is that he is gay. He claims to  have
    been disowned by his family in Bangladesh on account of  his  sexuality
    and claims that he has engaged in homosexual activity in the  UK  which
    he could not replicate in Bangladesh without fear of persecution and/or
    serious harm. The Secretary of State did  not  accept  the  Appellant's
    account.

 3. The judge in dismissing the  Appellant's  appeal  took  several  points
    against him. The judge noted the Appellant  claimed  asylum  after  all
    other routes of remaining in the  UK  had  been  exhausted.  The  judge
    observed that there was no evidence from his friend and uncle who  were
    capable of corroborating his claim. The judge also noted there were two
    significant omissions from the Appellant's witness statement signed two
    weeks prior to the date of hearing. The first being that  he  told  his
    sister-in-law that he is gay  and  the  second  being  his  failure  to
    mention a recent sexual  relationship.  The  judge  thus  rejected  the
    Appellant's claim that he is gay and the protection  claim  accordingly
    failed.

 4. The Grounds of Appeal to the Upper Tribunal take issue with the judge's
    decision in several respects. First, it is argued that the judge failed
    to fully determine that the Appellant is a practising homosexual and by
    living openly he will be at risk on return to Bangladesh, and erred  by
    unduly  focussing  on  immaterial  matters  and  failed   to   consider
    adequately the central elements of the Appellant's  claim.  Second,  it
    was argued the judge erred in failing to consider the Appellant's
    Article 8 claim. The permission granting judge considered that only the
    second ground was arguable.

 5. At the hearing Ms Turnbull sought to argue the grounds  in  respect  of
    which the permission granting judge  considered  were  unarguable.  She
    submitted that there were  two  letters  from  the  Appellant's  friend
    before the judge which he failed to take into  account,  and  that  the
    Appellant did mention in his witness statement that he told his sister-
    in-law that he is gay. Ms Turnbull acknowledged that the Appellant  may
    not have mentioned his recent relationship in  his  witness  statement,
    but he had mentioned his past relationship  with  another  man  in  the
    Statement of Evidence Form (SEF). She thus submitted that the judge did
    not properly consider the evidence; had made errors in relation to  the
    facts and gave inadequate reasons for dismissing the  appeal.  Finally,
    Ms Turnbull submitted that the judge failed to address Article 8 of the
    ECHR and that there ought to have been consideration of the Appellant's
    private life.

 6. On behalf of the Respondent, Mr Bramble submitted  that  the  grant  of
    permission was limited to the judge's failure to  consider  Article  8,
    and that it was not open to the Appellant to reargue the grounds  given
    his  failure  to  comply   with   the   Tribunal's   Procedure   Rules.
    Notwithstanding, Mr Bramble addressed the grounds and noted the letters
    from the Appellant's friend were silent on the issue of  sexuality  and
    that the omission the judge referred  to  related  to  the  Appellant's
    sister-in-law and not his sister. Mr Bramble properly acknowledged that
    there was no consideration of Article 8,  but  he  submitted  that  the
    error was not material. A private life claim was  not  put  before  the
    judge and the supporting letters relied upon were considerably  out  of
    date.

 7. In reply, Ms Turnbull (who did not represent the Appellant  before  the
    judge) submitted that detailed submissions were made  at  the  hearing.
    She referred to letters from the Appellant's  sister-in-law  which  the
    judge failed to consider. She submitted that the failure was material.

Discussion

 8. The Grounds  of  Appeal  seeking  to  challenge  the  judge's  decision
    dismissing the protection claim do not identify an error of law and are
    couched in terms of disagreement with the judge's findings. It is of no
    surprise therefore, in respect of those grounds,  that  the  permission
    granting judge stated as follows: "the Judge  has  considered  all  the
    evidence and has made appropriate findings which were open  to  him  to
    make, including having also having had the benefit of all oral evidence
    on the day of the hearing. It was open for the Judge to  consider  what
    weight he felt it appropriate to place on all the evidence before  him.
    The Judge has given adequate reasons for his decision."

 9. In my judgement, that view is  unassailable.  Before  me,  Ms  Turnbull
    sought to reargue these grounds without any  formal  application  being
    made, and the submissions that she advanced  transformed  into  grounds
    none of  which  are  particularised  in  the  Grounds  of  Appeal.  The
    application to reargue these  grounds,  such  as  it  is,  is  refused.
    Firstly, as Mr Bramble (rightly) noted the Appellant has  not  complied
    with rule 21 of The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 and,
    even there had been compliance, the grounds advanced are without merit.
    Central to Ms  Turnbull's  complaint  is  the  judge's  conclusions  at
    paragraph 27(3) and (5) - (13) respectively. Therein the  judge  stated
    thus:

         "(3) I note that because there are two individuals who  could  have
         assisted in some way - even if it had just been by way  of  letters
         of support - and they have remained silent.

           . The first is his brother's (and now his) friend [ ] who  lives
             down in Bristol. He states that it is [ ] who took  him  to  a
             pub/club in Bristol where he met a man called Charlie after he
             had explained to [ ] about his  sexual  orientation  and  with
             whom he had a homosexual experience.

           . The second is a man he describes as his uncle, [ ], who  lives
             up in Birmingham and who the Appellant states had learned from
             the Appellant's parents in 2011/2012 that  the  Appellant  was
             not interested in girls. He stated in his oral  evidence  that
             he had told his uncle about his sexual orientation. Given  the
             circumstances of this appeal,  and  the  fact  that  he  is  a
             relative if not an  immediate  family  member,  I  would  have
             expected to see some corroboration about this from him.

         (4) There is an additional problem and that is in the sequencing of
         things that he now  states  in  his  oral  evidence  that  are  not
         reflected in his written witness statement dated 6 December 2016.

         (5) That witness statement was signed only two  weeks  before  this
         oral hearing and yet it contains two significant omissions.

         (6) The first of these is that he said that he had told his sister-
         in-law either directly or in terms that he was gay shortly after he
         received the most recent refusal letter.

         (7) His written witness statement makes no mention of this  and  it
         is a significant omission because he says that part of  the  reason
         that he has failed to reveal his sexuality in  the  past  has  been
         because he is scared thrown out of the house by his  sister-in-law.
         (sic)

         (8) I would have expected such a significant piece  of  information
         to be properly recorded in the written witness statement and  I  am
         not satisfied that I had been given the good or adequate reason why
         that has not happened.

         ...

         (12) The second of these is that he has said in his  oral  evidence
         that he had a further recent, sexual relationship recently  with  a
         man called [ ] who lives in Bristol.

         (13) That relationship is not recorded in his witness  statement  -
         he only refers to an earlier male relationship with Charlie  -  and
         the Appellant described the relationship as having lasted for about
         two weeks which is much more than a one night stand."(sic)

10.   Ms Turnbull criticises the judge for his failure to take into  account
      two letters from the friend in question referred to at [27(3)].  While
      I acknowledge that the judge  does  not  specifically  refer  to  this
      evidence, the difficulty with this submission is that the letters from
      the Appellant's friend make no reference whatsoever to the Appellant's
      sexuality. This evidence therefore would have been of no assistance to
      the judge in determining the Appellant's claim  that  he  is  gay.  No
      material error of law is thereby made out.

11.   Next  Ms  Turnbull  referred  to  the  Appellant's  witness  statement
      (paragraph 7) and substantive asylum  interview  record,  wherein  she
      stated that he told his sister-in-law that he is gay,  in  support  of
      her contention that there was no omission as identified by  the  judge
      at paragraph [27(6)]. However, a closer examination of the Appellant's
      witness statement reveals that he states that he told his sister  that
      he had no "interest in girls"; there is no mention that  he  made  the
      same  or  similar  revelation  to  his  sister-in-law.   The   judge's
      identification of the omission was thus correct, an  omission  he  was
      entitled to place weight upon.

12.   Further, there is no merit in Ms  Turnbull's  challenge  to  paragraph
      [27(12)] where the judge identified the Appellant's failure to mention
      his recent relationship in his  witness  statement.  The  omission  is
      apparent and is not negated by the Appellant's reference to an earlier
      relationship with a different man. The  judge  was  thus  entitled  to
      place weight on this omission also.

13.   Overall,  in  my  judgement,  the  judge  gave  adequate  reasons  for
      rejecting the Appellant's claim that he is gay.  The  pleaded  grounds
      and, those advanced by Ms Turnbull, fail to identify  any  discernible
      error of law on the part  of  the  judge  who  reached  a  sustainable
      decision on the evidence and facts as found that are not  perverse  or
      irrational.

14.   There is however an apparent failure on the judge's part  to  consider
      the Appellant's Article 8 claim.  There  is  a  passing  reference  to
      Article 8 in the Grounds of Appeal. It is said  that  the  Appellant's
      removal would amount  to  a  disproportionate  interference  with  his
      family and private life established with his niece and other relatives
      in the UK, albeit, Ms Turnbull submitted that  it  was  essentially  a
      private life claim. While the judge's failure to consider the  Article
      8 claim is an obvious error, the difficulty for the Appellant is  that
      Counsel representing him before the judge did not put  the  Article  8
      claim on that footing.  In  his  skeleton  argument  Counsel  put  the
      Article 8 claims as follows: "It is also submitted that to remove  him
      would constitute a disproportionate interference with his private life
      in light of his claim for  asylum."  The  Article  8  claim  was  thus
      dependent on the judge's findings in relation  to  the  asylum  claim.
      Given that the judge's decision in respect  of  the  asylum  claim  is
      unimpeachable, it was  inevitable  that  had  the  judge  gone  on  to
      consider the Article  8  claim,  he  would  have  concluded  that  the
      Respondent's decision was proportionate.

15.   While Ms Turnbull submits, on instructions, that detailed  submissions
      were made at the hearing in respect of an  Article  8  claim  and  she
      referred to letters from the Appellant's sister-in-law and friend, she
      frankly acknowledged that as she was not Counsel at the  hearing,  she
      was unable to confirm whether the judge was in fact referred  to  such
      evidence. The judge's record of proceedings  does  not  indicate  that
      detailed submissions were received and no oral submissions  appear  to
      have been made by Counsel in support of an Article 8  claim.  None  of
      the evidence highlighted by Ms Turnbull appears to have been drawn  to
      the judge's attention as being significant, and I also  note  that  no
      family member or friend was forthcoming before the judge to attest  to
      the claim.

16.   In the circumstances, I am satisfied that the Article 8 claim was  not
      put before the judge as a separate private life claim, and  given  its
      limited utility as identified by Counsel before the judge, it  is  not
      now open to the Appellant to complain that the judge erred in  failing
      to consider an Article 8 claim on private life grounds.

17.   In any event, on the evidence drawn to my attention, which Mr  Bramble
      correctly noted was out of date, the evidence does not establish  that
      the Appellant's private life was of such significance that it could be
      said that there were compelling circumstances to warrant  a  grant  of
      leave outside of the Immigration Rules on human rights grounds. I  see
      no basis upon which this appeal could have succeeded before the  judge
      on private life grounds.

18.   Taking these matters together, I am not  satisfied  that  the  judge's
      decision is vitiated by a material error of law.

Decision

19.    The  Appellant's  appeal  is  dismissed.  The  First-tier  Tribunal's
    decision to dismiss the appeal did not involve the making of a material
    error of law and shall stand.





Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal)  Rules  2008.  Unless  and  until  a  Tribunal  or  court  directs
otherwise,  the  Appellants  are  granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these
proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify  them  or  any  member  of
their family. This direction applies both  to  the  Appellants  and  to  the
Respondent. Failure to comply with this direction could lead to contempt  of
court proceedings.





Signed                                             Dated: 25 July 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bagral


