








UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12018/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House                |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On: 26 February 2019                 |On: 05 March 2019                    |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer


                                   Between

                                  Abdul [A]

                        anonymity direction NOT made

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 secretary of state for the home department

                                                                  Respondent

Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr S Tauhid, Huber's Law Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a national of Bangladesh, born on 26 October 1977. He
      appeals  with  permission  against  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal promulgated on 29 June 2018, dismissing  his  appeal  against
      the respondent's decision to refuse his protection  and  human  rights
      claims.

   2. It is contended in the grounds of appeal  that  the  First-tier  Judge
      "has totally misconstrued and misinterpreted the  FIR  ...  filed  and
      relied upon by the appellant [32]. It is also contended that "...  the
      Judge has miserably failed to  understand"  various  matters.  It  was
      wholly unnecessary for counsel who settled the grounds to make such  a
      gratuitous assertion.

   3. The appeal came before the Upper Tribunal on  27  September  2018.  An
      application was made on that day pursuant to Rule 15(2A) of  the  2008
      Rules to file and produce documents from Bangladesh which were not yet
      available. There was no objection to that application and  the  appeal
      was adjourned until 4 January 2019.

   4. It was only at the resumed hearing on 4 January 2019 that a bundle  of
      documents received from Bangladesh was  produced.  Ms  Isherwood,  who
      represented the respondent at that hearing, understandably stated that
      the respondent needed time to consider the 71  pages  produced.  There
      was no objection to her application for an adjournment. The appeal was
      then adjourned to 26 February 2019.

   5. Following the production of those  documents,  Ms  Isherwood  has  now
      stated on behalf of the respondent that it is accepted that the First-
      tier Tribunal Judge erred in the approach to the  court  documentation
      produced. She agreed that the decision should accordingly be set aside
      and remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a  fresh  decision  to  be
      made.

   6. She contended at the hearing on 26 February - as she had stated in her
      email sent on 11 February 2019 to an Upper Tribunal lawyer - that none
      of the documents produced addresses or supports the  claimed  position
      that the appellant is said to have held, and accordingly  the  adverse
      credibility finding on the political positions should stand.  Further,
      putting in medical records at this late  stage  without  amending  the
      grounds did not alter the adverse finding  relating  to  the  lack  of
      evidence including the appellant's father's refusal to help.

   7. Mr Tauhid disagreed and submitted  that  in  the  circumstances  there
      should be a full re-hearing without any preserved findings.

      Assessment

   8. It is accepted that the Judge erred in her approach to the FIR dated 2
      May 2010 relied on by the appellant. In particular, it  was  contended
      that the communication between the sub-inspector and  the  officer  in
      charge of the police station contains material allegations against the
      appellant depending on which criminal proceedings have been instituted
      against him. This is not  an  internal  letter  but  has  to  be  read
      together with what the Judge referred to as a letter  written  by  one
      police officer to another. That explains why the formal  part  of  the
      FIR does not state what the incident is.

   9. It is now accepted that  the  decision  is  flawed  and  that  in  the
      interests of justice the appeal should be remitted to  the  First-tier
      Tribunal to be re-made.

  10. I have had regard to the contentions of both parties as to  the  scope
      of the re-hearing. As noted, Ms Isherwood contended that  the  adverse
      credibility findings should  stand.  On  the  other  hand,  Mr  Tauhid
      submitted that there should be a de novo hearing.

  11. I am unable to say with any degree of certainty whether the finding of
      adverse credibility against  the  appellant  may  in  part  have  been
      informed  by  the  misinterpretation  and  misunderstanding   of   the
      documents that were produced.

  12. I accept the joint submission that in the circumstances, the extent of
      judicial fact finding which is necessary for the decision  to  be  re-
      made is extensive.

  13. I remit the appeal for a fresh decision to be made without  preserving
      any findings.







      Notice of Decision

      The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making  of  an
      error on a point of law and is set aside.

      The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal (Taylor House) for a
      fresh decision to be made by another Judge.

      Anonymity direction not made.





      Signed                             Date 3 March 2019


      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer





