
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12850/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice, London     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 25 September 2017                         |On 27 September 2017          |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER

                                   Between

                                     SS
                          anonymity direction made
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Mupara, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI2008/269) an Anonymity Order is  made.   Unless  the  Upper  Tribunal  or
Court orders otherwise,  no  report  of  any  proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  the  original
Appellant.  This prohibition applies to, amongst others, all parties.

      1. I have made an anonymity order because this decision refers to  the
         circumstances of the appellant's son, L, born in December 2008.


      2. The  appellant  has  appealed  against  a  decision  of  First-tier
         Tribunal Judge G Clarke dated 17 May 2017, in  which  he  dismissed
         his appeal against a decision dated 10 November 2016  to  refuse  a
         protection and human rights claim and  to  maintain  a  deportation
         order signed on 11 July 2016.  The appellant was sentenced to  five
         years and six months' imprisonment for rape on 11 October 2013  and
         has been imprisoned or in immigration decision ever since.


      3. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Blum on  a
         limited basis.

Adjournment application

      4. At the beginning of the hearing Mr Mupara  renewed  an  adjournment
         application that had been refused on the  papers  on  22  September
         2017.  Mr Mupara submitted that the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  not
         have adequate evidence regarding L's best interests and the  impact
         of the appellant's deportation upon him, and therefore did not make
         a full best interests assessment.   He  sought  an  adjournment  to
         obtain reports from a psychologist and  independent  social  worker
         ('ISW').


      5. I entirely agree with the reasons provided by Upper Tribunal  Judge
         Gill for refusing the adjournment application on the  papers.   The
         appellant was  represented  by  solicitors  before  the  First-tier
         Tribunal and throughout these proceedings.  They prepared a  bundle
         of evidence containing witness statements from family members.  The
         appellant had every opportunity to provide relevant evidence and it
         is wholly  inappropriate  to  seek  to  produce  new  evidence  not
         available to the First-tier Tribunal, with a view  to  establishing
         that there was an error of law.


      6. As I pointed out to Mr Mupara, the grounds of appeal did not  argue
         that L's  best  interests  were  not  adequately  considered.   The
         grounds focus entirely upon (i) an inconsistent  finding  regarding
         L's visits to  his  father,  (ii)  a  failure  to  have  regard  to
         compelling circumstances, (iii) a failure to give the appellant the
         benefit of the doubt when assessing his risk of  reoffending,  (iv)
         minor factual errors.  Moreover, the sole issue in dispute has been
         identified by Upper Tribunal Judge Blum when granting permission to
         appeal.  He considered that the inconsistencies in  the  First-tier
         Tribunal's findings as  to  whether  L  visited  the  appellant  in
         detention may have made a material  difference  to  the  First-tier
         Tribunal's overall assessment of section 117C of  the  Nationality,
         Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ('the 2002 Act').   Upper  Tribunal
         Judge Blum expressly found there  to  be  no  merit  in  the  other
         grounds of appeal.


      7. The application for an adjournment was entirely misconceived.   The
         determination of whether the First-tier Tribunal  has  committed  a
         material error of law can fairly be determined by reference to  the
         evidence available to the First-tier Tribunal, and  I  refused  the
         adjournment application.

Application to rely upon additional grounds of appeal

      8. Mr Mupara sought to rely upon an additional ground of appeal, which
         he accepted was being raised for the first time orally  before  me.
         It was argued that insufficient care was taken when assessing  risk
         to the appellant in Zimbabwe.  I did  not  need  to  hear  from  Mr
         Melvin and refused the application.  Mr Mupara acknowledged that he
         was raising a new matter very late yet offered no  explanation  for
         the lateness or the failure to particularise the alleged  error  in
         writing.  The appellant has been represented throughout. He had two
         opportunities to draft grounds of appeal and it is simply too  late
         to seek to raise a vaguely expressed and unparticularised ground of
         appeal at this stage of the proceedings.  I refused  permission  to
         amend the grounds of appeal.

Issues in dispute

      9.  Having  refused  the  application  for  an  adjournment  and   the
         application to amend the grounds of appeal, Mr Mupara  agreed  that
         the appeal before me should proceed on the basis  that  the  First-
         tier Tribunal was entitled to make all the findings of fact it did,
         save for the findings regarding L's  visits  to  the  appellant  in
         detention.  The following findings, inter alia, remain intact:  the
         appellant has committed a very serious  crime;  in  any  event  his
         asylum claim  is  not  credible  or  well  founded;  there  are  no
         insurmountable obstacles preventing the appellant's  re-integration
         in Zimbabwe notwithstanding the appellant's blindness;  L  and  the
         appellant have a genuine and subsisting relationship.


First-tier Tribunal findings


     10. The First-tier Tribunal's decision is very detailed (running to 198
         paragraphs)   and   for   the   most   part,   carefully   drafted.
         Unfortunately, the First-tier Tribunal has not made clear  findings
         of fact regarding L's contact with his father whilst  imprisoned  /
         detained.  Earlier on in the decision  from  [107]  the  First-tier
         Tribunal made general findings of fact  regarding  the  appellant's
         family life  in  the  United  Kingdom.   These  include  the  clear
         findings at [109] that:


                i) the appellant has a genuine and  subsisting  relationship
                   with L;
               ii) L visited the appellant in prison and in detention;
              iii) the appellant keeps in regular telephone contact with L;
               iv)  there  is  credible  evidence  of  an  ongoing  parental
                   relationship.

     11. The  First-tier  Tribunal  then  returns  to  the  subject  of  the
         relationship between the appellant and L at  [157-160].   At  [159]
         the First-tier Tribunal makes a clear finding  that  L,  a  British
         citizen, has  always  resided  with  his  mother.   The  First-tier
         Tribunal repeats the finding that the appellant  keeps  in  regular
         contact with  L.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  has  however  made  a
         regrettable  error  when  referring  to  the   appellant's   claims
         regarding L's visits to him whilst  in  immigration  decision.  The
         appellant's claim is summarised as  being  both  that  L  "has  not
         visited him in immigration detention" and "has also visited him  in
         detention".


     12. The First-tier Tribunal repeats the finding that the appellant  has
         family life with his son at [178], an ongoing relationship with his
         son at [182] and a genuine and subsisting relationship with his son
         at [194].  This suggests  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  entirely
         accepted the claimed relationship between father and son.


     13. Rather confusingly the First-tier Tribunal finds at [195] and [196]
         that L has not visited his father or had contact with him whilst in
         detention.  I have no doubt that in making these findings and in so
         far as these inconsistent findings were  taken  into  account  when
         considering the impact of his  father's  deportation  upon  L,  the
         First-tier Tribunal has erred in law.


     14. Mr Melvin acknowledged the only error of law in relation  to  which
         permission to appeal was granted, but invited me to find that it is
         not a material error of law and in the premises the decision should
         not be set aside.  Mr Mupara submitted that the error infected  the
         First-tier  Tribunal's  assessment  of  undue  harshness  and   was
         therefore a material error of law.  The  only  disputed  issue  was
         therefore significantly narrowed.  It was agreed that there was  an
         error of law and the real question is whether that error of law  is
         a material one.  I reserved my decision on this after hearing  from
         both representatives.


Legal framework


     15. It is important to recall that  the  appellant  must  meet  a  very
         demanding test, having been sentenced to a term of imprisonment  in
         excess of four years - see section 117C of the 2002 Act:


             "(5) Exception 2 applies where C has a genuine and  subsisting
             relationship with a  qualifying  partner,  or  a  genuine  and
             subsisting parental relationship with a qualifying child,  and
             the effect of C's deportation on the partner or child would be
             unduly harsh.


             (6) In the case of a foreign criminal who has  been  sentenced
             to a period of imprisonment of at least four years, the public
             interest requires deportation unless there are very compelling
             circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions  1
             and 2."
    16. These statutory provisions provide a "particularly strong statement
        of public policy" (see NA (Pakistan) v SSHD [2017]  1  WLR  207  at
        [22]), such that "great weight" should generally be given to it and
        cases in which that public interest will be outweighed, other  than
        those specified in the statutory provisions and  Rules  themselves,
        "are likely to be a very small minority (particular in  non-settled
        cases)" (Hesham Ali v SSHD [2016] UKSC 60 at [38]),  i.e.  will  be
        rare (NA (Pakistan) at [33]). The Court of Appeal has very recently
        helpfully summarised the relevant legal  framework  in  SSHD  v  KE
        (Nigeria) [2017] EWCA Civ 1382, per Hickinbottom LJ.
            "33.  More importantly for the purposes of this  appeal,  where
            an  offender  has  been  sentenced  to  at  least  four  years'
            imprisonment, or otherwise falls outside the paragraph 399  and
            399A  exceptions,  the  decision-maker,   court   or   tribunal
            entrusted with the task must still consider and assess  whether
            there  are  "very  compelling  circumstances"  that  justify  a
            departure from the general rule that such offenders  should  be
            deported in the public interest. That  requires  the  decision-
            maker to take into account, not only  that  general  assessment
            (and give it the weight appropriate to such an assessment  made
            by Parliament), but also the facts  and  circumstances  of  the
            particular case which are not - indeed, cannot - be taken  into
            account in any general assessment. As  Lord  Reed,  giving  the
            majority judgment, said in Ali:
                 "49. ... It is necessary to  feed  into  the  analysis  the
                 facts of the particular case and  the  criteria  which  are
                 appropriate to the context, and, where a court is reviewing
                 the decision of another authority, to give such  weight  to
                 the judgment of that authority as may  be  appropriate.  In
                 that way, relevant differences between, for example,  cases
                 where lawfully settled migrants are facing  deportation  or
                 expulsion, and cases where an alien is seeking admission to
                 a host country, can be taken into account.


                 50. In summary, therefore, the  tribunal  carries  out  its
                 task on the basis of the facts as it finds them  to  be  on
                 the evidence before it,  and  the  law  as  established  by
                 statute and case law. Ultimately, it has to decide  whether
                 deportation is proportionate in the particular case  before
                 it, balancing the strength of the public  interest  in  the
                 deportation of the offender against the impact  on  private
                 and family life. In doing so, it  should  give  appropriate
                 weight  to  Parliament's  and  the  Secretary  of   State's
                 assessments of the strength of the general public  interest
                 in  the  deportation  of  foreign  offenders...,  and  also
                 consider all factors  relevant  to  the  specific  case  in
                 question.  The  critical  issue  for  the   tribunal   will
                 generally be whether, giving due weight to the strength  of
                 the public interest on deportation of the offender  in  the
                 case before it, the article 8 claim is sufficiently  strong
                 to outweigh it. In general, only  a  claim  which  is  very
                 strong indeed - very compelling,  as  it  was  put  in  [MF
                 (Nigeria)] - will succeed".


     17. The judgment continues:


                 "34. Therefore,  as  Lord  Reed  emphasises,  whatever  the
                 seriousness of the offences  or  length  of  sentence,  the
                 ultimate question is the same -  would  deportation  be  in
                 breach of article 8 - but the sentence imposed affects  the
                 approach to the exercise of assessing  proportionality  for
                 article 8(2) purposes.  If  it  is  at  least  four  years'
                 imprisonment,   any   decision-maker   must   attach   very
                 considerable weight to the general assessment of the public
                 interest  in  deporting  foreign  criminals,  now  directly
                 adopted by  Parliament  in  statute,  under  which  such  a
                 sentence represents a level  of  offending  in  respect  of
                 which  the  public   interest   almost   always   outweighs
                 countervailing considerations of private  or  family  life,
                 only being outweighed by countervailing factors  which  are
                 very compelling  (see  Ali  at  [46]).  Where  there  is  a
                 challenge  to  a  decision  involving  the   article   8(2)
                 balancing exercise by a decision-maker  on  behalf  of  the
                 Secretary of State in an individual case, as I have already
                 described, the court or tribunal  must  give  that  general
                 assessment substantial weight, because it  is  endorsed  by
                 Parliament; and it must also take into  account  -  but  no
                 more than take into  account  -  the  application  of  that
                 general assessment to the facts of the specific case by the
                 original  decision-maker  (OH  (Serbia)  at  [15(d)]).   As
                 independent judicial bodies, on hearing a challenge  to  an
                 executive decision in an individual case, it is the duty of
                 the court or tribunal to  make  its  own  findings  of  the
                 relevant facts and then make  its  own  assessment  of  the
                 proportionality of the proposed deportation (Ali at [46]).
                 ...
                 36. In NA (Pakistan) at [37],  Jackson  LJ  considered  the
                 correct approach to a case in which section 117C(6)  ("very
                 compelling circumstances") applies:
                     "... [I]t will often be sensible first to  see  whether
                     his case involves circumstances of the  kind  described
                     in Exceptions 1 and 2, both because  the  circumstances
                     so described set out particularly  significant  factors
                     bearing upon respect for private life (Exception 1) and
                     respect for family life (Exception 2) and because  that
                     may provide a helpful basis on which an assessment  can
                     be   made   whether   there   are   'very    compelling
                     circumstances,  over  and  above  those  described   in
                     Exceptions 1  and  2'  as  is  required  under  section
                     117C(6). It will then  be  necessary  to  look  to  see
                     whether  any  of  the  factors   falling   within   the
                     Exceptions 1 and  2  are  of  such  force,  whether  by
                     themselves or  taken  in  conjunction  with  any  other
                     relevant  factors  not  covered  by  the  circumstances
                     described in Exceptions 1 and 2, as to satisfy the test
                     in section 117C(6)."
                  I respectfully commend such an approach."
     18. The high threshold that is required and the inevitable consequences
         upon children that flow from deportation decisions made pursuant to
         the correct legal framework is illustrated in  WZ  (China)  v  SSHD
         [2017] EWCA Civ 795, a case that did not involve a sentence of over
         four years.  At [14] Sir Stanley Burnton said this:
                  "In my judgment, the Upper Tribunal was right to set aside
                  the determination of the First-tier Tribunal. Quite  apart
                  from the reasoning of the First-tier  Tribunal,  I  cannot
                  see how a tribunal properly applying the law as it was  at
                  the date it heard the Appellant's appeal, and  giving  the
                  public interest in the deportation of a  person  sentenced
                  to 2 years' imprisonment the weight that was  appropriate,
                  could have allowed his appeal. I take  into  account  that
                  until he  committed  his  offence  he  had  been  of  good
                  character, and that the reports before the Tribunal showed
                  that he was unlikely to reoffend. I bear in mind  that  he
                  has an established family life in this country,  that  his
                  family and children have UK nationality, and that his wife
                  would have to give up work to look after the  children  if
                  he were removed and they were to remain in  this  country.
                  However, none of these facts takes his  case  out  of  the
                  ordinary. Deportation necessarily results in the  break-up
                  of the deportee's family if they remain  in  this  country
                  after his removal."
Discussion
     19. When the commended approach referred to above, is  applied  to  the
         factual matrix of this father  /  son  relationship  taken  at  its
         highest, together with the other preserved findings, the  following
         emerges.


         a) The appellant and L have a genuine and subsisting  relationship.
            There was very little evidence before the First-tier Tribunal to
            explain or detail the nature and  extent  of  the  relationship.
            For the first five years of his life and until the appellant was
            imprisoned in 2013 L "visited his  father  quite  often"  -  see
            email from L's  mother  dated  15  December  2016.     Upon  the
            appellant's imprisonment and detention, his aunt  brought  L  to
            visit - see the letter dated 11 February 2017 from the aunt  and
            the appellant's witness statement.    The  relationship  between
            the appellant and his son has therefore been limited to prison /
            detention visits and telephone contact from 2013.


         b) There was evidence from the aunt  that  L  would  find  it  very
            difficult to cope with his  father's  deportation  to  Zimbabwe.
            The aunt did not give evidence and was not cross-examined -  see
            [110].


         c) There was no independent evidence from any  source  (other  than
            family members) to verify the strength of  the  relationship  or
            the impact of the termination of face to face contact  with  his
            father upon L.  That this would have been helpful in a case such
            as this is acknowledged belatedly in the appellant's adjournment
            application not before the First-tier Tribunal  but  before  the
            Upper Tribunal at a very late stage.


         d) Even when the evidence available to the First-tier  Tribunal  is
            taken at its highest, on no legitimate view  could  it  be  said
            that the  impact  upon  L  would  be  unduly  harsh.   When  the
            appellant's  very  serious  offending,  lack   of   remorse   or
            rehabilitation and the First-tier Tribunal's assessment that  he
            represents a danger to the community (see [142] and  [190])  are
            factored in, the position becomes even starker.


         e) When the factors falling within  the  Exceptions  1  and  2  are
            considered, either by themselves or taken  in  conjunction  with
            any other relevant factors, they would  not  satisfy  the  'very
            compelling factors over and above those described in  Exceptions
            1 and 2' test.  The appellant is a long way short of meeting the
            requirements of Exception 1 for the  reasons  explained  by  the
            First-tier Tribunal at [164-168 and 192].   He  is  a  long  way
            short of meeting Exception 2 for the  reasons  I  have  outlined
            above.  The only potential additional compelling factor  is  the
            appellant's blindness.  This has  not  impacted  upon  telephone
            contact from prison and it is difficult to  see  how  this  will
            adversely impact upon telephone contact from Zimbabwe given  the
            findings at [166-7].  It is well known that  there  are  various
            free  ways  to  communicate  overseas   through   mobile   phone
            'applications'.


         f) In any event even if the appellant's blindness can be  described
            as compelling, it is difficult to see how this can  properly  on
            any legitimate view be described as very  compelling  given  the
            other findings of fact uninfected by any error of law.
     20. In those  circumstances,  the  error  of  law  identified  was  not
         material, and the First-tier Tribunal  reached  the  only  decision
         that was open to it on the facts.  In order for  the  appellant  to
         succeed, he would now have to  demonstrate  that  there  were  very
         compelling circumstances in his case  over  and  above  any  unduly
         harsh effect on L. It should be noted that whilst Hesham Ali stated
         that the Immigration Rules do not  constitute  a  'complete  code',
         even a consideration of Article 8 cases involving foreign criminals
         requires an assessment of  whether  the  private  and  family  life
         considerations are sufficiently 'compelling' or 'exceptional' so as
         to outweigh the public interest in  deportation.   Looking  at  the
         matter realistically,  there  is  no  prospect  whatsoever  of  the
         appellant meeting the very high threshold applicable.
Conclusion
     21. Had the First-tier Tribunal considered and accepted the  father/son
         contact in detention at its highest, alongside all the findings  of
         fact uninfected by an error of law, the  outcome  would  inevitably
         have been the same.  The First-tier Tribunal would have been  bound
         to attach very significant weight to the appellant's  very  serious
         offending as reflected in a sentence of over four years.  When that
         is balanced against the particular nature and extent of private and
         family  life,  by  reference  to  the   section   117B   and   117C
         considerations, on no legitimate view could the  family  /  private
         life be said to outweigh the weight to be attached  to  the  public
         interest in this case.


Decision

     22. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making
         of a material error of law and I do not set it aside.


Signed:

Ms M. Plimmer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date:
26 September 2017



