
[pic]

Upper Tribunal (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)
                                                Appeal Number: PA/12405/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester                   |Decision promulgated                 |
|on 5 July 2017                        |on 6 July 2017                       |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                   Mr DTV
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant: No appearance
For the Respondent: Mr Bates Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS




     1. This is an appeal against a decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
        Housego  promulgated  on  12  December  2016  in  which  the  Judge
        dismissed  the   appellant's   appeal   on   asylum,   humanitarian
        protection, and human rights grounds.
     2. The appellant sought permission to appeal which was  granted  on  a
        limited basis of a Resident First-tier Tribunal Judge on 6  January
        2017. The appellant  sought  permission  directly  from  the  Upper
        Tribunal, in relation to the grounds for which permission  was  not
        granted, resulting in a grant of permission on all grounds by Upper
        Tribunal Judge Coker on 6 February 2017.
     3. The parties were served with notice of the date, time, and venue of
        the Initial hearing. The notices  sent  to  the  appellant  at  the
        address provided as his bail address have not been returned as  not
        having been delivered.
     4. The appellant's representatives before the First-tier Tribunal  had
        recently written advising they were no  longer  instructed  and  so
        their attendance at the hearing was not expected.
     5. The appellant failed to attend and,  according  to  the  Presenting
        Officer, has also failed to honour reporting conditions attached to
        his conditions of bail.  He is believed to have absconded.
     6. There is no application for an adjournment and no explanation  from
        the appellant for why he could not attend.
     7. It is  appropriate  to  consider  the  matter  in  the  appellant's
        absence, although it is also the case that the appellant has failed
        to establish any arguable legal error material to the  decision  to
        dismiss the appeal.
     8. The assertion of unfairness in relation to the Judge's  refusal  to
        adjourn has not been made out. There was  no  need  for  an  expert
        report confirming the appellant had been trafficked  as  the  Judge
        accepted as credibility the evidence he had been. There was no need
        for a country expert report dealing with the risk of re-trafficking
        as the Judge found there was ample other country material available
        to enable a finding to be made in relation to this aspect, which is
        referred to in the decision under challenge.  It has not been shown
        the Judge's conclusions are perverse, irrational,  or  contrary  to
        the available material.
     9. The Resident First-tier Tribunal Judge granted permission  claiming
        it was arguable the Judges approach to the human rights was  flawed
        but Judge deals with this matter at [114]  of  the  decision  under
        challenge and, again, the appellant has  failed  to  establish  any
        arguable legal error based upon the evidence the Judge was asked to
        consider.
    10. This is the appellant's appeal and  in  light  of  his  failure  to
        engage with the appeal process by attending court  to  advance  his
        argument that the decision is infected by legal error  material  to
        the decision, I find he has failed to discharge the burden of proof
        upon him to the required standard to make out any such error.
    11. It is not made out it is  appropriate  to  find  such  error  on  a
        'Robinson obvious' point.
    12. The appeal is therefore dismissed.


Decision

    13. There is no material error of law in the First-tier Tribunal
        Judge's decision. The determination shall stand.


   Anonymity.


    14. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of
        the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


        I make such order pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure
        (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.







Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 5 July 2017












