
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12165/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 14 May 2019                               |On 31 May 2019                |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE APPLEYARD


                                   Between

                                     N A
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs L Brajak, Solicitor.
For the Respondent:    Mrs R Petterson, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is  a  citizen  of  Iran.  He  made  an  application  for
    international protection which was refused. He appealed and following a
    hearing, and in a decision promulgated on 5 December 2018, Judge of the
    First-tier Tribunal Arullendran, dismissed his appeal on all grounds.

 2. The Appellant sought permission to appeal. It was granted by Designated
    First-tier Tribunal Judge McCarthy on 18 January 2019. His reasons  for
    so granting were: -

         "1. On  5  December  2018,  FtT  Judge  Arullendran  dismissed  the
         appellant's appeal against the  refusal  of  his  protection  claim
         because she decided the appellant was not a refugee  from  Iran  or
         otherwise in need  of  international  protection.  The  judge  also
         decided the appellant did not benefit from article 3 or 8 ECHR.

         2. On 14  December  2018,  the  FtT  received  an  application  for
         permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal. The application  is  in
         time.

         3. The grounds argue the judge erred in law by: (i) relying on  her
         own internet search for the appellant's Facebook page  rather  than
         the printouts provided, (ii) finding the printouts did not indicate
         whether the Facebook account was public or  private  and  therefore
         ignoring the "add friend" button indicated the account was  public,
         (iii) ignoring the fact  the  appellant's  4,000  Facebook  friends
         include Christians and non-Christians  and  not  taking  this  into
         consideration when assessing the appellant's evangelical activities
         since all his friends could read his posts promoting  Christianity,
         (iv)  failing  to  consider  the  likelihood   that   the   Iranian
         authorities may have  viewed  the  appellant's  Facebook  page  and
         thereby  the  risk  the  appellant  has  been  identified   as   an
         evangelising Christian, (v) failing to give  adequate  reasons  for
         disregarding the written testimony  of  people  the  appellant  has
         evangelised, (vi) failing to give adequate reasons for disregarding
         the oral and written evidence of two ministers,  and  (vii)  making
         inconsistent findings about the appellant's church activities.

         4. I find it is arguable the  judge  should  not  have  engaged  in
         internet research during the hearing because she did not afford the
         appellant an effective opportunity to rebut that  allegation.  This
         may have affected the fairness  of  the  hearing  and  the  judge's
         attitude towards the appellant's other  evidence.  I  also  mention
         that it is unlikely that a person  will  have  4,300  followers  on
         Facebook if an account is private and this factor appears  to  have
         been ignored. The printouts do  indicate  an  "add  friend"  button
         which appears to have been overlooked by the judge.

         5. I find it is arguable that reposting positive information  about
         Christianity might  be  viewed  as  evangelising.  I  think  it  is
         arguable that the judge erred  when  apply  the  principles  in  AB
         because this was a case where the appellant gave an explanation how
         the Iranian authorities may have been alerted to his activities  by
         his paternal cousin (see [35]) and that has not been considered.  I
         also find it arguable  that  the  judge  failed  to  give  adequate
         reasons for rejecting written evidence from  people  the  appellant
         says he evangelised and from one of his ministers. It  is  arguably
         inadequate reject evidence merely for non-attendance of a  witness,
         particularly  when  the  lower  standard  of  proof  applies,   and
         recalling that corroboration is not a requirement.

         6. I also find it is arguable that  the  judge  gives  insufficient
         reasons for rejecting the opinion of the minister who attended  the
         hearing that the appellant was a genuine convert. The situation had
         moved on significantly since the earlier judicial decision and  the
         minister  had  been  preparing  the  appellant  for  baptism  which
         suggests a close knowledge of his intentions."

 3. Thus, the appeal came before me today.


 4. At today's hearing Mrs Brajak sought to rely upon the  grounds  seeking
    permission to appeal.


 5. Mrs Petterson  conceded  that  the  Judge  had  materially  erred  with
    particular reference to the content of paragraph  34  of  her  decision
    which, given the way the Judge treated the evidence and found that  she
    herself was unable to locate his Facebook site  via  google  there  was
    procedural unfairness. I  find  for  all  the  reasons  highlighted  by
    Designated Judge McCarthy in his grant of permission to appeal as being
    arguable  the  Judge  has  in  fact  materially  erred.  There  is   no
    alternative in the circumstances but for this matter to be  reheard  de
    novo before the First-tier Tribunal.




Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making
of an error on a point of law. The decision is  set  aside.  The  appeal  is
remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be  dealt  with  afresh  pursuant  to
Section 12(2)(b)(i) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement  Act  2007  and
Practice Direction 7(b) before any Judge aside from Judge Arullendran.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.




Signed
         Date: 28 May 2019


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard

