
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12950/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8 April 2019                      |On 11 April 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT


                                   Between

                                     IA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Butler, Counsel, instructed by Harrow Law Centre
For the Respondent:    Mr Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against the decision issued on 19  December  2018  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge G Jones QC which refused the asylum appeal of
    the appellant.

 2. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal
    or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any
    form of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  the
    original appellant. This direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  all
    parties. Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise  to
    contempt of court proceedings. I do so in order to avoid  a  likelihood
    of serious harm arising to the  appellant  from  the  contents  of  the
    protection claim.

 3. The background to this matter is that the appellant was born  in  Saudi
    Arabia to an Afghan family who had relocated some years  prior  to  his
    birth. The appellant maintains that as he approached adulthood in Saudi
    Arabia he realised that he was gay and had two relationships with  men.
    His sexuality was discovered by the father of one his partners who told
    his own family members. His  asylum  claim  was  based  on  a  fear  of
    mistreatment on the basis of his sexuality on return to Afghanistan.

 4. The appellant obtained a visa to come to the UK valid from 10  December
    2017 to 10 June 2018.  After coming to the UK as a visitor, he  claimed
    asylum on 3 May 2018.  His residency permit for Saudi Arabia expired on
    11 July 2018.  The respondent refused the asylum claim  in  a  decision
    dated 29 October 2018.  The same decision indicated that the  appellant
    was entitled to humanitarian protection  under  which  refer  to  leave
    under paragraph 339C of the Immigration Rules.

 5. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal and had a hearing  on
    10 December 2018.  As indicated above, a decision dismissing his appeal
    was issued on 19 December 2018.  The First-tier Tribunal found that the
    appellant was not gay and on that basis dismissed  the  asylum  appeal.
    On 9 January 2019 the First-tier Tribunal granted permission to  appeal
    to the Upper Tribunal.

 6. There were six grounds of appeal, none of which were  expressly  stated
    to have no merit by the First-tier Tribunal and which all  fell  to  be
    addressed here, therefore.  The grounds were summarised in paragraph  2
    of the grounds of appeal:

      i) The judge failed to give any weight to the relevant evidence of  Ms
         Nasim of UKLGIG, who worked with the appellant  and  confirmed  his
         sexuality in her oral evidence at the hearing.

     ii) The judge rejected the appellant's attendance at UKLGIG meetings as
         "self-serving".

    iii) The judge made no reference  to  evidence  submitted  post-hearing,
         despite  granting  permission  to  the  appellant  to  file   those
         materials and a 63 page bundle being provided to the Tribunal on 14
         December 2018, prior to the issuing of the decision.

     iv)  The  judge  sought  to  go  behind  the  respondent's   grant   of
         humanitarian protection, wrongly referring to it as  "discretionary
         leave".

      v) The judge refused to place any weight on the statements adduced  on
         the appellant's behalf by other witnesses who gave evidence to  the
         effect that he was gay and in fear of family members.

     vi) The reasoning was, in parts, speculative, in particular  concerning
         whether the appellant's father  would  disclose  his  sexuality  to
         other family members given the shame of  such  a  disclosure  in  a
         culture such as that in Afghanistan.

 7. It is expedient to address ground three first. It was accepted for  the
    respondent at the hearing before me that the  First-Tier  Tribunal  had
    agreed to further documents being submitted after the hearing  and  had
    provided the appellant's legal representative with an email address  in
    order for  this  to  happen.  The  Presenting  Officer's  note  on  the
    respondent's file confirmed this to be so.

 8. The respondent also accepted that the  additional  materials  had  been
    sent in time for them to  be  considered  by  the  First-Tier  Tribunal
    before the decision was made. The Tribunal file contained a printout of
    an email from the appellant's legal representatives sent to  the  judge
    and the respondent on 14 December 2018, exhibiting the  further  bundle
    comprising 63 pages. The Tribunal file also contains a hard copy of the
    63 page supplementary bundle, sent under a  covering  letter  dated  18
    December 2018.  The covering letter indicates that:

         "Further to the hearing on 10/12/18 and as directed  by  First-tier
         Judge G Jones QC we now enclose the following:-

           . Legal rep's statement of truth (and annexes)

           . Additional bundle of documents

         We  confirm  that  this  documentation  was  served  by  email   on
         14.12.2018".

 9. The respondent agreed with the grounds in so far as it was an error for
    the First-Tier Tribunal not to have taken these further materials  into
    account. The ground was not conceded where it was not the  respondent's
    view that the further materials could have made a  material  difference
    to the outcome of the appeal.

10. Procedural fairness requires that the totality of a case is  considered
    by the decision  maker.  Here,  having  given  express  permission  for
    further materials to be submitted, the First-Tier Tribunal did not take
    the additional materials into account. That is a procedural unfairness.



11. Further, where deciding on the credibility of an  asylum  claim  and  a
    claim to be gay  is  necessarily  a  holistic  assessment,  it  is  not
    possible to find that the further materials would have had no effect on
    the outcome of the  appeal.  The  new  materials  contained  a  witness
    statement from the appellant's legal advisor confirming that it had not
    proved possible to access an old Facebook account showing the appellant
    together with one  of  his  partners  in  Saudi  Arabia.  This  witness
    statement went directly to the adverse findings made in  [21]-[22]  and
    [30(iv)] and it is not possible to say that it could not have  affected
    those conclusions. The new material also included a statement from  the
    appellant's brother corroborating the appellant's  claim  and  directly
    addressing the actions of the father of one of the appellant's partners
    and what his  own  family  members  had  done  after  learning  of  the
    appellant's sexuality. These issues were the subject of highly  adverse
    findings by the First-Tier Tribunal at  [25]-[26]  and  [30(iii)]  and,
    again, the new material had  the  potential  to  lead  to  a  different
    assessment.

12. Lord Mustill stated that what fairness demands in  any  given  case  is
    dependent upon the particular context; R v Secretary of State  for  the
    Home Department, ex parte  Doody  and  Others  [1994]  1AC  531.  I  am
    satisfied that a requirement of procedural fairness here  was  for  the
    new materials to be considered, additionally so where  those  materials
    were capable of leading to a different outcome.

13. I therefore find an error on a point of law such that the decision must
    be set aside. As above, where the credibility assessment is a  holistic
    exercise, it is  not  possible  to  preserve  any  of  the  credibility
    findings as the First-Tier Tribunal may have taken a different approach
    to other aspects of the evidence if  all  of  the  materials  had  been
    considered. The re-making of the decision  is  therefore  de  novo  and
    where there are no findings of fact extant it is appropriate for it  to
    take place in the First-Tier Tribunal.

14. If more is needed, it was also my  conclusion  that  other  grounds  of
    appeal had merit, for example, grounds one and two. At paragraph 30(vi)
    the judge stated that he placed no weight on the evidence of  Ms  Nasim
    from UKLGIG, finding that her  evidence  was  "nothing  more  than  her
    subjective opinion" which was "based on nothing more than  meeting  the
    appellant and talking to him about his concerns and needs".  He goes on
    to state:

         "In my judgment she  is  no  better  placed  to  assess  somebody's
         sexuality than the average man on the Clapham omnibus".

15. The grounds refer to the guidance of the Court of Session in TF and  MA
    v SSHD [2018] CSIH 58.  That case concerned the evidence of members  of
    an  appellant's  congregation  as  to  the  genuineness  of  a  claimed
    conversion to Christianity.  The court held:

         "[Such witnesses] will be able to say that, in their opinion, based
         on their  experience  of  this  individual  and  many  others,  the
         individual in question is or appears to be  genuine  (or  in  other
         cases, they are  not  satisfied,  or  not  yet  satisfied,  of  the
         genuineness of their self-proclaimed faith).  This, in our opinion,
         is admissible opinion evidence which is entitled to respect".

16. Here, Ms Nasim's witness statement dated 19 September 2018 set out  her
    contact with the appellant and how she had reached her assessment which
    went beyond talking to him about his concerns. Her statement  indicated
    that not all those who approach the UKLGIG are given a place in  groups
    but that the appellant was.  Ms Nasim commented that he had been  taken
    as a credible and trustworthy person by the other gay  members  of  the
    group which he attended.  Ms Nasim then went on over six paragraphs  to
    explain the background to the organisation and her involvement with  it
    since 2016.  She indicated that "UKLGIG only write  supporting  letters
    in specific and limited circumstances, indicating  that  they  "do  not
    provide supporting letters or even letters  confirming  attendance  for
    everyone that attends any UKLGIG event or service".   She  goes  on  to
    state:

         "The individual UKLGIG staff member or volunteer must  have  worked
         with  the  individual  over  a  sufficient  time  period  and  with
         sufficient openness and frankness on behalf of the client for us to
         be able to say with confidence that the person's sexual orientation
         or gender identity is as they claim.  This process can take  longer
         with some clients and some are not ready or able to engage with  us
         in that way".

         "Clients would need to meet this requirement in order to  obtain  a
         supporting letter.  UKLGIG will  refuse  to  provide  a  supporting
         letter where it is not in accordance with our policy".

17. In my view the care taken by Ms Nasim to set out the  wider  basis  for
    her opinion went materially further than merely  giving  a  view  after
    speaking to the appellant. The fact of her view being based on a number
    of other factors and the policy of the organisation on  providing  such
    supporting statements were matters that the First-Tier Tribunal  should
    have taken into account  before  finding  no  weight  attached  to  her
    evidence.

18. The second ground of appeal challenged the finding that the appellant's
    attendance at UKLGIG meetings was self-serving. At [30(v)]  the  First-
    Tier Tribunal stated:

          "The appellant's attendance at groups frequented by homosexual men
         was not something that he sought out.  The appellant was advised to
         attend such groups by his solicitor, plainly with  a  view  to  his
         attendance being prayed in aid as some kind of  evidential  support
         for his claim to be homosexual.  I take on board the fact that  the
         appellant readily accepted that he had attended  such  groups  upon
         the advice of his solicitor, as being to his credit.   Nonetheless,
         the preponderance of the evidence leads me to  conclude  that  this
         additional 'evidence' is contrived and self-serving".

19. The difficulty with this finding is that was  no  evidence  before  the
    Tribunal stating that the solicitor had advised the appellant to attend
    meetings "plainly with a view to", in  effect,  bolstering  his  asylum
    claim. This is not a finding that can be made  lightly  about  a  legal
    adviser where there was no supporting evidence that this was the motive
    behind the suggestion that the appellant go to UKLGIG. The  conclusions
    drawn on this part of the  evidence  were  speculative  and  undermined
    thereby.

20. For all of these reasons,  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    discloses an error on a point of law such that it must be set aside  to
    be re-made.  There is  a  procedural  error  regarding  the  additional
    materials provided to the Tribunal after the hearing  not  having  been
    considered at all.  The adverse credibility findings cannot  stand  and
    require a de novo re-making.  The appeal will be matter to be  remitted
    to the First-tier Tribunal to be re-made afresh.

Notice of Decision

21. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal discloses an error on  a  point
    of law and is set aside to be re-made by the First-tier Tribunal.

22. The re-making of the appeal should take place at a First-Tier  Tribunal
    hearing centre in London in order for witnesses for  the  appellant  to
    attend.


Signed:  [pic]                                   Date: 9 April 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt

