


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number
PA/12919/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at Birmingham
  Decision and Reasons Promulgated
On 5th February 2018
    On 20th February 2018



                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PARKES

                                   Between

                              HADDY JATOU NDOYE
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:         Mr M Trevelyan (Counsel, instructed by Kenneth
Jones Solicitors)
For the Respondent:      Ms A Aboni (Home Office Presenting Officer)

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. The Appellant, a citizen of Gambia, entered the UK as a student in 2005,
   her immigration and criminal history is set out in the Tribunal papers
   and summarised in the decision of Judge Borsada that is under appeal. The
   Appellant's claim was that she had been in an abusive marriage and would
   be in danger from her ex-husband on her being returned to Gambia. For the
   reasons given in the decision promulgated on the 23rd of March 2017 the
   Appellant's claim was rejected and the appeal dismissed.

2. The Appellant's claim was set out at paragraph 5 of the decision and the
   findings at paragraphs 8 to 11 which included the Judge's reasoning. The
   Judge had regard to the arrest, imprisonment and deportation of the
   Appellant's ex-husband in 2013, the advice and support the Appellant had
   access to, her mental health and the delay in making the claim. The Judge
   did not accept that the single email from the Appellant's ex-husband
   showed that she would be at risk in Gambia and there was no evidence to
   show that honour killings took place in Gambia.

3. The application for permission to appeal of the 4th of April 2017 argue
   that the Judge's approach the Appellant's credibility was flawed and
   focussed on section 8 issues which should not be a starting point. The
   Judge had not properly considered supporting evidence and the threats
   that the Appellant's mother had received had not been factored into the
   assessment. It is also argued that the Judge erred in attaching no weight
   to the email from the Appellant's ex-husband. Permission was granted by
   Judge Shaerf on the 26th of July 2017 it being arguable that the Judge's
   treatment of the credibility issues in paragraphs 6 and 10 were arguably
   deficient.

4. At the hearing it was submitted that the contents of paragraph 9 were
   not a rounded consideration of all section 8 matters and section 8 was
   not the starting point but only one factor to be considered. By
   paragraphs 9 and 10 credibility had already been decided. In paragraph 6
   it was wrong to describe the evidence as self-serving without giving
   reasons.


5. For the Home Office reliance was placed on the rule 24 response and it
   was submitted that the Judge had directed himself appropriately and was
   entitled to place weight on the Appellant's delay in claiming and the
   Judge had considered the factors involved. There had been no satisfactory
   evidence of domestic violence and it was open to the Judge to reject
   those claims. In summary the grounds were a disagreement with findings
   properly open to the Judge.


6. In reply it was submitted that the Appellant's reason for not reporting
   the domestic violence was consistent with the objective evidence. Finding
   the delay to be unreasonable compounded the error. The only evidence of
   domestic violence would be police reports and if it was reasonable not to
   report there would be no evidence. The finding of risk on return was
   coloured by the previous credibility assessment.


7. There is guidance from Burnett LJ in EA v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 10 who at
   paragraph 27 gave made the following observations:
      "Decisions of tribunals should not become formulaic and rarely benefit
      from copious citation of authority. Arguments that reduce to the
      proposition that the F-tT has failed to mention dicta from a series of
      cases in the Court of Appeal or elsewhere will rarely prosper.
      Similarly, as Lord Hoffmann said in Piglowska v Piglowski [1999] 1 WLR
      1360, 1372, "reasons should be read on the assumption that, unless he
      has demonstrated the contrary, the judge knew how he should perform
      his functions and which matters he should take into account". He added
      that an "appellate court should resist the temptation to subvert the
      principle that they should not substitute their own discretion for
      that of the judge by a narrow textual analysis which enables them to
      claim that he misdirected himself". Moreover, some principles are so
      firmly embedded in judicial thinking that they do not need to be
      recited. For example, it would be surprising to see in every civil
      judgment a paragraph dealing with the burden and standard of proof; or
      in every running down action a treatise, however short, on the law of
      negligence. That said, the reader of any judicial decision must be
      reassured from its content that the court or tribunal has applied the
      correct legal test to any question it is deciding."


8. Even without section 8 of the Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of
   Claimants, etc) Act 2004 a delay in making a claim for asylum would be
   relevant in the assessment of credibility. Clearly it would not be a
   simple exercise that delay inevitably undermines the credibility of a
   Appellant. In assessing the delay in the Appellant's claim the Judge had
   regard to a range of factors that had to be considered.


9. The Appellant's ex-husband's circumstances were relevant and as the
   Judge noted in paragraph 9 the Appellant had indicated that she was aware
   that the situation for women was different in the UK from that in Gambia.
   In addition the Appellant had access to support and information and that
   was in the absence of her husband. In paragraph 10 the Judge considered
   the evidence relating to the Appellant's mental health. The medical
   evidence referred to suggested that there had been no physical violence
   and that the GP was aware of that. The Appellant would have had access to
   legal advice when she was facing the criminal charges over the false
   passport and whilst that might not have been from immigration lawyers she
   would have had the opportunity to discuss what she said had occurred and
   could have been directed to an appropriate firm for assistance.


10. The delay also indicated that the Appellant was in the UK without any
   leave from 2011 onwards and away from her ex-husband from 2013 onwards.
   The willingness to remain in the UK in such circumstances was also
   relevant. It is interesting to note that she was willing and able to
   obtain a false passport but not the advice that would enable her to
   remain lawfully.


11. In effect the Judge considered the Appellant's circumstances
   chronologically and cannot be criticised for that. Also the decision has
   to be read as a whole, it is clearly not the case that he simply took the
   delay by itself as undermining the Appellant's credibility - it was
   assessed in the round and I find that there is no delay in that part of
   the decision.


12. The reference to the oral evidence and written evidence of the
   Appellant's mother being self-serving is perhaps an odd use of the
   phrase. However the Judge was entitled to look at that evidence to see if
   it added to the Appellant's case and explained other evidence that was
   available and he took the view that it did not as he was entitled to.


13. With regard to the circumstances in Gambia these were considered in
   paragraph 11. It is not suggested that the Judge's observations that
   there was no evidence that the Appellant's "uncle" was a man violent or
   had used violence was an incorrect assertion or that there was evidence
   to the contrary. Besides the evidence of connection was a photograph of
   the Appellant's mother sitting next to him, that was not taken by the
   Judge to be significant and that a fair assessment in addition to the
   lack of evidence of other influence or violence.


14. The Judge was faced with a single unrepeated email from the Appellant's
   ex-husband and not a campaign of abuse and harassment and the single
   email from November 2015 had to be seen in that context. That was also in
   the context that there was evidence before the Judge that there had been
   no physical violence before they had separated. The fact that may be
   explanations for the Appellant not going to the police including cultural
   considerations does not mean that those are the only reasons she did not
   go, there being nothing to complain about is also a reason that had be to
   considered and taking an overall assessment was one that was open to the
   Judge.


15. I find that as drafted the grounds are no more than a disagreement with
   findings that were open to the Judge for the reasons given in the
   decision. The findings made were not undermined by errors of law and the
   decision was made properly on the evidence. I find that there was no
   error by Judge Borsada.


CONCLUSIONS

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside the decision.




Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of
the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 and I make no
order.

Fee Award



In dismissing this appeal I make no fee award.

Signed:

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal (IAC)

Dated: 13th February 2018

