
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal number: PA/12083/2019 (P)



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard Remotely at Manchester CJC     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 2 September 2020                  |On 7 September 2020                  |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PICKUP



                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                     AS

                            (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)

                                                                  Respondent



Representation:

For the appellant:     Mr C Howells, Senior Presenting Officer

For the Respondent:    Ms S Khan of counsel,  instructed  by  Legal  Justice
Solicitors



                          DECISION AND REASONS (P)

This has been a remote hearing which has been consented to by  the  parties.
The form of remote hearing was video by Skype (V). A face  to  face  hearing
was not held because  it  was  not  practicable  and  all  issues  could  be
determined in a remote hearing. At the conclusion of the hearing I  reserved
my decisions and reasons, which I now give. The order made is  described  at
the end of these reasons.


 1. Whilst this appeal has been brought by the Secretary of State, to avoid
    confusion I have referred below to the parties as they were before  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The Secretary  of  State  has  appealed  with  permission  against  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated  20.4.20,  allowing  on
    both asylum and human rights grounds the appellant's appeal against the
    respondent's decision of 21.11.19 to  refuse  his  further  submissions
    made on 3.9.19.

 3. I have carefully considered the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  in
    the light of the submissions made to me and the grounds of  application
    for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

 4. The appellant is a Afghan national of Sikh faith and ethnic background,
    with date of birth given as 20.1.92, who first arrived  in  the  UK  in
    2011 before returning  to  Afghanistan  after  his  asylum  appeal  was
    dismissed and he became appeal rights exhausted (ARE) on 11.9.12. It is
    not clear when he returned but he made a claim in 2014 as  a  dependent
    on his wife's asylum claim, rejected in 2015. It is relevant that there
    were previous adverse credibility findings made against the  appellant.
    Further submissions were made  in  2018,  also  rejected.  The  current
    appeal arises out of the yet further submissions made on 3.9.19.

 5. In brief findings, the First-tier Tribunal Judge concluded at  [29]  of
    the decision that it was reasonably likely that the appellant  and  his
    wife  and  their  children  would  suffer  such  a  severe   level   of
    discrimination that  would  amount  to  persecution.  At  [30]  of  the
    decision the judge accepted the evidence that  the  appellant  and  his
    family are in poor financial  circumstances  and  would  not  have  the
    ability to access basic accommodation on return and would not  be  able
    to obtain  employment.  At  [31]  the  judge  was  satisfied  that  the
    appellant had no close family members in  Afghanistan  and,  therefore,
    could not access family support. At [32] the judge  found  that  whilst
    the Gurdwara had previously  offered  the  appellant  protection,  that
    support was not now available. At [33] the judge  found  it  reasonably
    likely that on return the appellant would  be  subjected  to  harm  and
    threats whilst accessing a Gurdwara. At [34] the judge found  that  the
    appellant's children would be unlikely to be able to access educational
    facilities in Afghanistan. At [35] the  judge  found  that  the  Afghan
    government is increasingly less  able  to  provide  protection  to  its
    citizens and in particular there was little  will  at  local  level  to
    protect members of the Sikh and Hindu communities, "and  therefore  the
    Appellant and  his  family  are  to  the  lower  standard  at  risk  of
    persecution on the basis of their religion and ethnicity."

 6. No reasoning was provided for also allowing the appeal on human  rights
    grounds.

 7. In summary, the grounds assert that  (1)  the  judge  erred  in  giving
    insufficient reasons on what elements of the appellant's case  amounted
    to a real risk of persecution. The Country Guidance  cases  of  TG  and
    others (Afghan Sikhs persecuted) CG [2015] UKUT 595 (IAC) and  ASN  and
    others v The Netherlands 68377/17 (Judgement: Prohibition  of  torture:
    Fourth Section) [2020] ECHR 177 are relied on by the respondent, on the
    basis that they establish that Sikhs in Afghanistan are not  persecuted
    per se. It is argued (2) that the judge both failed to take account  of
    this case law and objective evidence, and  failed  to  give  sufficient
    reasons why, in the appellant's particular case, his treatment amounted
    to persecution. It is further argued (3) that there  was  a  procedural
    irregularity in that the judge had made up his mind about the  case  in
    advance of the evidence and submissions by indicating his  'preliminary
    view.' It is also argued (4) that the judge failed to  explain  why  he
    departed from the findings of the previous appeal tribunal decision and
    failed to apply Devaseelan (Second Appeals - ECHR  -  Extra-territorial
    Effect) Sri Lanka [2002] UKAIT 00702.

 8. Permission to appeal was granted by the First-tier Tribunal on 21.5.20,
    on the basis that it was  arguable  that  the  judge  "failed  to  make
    adequate findings of fact in the light of  (ASN)  and  failed  to  give
    adequate reasons as to why the appellant was at risk of persecution. It
    is also  arguable  that  the  Judge  failed  to  address  the  previous
    decisions of the Tribunal. Whilst ground 3 is less arguable  I  do  not
    refuse permission."

 9. The findings and conclusions were certainly brief,  comprising  just  7
    short paragraphs taking up less than a page, but that fact  alone  does
    not demonstrate any error of law. However, it must be  clear  from  the
    decision what the judge has found and why. In other words, the findings
    must be supported by cogent reasoning, no matter how brief, and open to
    the judge on the evidence. Put another way, the losing  party  must  be
    able to clearly discern from the written decision why he has lost.

10. For the reasons set out below, I find such error of law in  the  making
    of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal as to require  the  decision
    to be set aside and remade.

11. In his submissions, Mr Howells addressed grounds 4, 1 and 2,  the  last
    two of which overlap. He accepted that ground 3 was weak  and  did  not
    pursue it. Ms Khan submitted  that  although  brief  the  decision  was
    sustainable and disclosed no error of law.

12. Whilst I accept Ms Khan's submission that the decision  discloses  that
    the judge was aware of the previous decisions, I can find no  reasoning
    justifying not taking the adverse credibility findings  as  a  starting
    point. I take into account Ms Khan's submission that TG post-dated  the
    earlier Tribunal decisions,  so  that  different  criteria  may  apply.
    However, there were significant adverse credibility findings such  that
    it was not accepted that the appellant had  no  friends  or  family  in
    Afghanistan and the claimed incident of 2007 was rejected. There is  no
    evidence that the judge has applied the Devaseelan  (Second  Appeals  -
    ECHR - Extra-territorial Effect) Sri Lanka [2002] UKAIT 00702 principle
    or explained why he departed from those findings as a starting point. I
    am satisfied that this amounts to an error of law.

13. Whilst the judge accepted the evidence of the appellant  and  his  wife
    that they had suffered harassment in Afghanistan and account  was  said
    to have been taken of the current situation and the dwindling number of
    Sikhs, the finding that it was reasonably likely that  on  return  they
    would suffer such a severe level of discrimination so as to  amount  to
    persecution  appears  entirely  unreasoned.  Given  that  the   Country
    Guidance and country background evidence was to the effect  that  there
    is no widespread persecution of Sikhs per se in Afghanistan, it was all
    the more incumbent on the judge to explain why with  reference  to  the
    particular facts of the appellant's case his treatment on return  would
    reasonably likely amount to persecution.

14. The Country Guidance held that  Sikhs  do  not  face  a  real  risk  of
    persecution or ill-treatment such as to entitle  them  to  a  grant  of
    international protection on the basis  of  their  ethnic  or  religious
    identity per se. "Neither can it be said that the cumulative impact  of
    discrimination suffered by the Sikh and Hindu  communities  in  general
    reaches the threshold of persecution." The Upper Tribunal held  that  a
    consideration of whether an individual member  of  the  Sikh  or  Hindu
    communities is at real risk of persecution on return is fact-sensitive,
    requiring consideration of all the relevant circumstances with "careful
    attention" paid to the four consideration set out in the headnote.

15. Ms Khan argued that the judge  had  taken  account  of  TG,  referenced
    throughout the findings, and had applied the  considerations  from  the
    headnote of that case to the  appellant's  circumstances  as  given  in
    evidence and accepted by  the  judge.  Whilst  the  judge  has  briefly
    referenced employment,  language,  family  members,  and  education,  I
    cannot discern  from  the  decision  adequate  reasoning  justifying  a
    finding of risk on return for this appellant. The judge has  implicitly
    referenced the appellant's evidence but it is not clear what was found.
    Merely  stating  that  the  appellant's  evidence  was   credible   and
    consistent with TG's guidance is insufficient.

16. The grounds and grant of permission also referred  to  ASN,  where  the
    European court has recently held that in general Afghan Sikhs  are  not
    at risk on return and that the general security situation, at least  in
    Kabul, did not establish a risk  of  ill-treatment  arising  from  mere
    presence.  The  ECHR  found  that  there  would  need  to  be   special
    distinguishing features in order to establish  risk  on  return,  which
    should be subjected to a detailed credibility assessment. Whilst, as Ms
    Khan pointed out, this decision was only promulgated on 25.2.20,  after
    the appeal hearing, it  was  before  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal was promulgated. However, I accept Ms Khan's  submission  that
    it was not binding on the Tribunal  and  no  error  can  arise  in  not
    referring to it.

17. However the CPIN of May 2019, which was put before the  Tribunal,  made
    the same points as taken in ASN and should have been addressed  by  the
    judge. The  CPIN  provided  information  that  the  Afghan  authorities
    provide Sikhs with police protection during funeral services; that they
    are free to build places of worship; and that the  Afghan  Ministry  of
    Hajj and Religious Affairs is making efforts  to  provide  free  water,
    electricity, and repair services for some Sikh temples. There  is  also
    at least one school for Sikh children open in Kabul. Further, according
    to the Sikh member of the lower  house  of  the  Afghan  Assembly,  the
    majority of the Muslim  population  is  very  supportive  of  the  Sikh
    community, they have a positive relationship, and  Sikhs  are  able  to
    practice their religion publicly. This CPIN was quoted and relied on in
    the ECHR decision referred to above,  leading  the  European  Court  to
    conclude that it was not persuaded  that  the  situation  of  Sikhs  in
    Afghanistan is such that they can be said to be members of a group that
    is systematically exposed to a practice of ill-treatment.

18. In summary, the judge  should  have  provided  adequate  reasoning  for
    finding risk on application of the Country Guidance of  TG,  indicating
    the particular features of the appellant and  his  family  in  a  fact-
    sensitive assessment. Even if this could be said to have  been  covered
    by the brief findings, I  am  satisfied  that  the  judge  should  have
    provided reasoning to  distinguish  or  depart  from  the  more  recent
    country background information.

19. In the circumstances and for the reasons set out  above,  I  find  such
    material error of law in the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  that
    it must be set aside.

20. When a decision of the First-tier Tribunal has been set aside,  section
    12(2) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 requires either
    that the case is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  with  directions,
    or it must be remade by the Upper Tribunal. The scheme of the Tribunals
    Court and Enforcement Act 2007 does not assign the function of  primary
    fact finding to the  Upper  Tribunal.  The  errors  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge vitiates all other findings of fact and the  conclusions
    from those facts so that there has not been a  valid  determination  of
    the issues in the appeal. As Mr Howells pointed out, a rehearing of the
    appeal will require considerable oral evidence as the factual  findings
    will need to be remade.

21. In all the circumstances, at the invitation and request of both parties
    to relist this appeal for a fresh hearing in the First-tier Tribunal, I
    do so on the basis that this is a case which falls squarely within  the
    Senior President's Practice Statement at paragraph 7.2.

Decision

      The appeal of the Secretary of State is allowed.

      The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside in  its  entirety
      with no findings preserved.

      The remaking of the decision in the appeal is remitted to  the  First-
      tier Tribunal to be made de novo.

      I make no order for costs.


Signed: DMW Pickup

Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

Date:    2 September 2020




Anonymity Direction

I am satisfied, having had  regard  to  the  guidance  in  the  Presidential
Guidance Note No 1 of 2013: Anonymity Orders, that it would  be  appropriate
to make an order in accordance with  Rules  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 in the following terms:

    "Unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellant
    is granted anonymity. No report of these proceedings shall directly  or
    indirectly identify him or any member of  his  family.  This  direction
    applies to, amongst others, both  the  appellant  and  the  respondent.
    Failure to comply with this direction could lead to contempt  of  court
    proceedings."


Signed: DMW Pickup

Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

Date:    2 September 2020


