

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA124322016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at  Field House                    |Decision and Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 25.7.2017                             |On 27.7.2017                      |
|                                         |                                  |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                  GA BLACK

                                   Between

                                   MR M K
                             ANONYMITY ORDER MADE

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S. Chelvan (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr P. Duffy (Home office presenting officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is  a  citizen  of  Iran  and  whose  date  of  birth  is
    18.2.1984.  He appeals against a decision  before  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Abebrese ("FTT") promulgated on 13.2.2017 in which  he  dismissed
    his asylum appeal.  The appellant claimed asylum on the grounds that he
    faced persecution because of his sexual identity as a gay man  and  for
    political reasons.  He claimed that he had been filmed while having sex
    with a man and the film was in the hands of  the  Revolutionary  Guard.
    Further he claimed that he was at risk  because  his  father  had  been
    executed because of his association with Kurds.  He fled from Iran with
    only his bank card.

2.     The  appellant  appeared  before  the  FTT  and   was   not   legally
    represented. The  issue  to  be  determined  was  whether  or  not  the
    appellant was gay (HJ (Iran) v SSHD 2010 UKSC 31.  The appellant relied
    on his substantive interview and oral evidence. He was  cross  examined
    by the representative from the Home Office. The FTT found the appellant
    was not credible that he was gay or that there was a film of his sexual
    activity [21]. The evidence was recorded in two  paragraphs  at  [19  &
    20].  The FTT found the evidence to be  vague,  based  on  hearsay  and
    unsupported [24].

3.    The grounds of appeal for permission contend that the  FTT  failed  to
    follow procedural requirements applicable to an unrepresented appellant
    as set out in Adjudicator's guidance no 5 and that because he relied on
    sexual identity he ought to have been treated as a  vulnerable  witness
    following the Joint Presidential Guidance note no 2 of 2010.  Secondly,
    the FTT failed to have regard to CG decisions  on  sexual  identity  in
    Iran (RM & BB (Homosexuals) Iran [2005] UKAIT 00117. The  third  ground
    contended that the FTT materially erred by finding  that  there  was  a
    lack of corroboration and reliance on hearsay [24].

4.     Permission was granted on all grounds by FTJ Page.

5.    At the hearing before me Mr Duffy conceded that there was  a  material
    error of law as argued in the third ground as  to  the  FTT  concluding
    that there was a lack of corroboration.  Mr Chelvan submitted that  the
    matter ought to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.

Discussion

6.    I find that there were material errors of  law  in  the  decision  and
    reasons which I set aside.  It was not apparent from the decision  (nor
    from  the  record  of  proceedings)  that  the  FTT   had   given   any
    consideration to the fact that the appellant was unrepresented and that
    he had not made a witness statement and whether or not it  was  in  the
    interests of justice to adjourn the hearing.  I find that there was  an
    absence of reasons given by the  FTT  as  to  why  it  found  that  the
    appellant was not credible as to his sexuality. Some reference is  made
    to the answers given in the substantive interview  [21  &  22]  but  no
    reasons were given in support .It is clear that the appellant expressed
    some difficulty in expressing himself in terms of his  sexuality  [16].
    There was  no  reference  to  the  Guidelines  to  treat  witnesses  as
    vulnerable. It was unclear the extent to which the reasons for  refusal
    had been put to the appellant  during  the  hearing  and  during  cross
    examination. The FTT did not record whether or not the points raised in
    the refusal letter had been put to the appellant.  Further as  conceded
    by Mr Duffy the FTT erred at [24] by in effect requiring corroboration.

Decision

7.   The decision is set aside. The appeal is  remitted  to  the  First-tier
    tribunal for hearing de  novo  (excluding  Judge  Abebrese)  at  Taylor
    House.  I make an anonymity order.

                               Signed                     Date 26.7.2017


                               GA Black
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal




Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

    Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  appellant
    is granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
    indirectly identify him or any member of their family.  This  direction
    applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.  Failure to comply
    with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.







                               Signed                     Date 26.7.2017


                               GA Black
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


