
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12542/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 3rd May 2017                      |On 24th May 2017                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES


                                   Between

                                    [e k]
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Iqbal, instructed by Wimbledon Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant is a citizen of Albania born on [  ]  2000.   He  appeals
    against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Lucas promulgated  on
    9th January 2017 dismissing his protection claim.

2.   Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal  Judge  Lindsley  on
    20th March 2017. It was arguable the judge had erred in law in  failing
    to assess the Appellant's evidence and his return  to  Albania  on  the
    basis that he was a minor, and  in  failing  to  consider  the  medical
    evidence in the round.

3.   In  the  Rule  24  response,  dated  4th  April  2017,  the  Respondent
    submitted that the judge did not accept that  the  Appellant  had  lost
    contact with his mother and father.  He would not  be  returned  as  an
    unaccompanied minor and therefore the judge's  reference  to  the  fact
    that the Appellant would not be returned until he was 18 years old  was
    irrelevant.  Further, the  judge  assessed  the  medical  evidence  and
    concluded that the Appellant's PTSD was unconnected to  his  claim.  In
    any event, the Appellant could internally relocate on return.

Submissions

4.   Ms Iqbal relied on the grounds of appeal and submitted that  the  judge
    had erred in law in his assessment of credibility  and  in  failing  to
    assess risk on return at the date of hearing. She  submitted  that  the
    judge had not assessed the Appellant's circumstances  at  the  date  of
    hearing when he was 16 years old. She referred to paragraph 46  of  the
    judge's decision in which he states:-

         "In so doing, it notes that the Appellant is sixteen years old  and
         has, in accordance with public policy, been granted leave to remain
         in the UK until 2008 (sic).  There is therefore no prospect of  him
         (sic) imminent removal."

    and at paragraph 57:-

         "In any event, the Tribunal simply does not accept that  inside  or
         outside of his local area,  the  Appellant  cold  (sic)  not  avail
         himself of State or other protection.  The Tribunal notes  that  he
         will be an adult when he is returned to Albania and can readjust to
         life there as he has done to life in the UK."

5.   Ms Iqbal submitted that the judge failed to  consider  the  Appellant's
    evidence as a child and instead considered the risk  on  return  as  an
    adult. The judge failed to consider presidential guidance on vulnerable
    witnesses which was referred to in the skeleton argument before him.

6.   Further, it was clear from paragraph 52 of the decision that the  judge
    had used his own perception of the situation  rather  than  considering
    the Appellant's age. The Appellant was a child who would not be able to
    refer  to  every  single  fact.  The  judge  was  wrong  to  have  made
    assumptions. In effect, the judge concluded that  there  was  no  blood
    feud so he did not attach weight to the medical report.  However, there
    was no reason for rejecting the Appellant's  account  at  paragraph  51
    where the judge concluded:-

         "The Tribunal does not consider that there was in fact a blood feud
         existing in Albania which involved the Appellant in  any  way.   It
         places no weight at all upon the fact that he  was  'warned'  while
         still aged fifteen years and before his departure from Albania."

7.   There were no reasons for rejecting the  Appellant's  account  that  he
    was attacked in August 2015 and  this  account  was  supported  by  the
    medical evidence. Accordingly, there were gaps in the judge's  findings
    and conclusions. There had been two violent incidents in Albania  which
    was enough to  establish  a  blood  feud  and  there  was  evidence  to
    corroborate the occurrence of a blood feud. Had the judge accepted  the
    attack on the Appellant, as he should have done in light of the medical
    report, he would have found that the Appellant had established a  blood
    feud.

8.    Ms  Iqbal  submitted  that  the  judge  failed  to  consider  relevant
    evidence, and had he done  so,  he  would  have  come  to  a  different
    conclusion. Therefore, there was a material error in law. Further,  the
    judge should have referred to, and taken into  account,  the  character
    evidence in assessing credibility rather than just referring to  it  in
    relation to the Article 8 claim.

9.   Ms Isherwood submitted that there was no material error of law  in  the
    judge's decision and the points made  amounted  to  disagreements.  The
    Appellant had claimed asylum  in  May  2016  and  the  hearing  was  in
    December 2016. The character witness accounts were  based  on  evidence
    told to them by the Appellant  over  a  limited  period  of  time.  The
    witness evidence had no reflection on the events in  Albania.   It  was
    not direct evidence of what had happened. It was evidence of  what  the
    Appellant had told the witnesses and was used to  support  his  private
    life.

10.  Ms Isherwood submitted that the  judge  did  not  have  to  accept  the
    Appellant's account just because he was a minor. Throughout the judge's
    decision there was reference to the Appellant being 16 years  old.  The
    judge went through the documentary evidence provided by the  Appellant.
    He was not just looking at the oral evidence and failing to  take  into
    account the Appellant's age. At  paragraph  26,  the  judge  took  into
    account the medical evidence, which indicated  that  the  scarring  was
    consistent with the Appellant's account of  having  been  attacked.  At
    paragraphs 27 and 28 the judge took into account the letters of support
    from the village head, the supporting letters and the student  progress
    report, and also a letter from a further witness  dated  12th  December
    2016.

11.  The judge assessed the Appellant's oral evidence in the light  of  this
    documentary evidence and he properly applied country guidance 7(ii)  of
    EH (blood feuds) Albania CG [2012] UKUT 00348 (IAC) in which it states:-



         "In order to establish that there is an active blood feud affecting
         him personally, an Appellant must produce  satisfactory  individual
         evidence of its existence in relation to him.  In  particular,  the
         Appellant must establish:

         (i)  his profile as a potential target of the feud  identified  and
             which family carried out the most recent killing; and

         (ii) whether the Appellant has been, or other members of his family
             have  been,  or  are  currently,  in  self-confinement  within
             Albania."

12.   Ms  Isherwood  submitted  that  the  judge  was  well-aware  that  the
    Appellant was a minor and it is clear from his conclusions at paragraph
    48 that there was a conflict in the evidence.  This was not a matter in
    which the Appellant was vague or his account was lacking in detail.  In
    this case the documentary evidence  did  not  support  the  Appellant's
    claim.

13.  The Appellant's claim was partially accepted by the Respondent. It  was
    accepted that the Appellant's father had been arrested and detained and
    therefore the court documents did not show that the authorities  turned
    a blind eye as alleged by the Appellant. The judge's finding that there
    was not a blood feud involving the Appellant was one which was open  to
    him on the evidence before him.

14.  The judge found that the warning incident in 2015 was not connected  to
    a blood feud. The medical report did not go into detail of this claimed
    incident. There was also evidence  that  the  Appellant's  father  left
    Albania with the  Appellant  and  brought  him  to  Belgium.  This  was
    inconsistent with a blood feud. At paragraph 52 the judge looked at the
    evidence and made appropriate findings. The Appellant's father was  not
    in self-imposed captivity because, on the Appellant's own evidence,  he
    had left the country with the Appellant in 2016.

15.  At paragraph 53, the judge did  not  accept  that  the  Appellant  lost
    contact with his family and this was relevant to risk on return.  There
    was a letter from  a  village  elder  dated  6th  December  2016  which
    supported the judge's finding that the Appellant still had contact with
    his family. There was no evidence from the Appellant of any attempt  to
    contact his family. The judge's finding that the Appellant had not lost
    contact with  his  family,  who  were  resourceful  and  had  sent  the
    Appellant out of  Albania,  was  supported  by  the  letters  that  the
    Appellant was doing well in education.

16.  In summary, Ms  Isherwood  submitted  that  the  judge  looked  at  the
    documentary evidence and oral evidence and made  appropriate  findings.
    The judge acknowledged the medical report in his decision at  paragraph
    26 and he referred to it again at paragraph 55.   The  report  did  not
    give an alternative cause for the scarring and it did not dislodge  the
    finding that there was no blood feud.  The  judge  looked  at  risk  on
    return at the date of hearing, given his finding that the Appellant had
    family to whom he could return.  At paragraph  56  the  judge  did  not
    accept that there was a blood feud. Further, he considered  the  matter
    in the alternative.

17.  The decision was well-reasoned and took into account all  the  evidence
    (including the fact that the Appellant was  a  minor,  the  letters  of
    support and the expert report) and the judge made sustainable  findings
    on risk on return.  The argument put forward by the  Appellant  was  no
    more than a challenge to the weight that  should  be  attached  to  the
    Appellant's evidence. The grounds fail to address the judge's  findings
    on the documentary evidence.  Accordingly, there was no error of law.

18.  In response, Ms Iqbal referred to the Appellant's witness statement  in
    which he stated that he was currently in the process of getting an  up-
    to-date letter. The fact that he could obtain other evidence  from  his
    village did not show that he had contact with his family. In any  event
    this was not a matter which was raised in cross-examination or  at  the
    hearing before the First-tier Tribunal.

19.  It was clear, from paragraph 57, that  the  judge  considered  risk  on
    return for the Appellant as an  adult.  This  clearly  highlighted  the
    judge's state of mind when considering risk and was not  in  accordance
    with current guidance.  The  judge  had  gone  beyond  looking  at  the
    evidence of a child and assumed that the Appellant would  be  in  touch
    with his family.

20.  The medical evidence was not  properly  considered  and  parts  of  the
    Appellant's evidence, which were corroborative of his account, were not
    properly considered. The Appellant should have been given  the  benefit
    of the doubt. There was consistency in the Appellant's oral and written
    evidence. The inconsistencies in  the  documentary  evidence  were  not
    within the Appellant's control.  If an error had been made, this should
    be weighed against the consistency of the Appellant's own  account  and
    oral evidence. This had not been done. The Appellant had not been given
    a margin of error.

21.  I asked Ms Iqbal how her submissions and grounds were  material,  given
    the judge's finding that there was sufficiency of protection, and  that
    this was not challenged in the grounds of appeal.  She submitted  that,
    if the judge had accepted the Appellant's account as credible, he would
    have accepted that the police would not protect  the  Appellant  as  he
    claimed.

Discussion and Conclusion

22.  The judge  acknowledged  that  the  Appellant  was  16  years  old  and
    accepted that his father  had  been  involved  in  a  violent  incident
    resulting in his father's arrest. However, the  judge  did  not  accept
    that the Appellant was the subject of a blood feud and he  gave  cogent
    reasons for coming to this conclusion.

23.  Firstly, the letters from the village elders and  the  court  documents
    were inconsistent with the Appellant's claim.  Secondly, the fact  that
    the Appellant's father had been  prosecuted  for  assault  showed  that
    there was a functioning police force and that the police did not turn a
    blind  eye  to  such  disputes,  contrary  to  the  Appellant's  claim.
    Thirdly, the Appellant claimed his father remained indoors to avoid his
    persecutors.  However, this claim was inconsistent with the Appellant's
    account that he left Albania on his own passport with  his  father  and
    his sister. I find that there was  no  error  of  law  in  the  judge's
    rejection of the Appellant's claim to be the subject of a  blood  feud.
    The matters identified  in  the  grounds  were  not  material  to  this
    finding.

24.  The judge did not accept that the Appellant had lost contact  with  his
    family. There was no reason for his mother to  leave  the  family  home
    because she would not be subjected to the blood feud.  The  Appellant's
    father had brought him to Belgium and secured his passage  to  the  UK.
    The judge did not find it credible  that  his  father  would  not  have
    remained in contact with  the  Appellant  and  there  was  insufficient
    evidence from the Appellant that he had made attempts  to  contact  his
    family.  Accordingly, the Appellant would not be returning  to  Albania
    as an unaccompanied minor. The judge's reference to the grant of  leave
    until 2018 and that there was no prospect of imminent removal  was  not
    material to the judge's conclusion that the  Appellant  had  failed  to
    show he was the subject of a blood feud.

25.  The judge considered each aspect of the Appellant's claim and  assessed
    whether it was credible.  He took into account the medical evidence  as
    part of that assessment.  The fact that  he  referred  to  the  medical
    report at the end of his assessment does not amount to an error of law.
    The judge took into account that the Appellant had received  a  warning
    while he was 15 years old and (at paragraph  26)  that  the  injury  he
    sustained, scarring on his chest and hands,  was  consistent  with  his
    account. The judge however  did  not  accept  that  the  Appellant  was
    involved in a blood feud. The judge's conclusion was open to him on the
    evidence and the medical evidence did not take the matter any  further.
    There was no error of law in the judge's assessment of credibility.

26.  In any event, the judge found that there was sufficiency of  protection
    and the Appellant could internally relocate. This finding was  open  to
    the judge on the Appellant's own evidence  and  was  supported  by  the
    background material. There was insufficient evidence before  the  judge
    to show to the lower standard that the rival family had the ability and
    resources to locate the Appellant  and  his  family  on  relocation  to
    Tirana.

27.  I find that there was no error of law in the decision  of  9th  January
    2017 and the Appellant's appeal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

Appeal dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


     J Frances

Signed        Date: 15th May 2017
Upper Tribunal Judge Frances

