
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/12166/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Determination & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 31 May 2019                       |On 13 June 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY


                                   Between

                                  AHMED [S]

                          (ANONYMITY NOT DIRECTED)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Holmes (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)



                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    This is the claimant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal brought with the
permission of a Judge of the Upper Tribunal, from a decision of the First-
tier Tribunal (the tribunal) which it made on 30 November 2018, following a
hearing of 16 November 2018, and which it sent to the parties on 20
December 2018. The tribunal's decision was to dismiss the claimant's appeal
from the Secretary of State's decision of 2 October 2018, refusing to grant
him international protection.

2.    I have not directed anonymity. I note that the tribunal did not do
so. Further, nothing was said about that before me despite the claimant
having the benefit of legal representation. It is not otherwise apparent to
me, in the absence of any request, that anonymity ought to be directed.

3.    The relevant background circumstances are as follows: The claimant is
a national of Afghanistan and he was born on 6 August 1993. He entered the
United Kingdom (UK) illegally on 15 November 2016. In making that claim he
said that his father is a commander in the Taliban but that he himself had
resisted his father's requests to join that organisation. He also said he
had assisted a person who had been kept by his father as a sex slave to
escape. In addition to a fear of his father as a result of those matters,
he also asserted that he feared the Taliban generally because he had worked
with members of the American Forces and that he feared a specific Taliban
group who had been angered by the actions of his father (see paragraph 3 of
the decision of Judge Moxon of 16 June 2017). The asylum claim was refused
and an appeal (the one heard by Judge Moxon) was subsequently dismissed on
16 June 2017 following a hearing of 14 June 2017. The claimant was found by
Judge Moxon not to be credible. His appeal rights became exhausted on 9
August 2017. The claimant, however, did not leave the UK. Indeed, on 29
June 2018, he submitted further submissions to the Secretary of State
concerning what he claimed to be a conversion to Christianity and risk
arising in consequence of that. The submissions were treated as amounting
to a fresh claim for asylum about which he was interviewed on 6 August
2018. In pursuing that claim he asserted that he would be at risk upon
return to Afghanistan because he had converted from Islam and that such
conversion was not permitted. He said he would be subjected to serious harm
or would be killed by people in Afghanistan as a result. It was that claim
which led to the decision of 2 October 2018 made by the Secretary of State
and then to the tribunal's decision of 30 November 2018.

4.    The tribunal heard oral evidence from the claimant and from one
Reverend Barlow. It disbelieved the claimant's contention that he had
genuinely converted to Christianity. In so deciding it was necessary for it
to reach a view (whilst this was not of itself determinative) as to the
probative value of Reverend Barlow's evidence. As to that, in addition to
his oral evidence, it had a quite lengthy letter which he had written about
the claimant and which appeared from B17 to B20 of the Secretary of State's
bundle which had been before it. In addressing Reverend Barlow's evidence
and the significance or otherwise of it, the tribunal said this:

    "20.   Mr Barlow is an evangelist. It is his task to "spread the
    Gospel" as he calls it. He organised bible and baptism study classes. A
    potential convert repeats "lessons" learnt at these sessions and
    repeats them to Mr Barlow and colleagues in his church. Providing a
    potential convert repeats the lessons learnt to the satisfaction of Mr
    Barlow and his colleagues a potential convert is baptised. However,
    simply because a potential convert has learnt his "lessons"
    satisfactorily and has stood the test does not of itself mean such a
    potential convert has genuinely converted to Christianity.


    21.    In cross-examination Mr Mullarkey Mr Barlow if he had read
    either of the two AIRs screening interviews, respondent's DECISIONs or
    the tribunal's DECISION to ascertain the truthfulness of the appellant.
    Mr Barlow he had not. Mr Mullarkey submitted that Mr Barlow ought to
    have done so before he (Mr Barlow) accepted the appellant as a
    Christian. In my view, it is not the "job" of Mr Barlow to conduct an
    enquiry of the sort suggested by Mr Mullarkey. Mr Barlow cannot look
    into the heart of a person to ascertain his or her truthfulness. It is
    his "job" to be satisfied that a potential convert "meets" on the face
    of it, the basic tenets of Christianity. If such a person has a command
    of those it is not Mr Barlow's "job" to ascertain the genuineness of
    conversion. It is the task of decision makers such as the respondent
    and a tribunal judge."

5.    There are some slight grammatical errors in the above passage but the
meaning is clear. In seeking permission to appeal (which was sought on
various grounds) one of the claimant's contentions was that the tribunal
had failed to indicate what significance it was attaching to Reverend
Barlow's evidence. Indeed, it was suggested that such represented "an
omission of real significance".

6.    Permission having been granted there was a hearing before the Upper
Tribunal (before me) for the purpose of deciding whether the tribunal had
erred in law. Discussion at the hearing focused on the above ground.

7.    I have decided, as I informed the representatives at the hearing,
that the tribunal did err in law with respect to its consideration of and
treatment of the evidence of Reverend Barlow.

8.    As to that, on my reading, what the tribunal was effectively saying
was that given what it perceived as being his role or as it put it his
"job", Reverend Barlow's evidence amounted to and could only amount to an
assessment of the claimant's ability to remember facts relevant to
Christianity to an extent that he satisfied prescribed requirements to be
accepted for baptism. But I accept Mr Holmes submission that what was said
in the lengthy letter referred to above went somewhat beyond that. It
talked, in some detail, of the claimant's interaction with Reverend Barlow
and his involvement in study of the Bible. Mention is made of his
indicating to Dr Barlow, for example, which passages in the Bible "speak
most strongly to him" and what his thoughts were about the significance of
communion. Mr Holmes, who had represented the claimant not only before me
but also before the tribunal, told me, with reference to his own note of
what had been said at the hearing, that Reverend Barlow had given oral
evidence concerning the claimant's understanding of the life and death of
Jesus and the significance that that was thought to have for the claimant's
own life.

9.    Of course, the tribunal was not required to attach a particular
amount of weight to Reverend Barlow's evidence. It might have been open to
it, for example, to conclude that he had been duped or that his conclusions
regarding the claimant's conversion were misplaced or unreliable. But in my
judgment, it did have to address the breadth of his evidence and form a
view as to whether that did assist with the question of the genuineness of
the conversion and, if so, to what extent. It effectively marginalised and
mischaracterised his evidence in its written reasons by suggesting it only
amounted to an indication as to the claimant's ability to memorise facts
and information relating to Christianity and by disregarding Reverend
Barlow's own view as to the genuineness of the conversion. In my view had
the tribunal not erred in that way it might (though it is far from
inevitable) have reached a different view as to the conversion.

10.   In the circumstances I have decided to set aside the tribunal's
decision. As to disposal, it seems to me that, given that this is a case
which turns upon credibility, the proper course is to remit without
preservation of any of the tribunal's findings and conclusions. That, then,
is what I do. This means there will be a complete rehearing before a
differently constituted tribunal (a different judge). The tribunal
conducting the rehearing will consider all matters, both fact and law,
entirely afresh.

11.   Having decided to set aside the tribunal's decision I am statutorily
obliged to give directions for its rehearing. But it is not necessary for
me to give extensive or prescriptive directions. So, I simply direct that
there be a complete rehearing of the appeal, in Bradford, before a
differently constituted tribunal with nothing preserved from the previous
tribunal's findings. Other directions are best made by a tribunal judge.



Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error of
law and is set aside. Further, the case is remitted to the First-tier
Tribunal for a complete rehearing.

I do not direct anonymity. The First-tier Tribunal did not do so and I was
not invited to.


Signed:
                 Dated: 11 June 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway

