
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: pa/12521/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 15 June 2017                      |On 3 July 2017                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON


                                   Between

                                   MR K K
                         (aNONYMITY DIRECTION Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Butterworth, Counsel instructed by Jein
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1.  This  is  an  application  for  permission  to  appeal   against   the
    determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge Anstis who  on  22  December
    2016 dismissed the applicant's appeal against the Secretary of  State's
    refusal of his protection and human  rights  claims.   The  matter  was
    heard on 14 December 2016.

 2. There are various grounds in the written amorphous application which Mr
    Butterworth attempted to set out clearly.  The  grounds  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal did not appear to  rely  on  the  grounds  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

 3. In ground (i) was asserted that there  was  inadequate  reasoning;  the
    judge failed to take into account the applicant's  claim  that  he  was
    arrested  having  been  identified  by  an  LTTE  member  whom  he  had
    accommodated.  This claim was consistent and not inconsistent  with  GJ
    and Others [2013] UKUT 00319 which noted the use of former LTTE members
    as informants.  The judge should have focussed on  the  perception  the
    authorities would have of the appellant.   His  scars  were  consistent
    with his claim and his family had links with the LTTE.

 4. In response to ground (i) the judge at  paragraph  45  found  that  the
    appellant was someone who offered low-level  assistance  in  Sri  Lanka
    apparently reporting what he observed  while  travelling  to  and  from
    work.  I do not find the judge's findings  were  at  odds  with  GJ  or
    disclose an error of law on this ground alone.  The head note of GJ  at
    (8) notes that:

         "Everyone on the northern province had some  level  of  involvement
         with the LTTE during the civil war.  In post conflict Sri Lanka  an
         individual's past history will be relevant only to the extent  that
         it is perceived by the  Sri  Lankan  authorities  as  indicating  a
         present risk to the unitary Sri Lankan  state  or  the  Sri  Lankan
         Government."

 5. In relation to ground  (ii)  as  set  out  by  Mr  Butterworth  it  was
    submitted that paragraph 47 was highly  relevant  in  relation  to  the
    death of the aunt and her death certificate showed  that  she  died  of
    gunshot.  Although the appellant stated that this related to  the  LTTE
    and contended that there  was  no  finding  by  the  judge,  I  am  not
    persuaded on this point alone that the judge erred in law.   There  was
    no indication on the death certificate which  specifically  linked  the
    mother to the LTTE or that the incident was other than  random  in  the
    event of the conflict.

 6. Nor do I consider that the judge's finding at [47] in relation  to  the
    letter from the mother, referring to the work of  the  appellant  as  a
    teacher, could be construed as connoting a new job, such that it  could
    be argued the judge misconstrued it.  There was ambiguity in the letter
    and it was open to the judge to find that it did not add  significantly
    to the appellant's account, which the judge had clearly been taken into
    account.

 7.  Overall,  as  Mr  Tufan  pointed  out,  the  appellant's   claim   was
    significantly undermined by the  failure  of  the  appellant  to  claim
    asylum during his lengthy residence in  the  United  Kingdom.   As  the
    judge pointed out at paragraph 41 the appellant claims to have been  in
    danger from the Sri Lankan authorities from the date of his arrival  in
    the United Kingdom on 17 October 2010 and yet only  claimed  asylum  in
    2016.  In the meantime he made a successful application  to  remain  in
    the UK as a Tier  1  (Post  Study)  Worker  and  then  an  unsuccessful
    application as a Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) without mentioning  anything  of
    the risk he faced in Sri Lanka.   As  the  judge  noted  there  was  no
    suggestion from him as to how the improvement  might  have  transpired.
    Those findings by the judge fundamentally  undermined  the  appellant's
    credibility.

 8. In relation to the appellant's past activities Mr Butterworth was  keen
    to emphasise that the appellant was not a member of the LTTE.

 9. I note that the judge also referred at paragraph 51 to  the  report  of
    Professor Lingam identifying that his scars "could be from any accident
    or injury" and that "these wounds are still oozing".  Bearing  in  mind
    the appellant had been  in  the  United  Kingdom  since  2010  this  is
    surprising.   Nonetheless, on findings open to him, the  judge  clearly
    found at [51] that the medical report did not assist the appellant  and
    I find no error in the reasoning on the evidence as it was presented.

10. The judge also noted at paragraph 54 that  it  was  striking  that  the
    first time the appellant sought medical treatment was in 2016 and spent
    five years in the UK whilst studying and working without  any  form  of
    medical attention or treatment for his depression.  Those findings were
    also  open  to  the  judge  and  further  undermined  the   appellant's
    credibility.

11. More problematical is the tension between paragraphs 56  and  65  where
    the judge states:

         "56. The Appellant has given an account  of  activities  sur  place
             which are said to place him at risk on return  to  Sri  Lanka.
             In his asylum interview he talks of having attended 6-7  Tamil
             demonstrations in his time in the United Kingdom.  In  October
             2016 there is a letter from the TGTE describing the  Appellant
             as having been a volunteer and office assistance with the TGTE
             for the previous ten months, so since approximately the  start
             of 2016.  In the most recent letter of  December  2016  he  is
             described as taking an 'active role in organising  events  and
             public demonstrations'.  Whatever view one takes of  that,  it
             is  apparent  that  on  the  Appellant's  own   evidence   his
             involvement with Tamil organisations in the United Kingdom has
             increased over time, from attending what must have been  about
             one event a year, through to  'organising  events  and  public
             demonstrations'.

         ...

         65.  Bearing in mind GL, I do not  consider  that  the  Appellant's
             activities in the United Kingdom would be  considered  by  the
             Sri Lankan authorities  as  a  threat,  or  to  bring  adverse
             attention to him.  I do  not  accept  his  evidence  that  the
             authorities  came  looking  for  him  after   last   weekend's
             demonstration.  These demonstrations are plainly  attended  by
             many people, and there is nothing evident from the photographs
             and other materials I have  seen  that  would  suggest  to  an
             observer that the Appellant was a prime mover or  particularly
             influential in those demonstrations."

12. It is either the fact that the judge has not made clear findings as  to
    the extent of the appellant's activities in the United  Kingdom,  which
    is what the judge needs to do before applying GJ, or alternatively  the
    judge is accepting that the appellant has been a volunteer and  offered
    assistance with the TGTE, a proscribed organisation  for  the  previous
    ten months at the start of 2016 and that he is  now  taking  a  "active
    role in organising events and public demonstrations".

13. GJ does not require that the applicant be designated as a "prime mover"
    or particularly influential in those  demonstrations.  It  is  how  the
    appellant will be perceived on return. As the head note  indicates  the
    categories of persons at real  risk  of  persecution  or  serious  harm
    include:

         "7(a)    Individuals who are, or are perceived to be, a  threat  to
              the integrity of Sri Lanka as a  single  state  because  they
              are, or are perceived to have a significant role in  relation
              to post conflict Tamil separatism within the diaspora  and/or
              a renewal of hostilities within Sri Lanka."

14. As Mr Butterworth pointed out the TGTE is  in  part  dedicated  to  the
    creation of a Tamil separatist state.  The key issue in this matter  is
    how the appellant will be viewed on return in relation to his sur place
    activities.

15. In the overall context of the evidence which is clearly how  the  judge
    addressed the letters from the mother and the attorney, it was open  to
    the judge to find that the letters from the attorney  were  undermined.
    The judge addressed these issues at [59] of the  decision.   The  judge
    criticised the letters from the MP, the attorney and the mother on  the
    basis that they all relate to 2016.  However, although it was  open  to
    the judge on the basis  of  Tanveer  Ahmed  (Documents  unreliable  and
    forged)/Pakistan [2002] UKIAT 00439 to find that the letters carried no
    weight, in  view  of  my  findings  above  in  relation  to  sur  place
    activities, I will set aside all findings from paragraph [56] onwards.

16. In my view there was  an  adequacy  of  findings  in  relation  to  the
    appellant's activities in Sri Lanka and paragraphs  [41]  to  [55]  are
    preserved.  However, there are no clear findings as to the  appellant's
    role with the TGTE and that is what needs to be undertaken in the First-
    tier Tribunal. I therefore conclude that there is an error  of  law  in
    relation to the appellant's sur place activities only.

17. For that reason and for that reason alone I return the  matter  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal for such findings, deliberations and assessment.

18. The Judge erred materially for the reasons identified. I set aside  the
    decision pursuant to Section  12(2)(a)  of  the  Tribunals  Courts  and
    Enforcement Act 2007 (TCE 2007).  Bearing in mind the nature and extent
    of the findings to be made, and as  indicated,  the  matter  should  be
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal under section 12(2) (b) (i) of  the
    TCE 2007 and further to 7.2 (b) of the Presidential Practice Statement.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Helen Rimington                Signed 30th June 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington
