
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12350/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Eagle Building, Glasgow      |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 5th January 2018                   |On 19th January 2018                 |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER


                                   Between

               SALAH SAYAH (aka SALAH MOHAMMED SAYAH AL BADRI)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Winton, instructed by Latta and Co solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms R Petterson, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. In a decision promulgated on 21st September 2017, First-tier  Tribunal
      judge McGavin dismissed the appellant's appeal against the refusal  of
      his protection and human rights claims.


   2. The appellant sought and was  granted  permission  to  appeal  on  the
      grounds that it was arguable the First-tier Tribunal judge  had  erred
      in  his  assessment  of  and  reference  to   evidence   relating   to
      undocumented Bidoon and that  the  judge  had,  contrary  to  what  he
      recorded in the decision, been directed to evidence that supported the
      appellant's claim.


   3. The respondent's Rule 24 response asserted that judge's error,  if  it
      existed, was immaterial. The appellant had failed to show  that  there
      were cogent reasons to depart from the country  guidance  case  of  NM
      (documented/undocumented Bidoon: risk) Kuwait CG [2013] UKUT 00356 and
      the judge had provided adequate and cogent  reasons  for  finding  the
      appellant's account incredible.


            Background


   4. The appellant claims to be an undocumented Bidoon from Kuwait, born on
      3rd January 1980. He claims to have left Kuwait on either 12th May  or
      12th September 2015, travelled to Turkey by air on a  false  passport,
      then to France overland where he remained for  some  5  months  before
      arriving in the UK on 25th April 2016. He claimed asylum that day. His
      claim was refused on 26th October 2016.


   5. He claims his family were not registered in the  1965  census  because
      they were in the desert at that time and, despite various attempts  to
      register in both 1996 and 2000, registration was refused  because  the
      family had not been included in the 1965  census.  He  claims  he  was
      arrested on attending a demonstration; he was released from  detention
      he says, after he agreed to give information to the authorities  about
      Bidoon activists and on the basis he would sign on weekly. His  father
      arranged for him to stay with a close Kuwaiti friend where he remained
      for about a year. That friend then arranged, after about a year, for a
      smuggler to bring him to the UK.


   6. The First-tier Tribunal  judge  found  that  the  appellant  was  from
      Kuwait, as accepted by the SSHD, but that he was not  an  undocumented
      Bidoon.


            Error of law


   7. The judge identified a number of issues which, he found, significantly
      undermined the appellant's credibility:
   i) That he had not been directed to any  evidence  which  indicates  that
      Bidoon who were not included in the 1965 census were  not  allowed  to
      register with the Executive Committee between 1996 and 2000  and  thus
      denied security cards.
  ii) He claimed his father worked as a shepherd for  Kuwaiti  people  until
      1980 when he moved to the city of Sulaibiya and did not work again.
 iii) The appellant and his brother supported the family from 2001 when they
      began to work.
  iv) The appellant was asked  three  times  in  cross-examination  how  the
      family were supported between 1980 and 2001but it was  not  until  re-
      examination provided an answer to the question namely that the man for
      whom his father had previously worked gave the family money  to  live;
      it was not credible that a person for whom his father had worked until
      the age of 25, for a maximum of 10 years, would then support an entire
      family for 21 years.
   v) It was not credible that a man for whom  the  appellant's  father  had
      ceased working some  30  years  earlier  would  fund  the  appellant's
      journey to the UK.
  vi) He did not find credible the appellant's explanation that  his  father
      had been trying to obtain registration between 1980 and 1997 when  the
      registration scheme was only established in 1996.
 vii) It was not credible that the appellant's birth  would  not  have  been
      registered given that at the time of his birth,  free  healthcare  was
      available to all Bidoon until 1993.
viii) It was not credible that the appellant would be completely  illiterate
      because of lack of access by Bidoon to education,  when  the  evidence
      was that free education was available to all Bidoon whether registered
      or not, until 1987.
  ix) It was not credible, for reasons not challenged in the application for
      permission  to  appeal,  that  the  appellant  was   wanted   by   the
      authorities; findings adverse to the appellant in connection with  his
      claimed undocumented friend were not challenged  in  the  grounds  for
      permission to appeal.


   8. The core of the grounds relied upon in the appeal  before  me  is  the
      asserted failure of the judge to have regard to information  to  which
      he was directed in relation to the non-registration of  Bidoon,  which
      is an issue not considered in NM.  The  credibility  findings  of  the
      appellant are not significantly challenged  but  Mr  Winton  submitted
      that those findings would not necessarily have been  reached  had  the
      judge properly considered the background  material  to  which  he  was
      referred.


   9. The material relied upon by the appellant in support of the  assertion
      the First-tier Tribunal judge had failed to have  specific  regard  to
      the material before him in reaching his decision is  an  extract  from
      Prisoners of the Past Kuwaiti Bidun and the Burden of Statelessness, a
      Human Rights Watch report dated June 2011:


                   ".....The Central system to  resolve  Illegal  Resident's
                   Status, generally known as the Bidun  committee,  is  the
                   sole government body through which Bidun can register and
                   see resolution of their claims for  Kuwaiti  citizenship.
                   The committee's procedures are opaque and applicants  may
                   never be told the reason for non-review, delay or  denial
                   of nationality.  Nor  can  the  Bidun  challenge  matters
                   relating to their citizenship claims  or  status  through
                   the judicial system. A 1990 law governing  the  judiciary
                   took away  the  court's  jurisdiction  over  all  matters
                   relating t national  sovereignty,  including  citizenship
                   claims as well as administrative decisions  to  deny  the
                   Bidun temporary travel  documents,  or  other  government
                   documentation....for  these  reasons,  at  least  106,000
                   claims for nationality remain unresolved within the Bidun
                   committee.
                   ....
                   Today's  Bidun  include  those  who  were  eligible   for
                   nationality under the Nationality Law but who  failed  to
                   complete the application procedures by  1960  during  the
                   initial  registration  efforts  that  preceded   Kuwait's
                   independence[1]. Following passage of the Nationality Law
                   Kuwait's government still granted Bidun residency rights,
                   equal employment opportunities, and full access to social
                   services that included free education and health care[2].
                   In effect, except for their lack of  voting  rights,  the
                   government treated them as equal to Kuwaiti citizens....
                   ....
                   Security cards must be  renewed  either  yearly  or  once
                   every two years, depending on the  class  of  card.  Some
                   Bidun reported that they could  renew  their  cards,  and
                   those of their  offspring,  simply  by  presenting  their
                   previous cards and documents proving  their  registration
                   in the 1965 census or residence  in  Kuwait  before  that
                   time.  Other  Bidun  said  that  they  had   to   undergo
                   interviews  each  time  they  wished   to   renew   their
                   cards......"


  10. In reaching its decision NM had regard to the HRW report Prisoners  of
      the Past, June 2011 - see paragraphs 27 to 45 of NM and  records  that
      the country expert, who gave  evidence  in  NM,  "in  many  respects",
      endorsed that report.  In [104] the Upper Tribunal held:


                  "It must be assumed  that  Bidoon  who  did  not  register
                  between 1996 and 2000, and hence did not  obtain  security
                  cards, are as a consequence  undocumented  Bidoon,  though
                  this must be seen in the context of the evidence that most
                  Bidoon carry security cards."


        11. The essential core matter relied upon by the appellant is  that
            the failure of the First-tier Tribunal judge  to  consider  the
            HRW report impacted adversely on findings  on  the  appellant's
            credibility and thus the overall  conclusion.  The  significant
            difficulty with this submission is that  the  findings  by  the
            judge on the  assistance  given  by  the  appellant's  father's
            former employer are findings that  were  plainly  open  to  the
            judge on the evidence before  him.  His  finding  that  it  was
            incredible that a man for whom the  appellant's  father  worked
            for 10 years would continue for 21 years  to  meet  the  living
            costs of the family and then also pay the  costs  of  smuggling
            the appellant to the UK was entirely open to him. The disbelief
            of the appellant's claimed lack  of  education  and  access  to
            health care was, in  the  context  of  NM  and  the  background
            evidence, entirely open to him.


        12. The judge referred to and considered  the  appellant's  account
            ([22]) that the father was refused registration because he  was
            not included in the 1965 census and that in 1997 he was refused
            because the authorities had no information about him,  yet  the
            family had lived in Sulaibiya in rented  accommodation  for  17
            years. It is correct that the judge (in [16])  states  that  he
            was not referred to "any evidence which indicated  that  Bidoon
            who were not included in the 1965 census were  not  allowed  to
            register with the Executive Committee between 1996 and 2000 and
            were thus denied security  cards".  But  there  was  none.  The
            evidence which it is stated was referred to appears in the  HRW
            June 2011 report referred to above. That report was  considered
            in NM. It does not state that those who were  not  included  in
            the 1965 census were not allowed to register.


        13. It was not the  appellant's  case  that  his  family  had  held
            documentation but renewal had been denied; nor was it his  case
            that he had been refused and not told the reason; nor  that  he
            had had some education  but  this  had  ceased;  nor  that  the
            proposed reforms referred to in NM had  not  been  implemented.
            The First-tier Tribunal judge considered the  evidence  overall
            and reached findings that were  open  to  him.  the  background
            evidence does not support the appellant's contention  regarding
            the 1965 census but the findings overall  do  not  support  the
            appellant's contention that he is undocumented.


        14. There  is  no  material  error  of  law  in  the  findings  and
            conclusion of the First-tier Tribunal judge.


          Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

     I do not set aside  the  decision;  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal judge stands, dismissing the appeal.



                                    Date 16th January 2018
[pic]


Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
-----------------------
[1] Human Rights Watch, the Bedoons of Kuwait: citizens without citizenship
(New York: Human Rights Watch, 1995)
[2] Anh Nga Longva Walls Built on Sand: Migration, Exclusion, and Society
in Kuwait (Oxford: Westview Press, 1997)

