
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12558/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 10 November 2017                       |On 27 November 2017               |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between

                                     t m
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms E Harris, Counsel instructed by Nag Law
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Sri Lanka born on [ ] 1997.  She arrived
    in the United Kingdom pursuant to a student  visa  accompanied  by  her
    husband and young daughter on 21  January  2010.   The  Appellant  then
    overstayed following the expiry of her leave and applied for  leave  to
    remain outside the Rules on 19 September 2014, an application which was
    refused on 17 December 2014.  On 26 November 2015 the Appellant applied
    for residency under the EEA Regulations as a family member of her  aunt
    who lived in France.  The outcome of this application was disputed, the
    Appellant claiming that the application was withdrawn due to a lack  of
    required  documentation  and  the   Respondent   asserting   that   the
    application was dismissed.  The Appellant, her husband and  child  were
    served with removal papers as overstayers on  17  February  2016.   The
    Appellant claimed asylum on 10 May 2016 when she attended  a  screening
    interview.

 2. The basis of her claim is that both she and her husband were  suspected
    of being involved with the LTTE as  a  consequence  of  the  fact  that
    whilst living in Sri Lanka they had  a  Tamil  employee  who  had  been
    abducted by the Sri  Lankan  authorities  on  16  December  2008.   The
    Appellant and her husband had witnessed this and  reported  it  to  the
    police but there was no progress. Their employee's wife  contacted  the
    Appellant asking for her to provide a statement to the  LLRC,  that  is
    the Lessons Learned and Reconciliation Committee.  The Appellant did so
    on 11 February 2009.  On 14 February 2009 the  Appellant  asserts  that
    their shop was attacked and its windows smashed and on 21 February 2009
    the Appellant's husband was physically assaulted.  The couple  believed
    that their assailants were acting under the instructions of the  former
    head of the Sri Lankan armed forces and now Government Minister, Sarath
    Fonseka and that they had been told this by the Appellant's father  who
    was a retired police officer who had retained contacts within  the  Sri
    Lankan police.  The couple closed their shop, moved to the  Appellant's
    mother's home in a different part of Sri  Lanka  and  then  decided  to
    leave the country.

 3. The Appellant's application was refused on  6  November  2016  and  her
    appeal against this  decision  came  before  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Keith for hearing on 12 May 2017.  In a decision  and  reasons
    promulgated on 1 June 2016 he dismissed the appeal.  An application for
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was made on 14 June 2017  on
    three grounds.

 4. First, that the judge's approach to the assessment  of  documents  from
    the court and from an attorney in Sri  Lanka  was  flawed  and  unfair.
    Prior to the hearing on 20 December 2016 the  Respondent  had  made  an
    application to adjourn the appeal in order to  verify  court  documents
    that had been produced by the Appellant, it  being  asserted  that  the
    authorities  were  interested  in  prosecuting  the  Appellant   as   a
    consequence of her evidence to the LLRC.  However there was no document
    verification report and at the substantive hearing the  Respondent  was
    not in a position to verify the documents or otherwise.  The judge  was
    given a copy of the Respondent's country information which indicated at
    paragraph 2.2.1 that as recently as March 2017 the Secretary  of  State
    still indicated that "decision-makers should note  that  staff  at  the
    British High Commission in Colombo are in  a  position  to  respond  to
    requests from UK asylum decision-makers to verify the  authenticity  of
    official documents".  The judge in this case failed to engage with  the
    history of that aspect of the appeal.  It was further asserted that the
    judge erred at [61] in his  findings  regarding  the  letter  from  the
    Appellant's attorney and as to the court documents, in that  he  failed
    to provide  reasons  for  not  accepting  this  evidence,  particularly
    bearing in mind that the Respondent had  a  reasonable  opportunity  to
    verify these details but failed so to do.  It  was  asserted  that  the
    judge's finding that the attorney's letter is general and not  entirely
    consistent with the Appellant's evidence is not supported upon a  close
    reading of the letter.  It  was  submitted  that  the  judge  erred  in
    attaching more weight  to  a  generic  letter  from  the  British  High
    Commission dated 2  November  2015,  which  asserts  that  out  of  130
    verifications carried out since June 2014 there were only two where the
    documents were genuine.  The judge's error was not to engage  with  any
    of the criticisms of this evidence made on  behalf  of  the  Appellant.
    Reliance was also based on the judge's approach to plausibility praying
    in aid the decision in Y [2006] EWCA Civ 1233.

 5. The second ground of appeal asserted that the judge erred in failing to
    consider relevant evidence and that there was an absence of  reasoning.
    This was particularised in relation to [57] of  the  judge's  decision,
    where the judge considered  that  the  Appellant's  affidavit  made  no
    express reference to Mr Fonseka and was not witnessed by a human rights
    organisation, but in so doing failed to consider the entirety  of  [11]
    of the affidavit where reference is made to the commander in  chief  of
    the army who at that time was  General  Fonseka.   There  were  further
    background references to him at [8] of the skeleton argument  and  [16]
    of the Appellant's witness statement.  At [58] the judge's finding that
    the affidavit provided no basis for  linking  the  abduction  of  their
    Tamil employee with state actors  is  unsustainable  in  light  of  the
    evidence as set out in the affidavit that the former commander in chief
    of the army and  inspector  general  of  the  Sri  Lankan  Police  were
    believed to be behind that abduction.  The finding by  the  judge  that
    the affidavit was not witnessed in front of a human rights organisation
    fails to take  into  account  the  fact  that  the  Appellant  provided
    evidence to the LLRC.  It was submitted as a consequence  of  the  fact
    that the Appellant has given evidence to the  LLRC  she  fell  squarely
    within the risk categories outlined in GJ & Others [2013] UKUT 00319 at
    356(7)(c).

 6. The third ground of appeal asserted that the judge failed  to  consider
    and apply the judgment of the Court of Appeal  in  MA  (Pakistan)[2016]
    EWCA Civ 705 when making findings of fact in respect of the Appellant's
    daughter who had resided in the United  Kingdom  for  more  than  seven
    years.  It was submitted that the judge's findings in  respect  of  the
    Appellant's daughter lacked reasoning and were speculative.  There  was
    no consideration of her own wishes as outlined in  her  letter  to  the
    court in the second Appellant's bundle at page 23 and a failure by  the
    judge to balance or consider the evidence in support of  her  residence
    in the UK including from a Reverend from the Church of England (page 61
    of the Appellant's second bundle), her primary school (page 65  of  the
    Appellant's second bundle) and  references  from  the  community.   The
    error was material because the guidance set out in  MA  (Pakistan)  had
    not been considered as part of the  proportionality  exercise  and  the
    judge further erred in failing to consider Section 117B(6) of the  NIAA
    2002, namely that the public interest did not require  the  Appellant's
    removal where it would not be reasonable to expect her child to leave.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Grant-Hutchison on 20 September 2017 essentially only  in  relation  to
    the third ground of appeal i.e. the  manner  in  which  the  judge  had
    assessed the reasonableness of the  Appellant's  daughter  leaving  the
    United Kingdom.

 8.  The  Appellant's  representatives  then  sought  to  make  a   renewed
    application for permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  and  in  a
    decision dated 11 October 2017 Upper Tribunal  Judge  Lindsley  granted
    permission to appeal on all grounds:

         "It is accepted that the Appellant witnessed the abduction  of  her
         employee  at  paragraph  59.   The  asylum  grounds  are  arguable,
         although consideration should be given to VT (Article 22 Procedures
         Directive  -  confidentiality)  Sri  Lanka  [2017]  UKUT  368  when
         considering what role the Secretary of State properly had to verify
         the documents provided to her."

     Hearing

 9. At the hearing before me the Appellant was represented by Ms Harris  of
    Counsel.  She sought to rely on all the grounds of appeal submitting in
    respect of ground 1: this was based on the judgment in PJ  (Sri  Lanka)
    2014 EWCA Civ 1011 which was not referred to by the judge at all.   The
    duty upon the judge was to consider the consequences and  prejudice  to
    the Appellant of  the  Respondent's  failure  to  seek  to  verify  the
    documents from Sri Lanka viz the court documents and the affidavit from
    the Appellant's lawyer.  The judge  further  erred  in  asserting  that
    there was an inconsistency when there was none in respect of the letter
    from the Appellant's lawyer and in  attaching  weight  to  the  generic
    evidence from the  British  High  Commission  which  was  already  over
    eighteen months old at the date of the hearing and was very limited  in
    its scope.  There was an absence of evidence as to the  information  as
    to what happens to the verifications nor as to  how  verifications  are
    conducted and whether it was via the intelligence  services,  i.e.  the
    very people the Appellant fears persecution  from.   Ms  Harris  relied
    upon [10] of the grounds which relates to [59] and [61] of the  judge's
    decision and the judge's approach to the issue of plausibility.

10. Ms Harris asserted in relation to the second ground of appeal that  the
    judge had failed to take account of a material fact  and  that  is  the
    reference indirectly to Commander Fonseka in the Appellant's  affidavit
    at page 16, paragraph 11 and consequently there was  no  inconsistency.
    She submitted that it is clear from the country guidance decision in GJ
    that those who have given evidence to the LLRC are considered to be  at
    risk.  Consequently the Appellant fits within 356(7)(c) of GJ and there
    will be a high likelihood of the risk of detention  and  torture.   The
    judge failed to provide any reasons why he did not accept the Appellant
    would be at risk on return to Sri Lanka.

11. In relation to the third ground, Ms Harris  submitted  that  the  judge
    simply failed to apply MA (Pakistan) or even  refer  to  the  Court  of
    Appeal's guidance in that case. Whilst at [23] the judge  recorded  the
    child was now over 8 years old and again at [66] and there is reference
    to Section 55 of the 2009  Act,  there  was  no  recognition  that  the
    Appellant's daughter had resided in the UK for longer than seven  years
    and no weight was consequently attached  to  that  factor.   There  was
    further no evidence in support of the judge's contention at  [67]  that
    the Appellant's daughter was in contact with her  grandparents  in  Sri
    Lanka.  This was simply not an issue in respect of which  evidence  was
    given, thus the judge's finding was entirely speculative.

12. In his  submissions  Mr  Melvin  asserted  that  the  judge  had  dealt
    adequately with the documents before  him  i.e.  the  letter  from  the
    Appellant's attorney and from the court and this was at  [56]  onwards.
    The judge was entitled to rely on the evidence from  the  British  High
    Commission as to the verification process and the judge had  in  effect
    applied the decision in Tanveer Ahmed and looked at all the evidence in
    the round.  Mr Melvin submitted that  in  respect  of  the  Appellant's
    affidavit submitted to the LLRC the judge  had  dealt  adequately  with
    that evidence at [55] to [58] of the decision.  He submitted  that  the
    submission of an affidavit to the LLRC does not mean that the Appellant
    would automatically fall within the GJ  risk  categories,  particularly
    given that the LLRC have not pursued the  Appellant's  complaint  about
    the abduction of her Tamil employee further in light of the  fact  that
    the Appellant failed to provide further details when  asked  for  them.
    Mr Melvin submitted that the judge's conclusions at [59] were  open  to
    him to make.

13. In relation to the third ground of appeal Mr Melvin submitted  that  it
    was clear that the judge had considered the best interests of the child
    i.e. the Appellant's daughter, their son being only  3  years  of  age.
    The judge's findings were open to him and were  adequate  in  order  to
    deal with the Article 8 issue.

14. Ms Harris briefly responded to Mr Melvin's submissions.

Decision

15. I find material errors of law in the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Keith.  I announced my decision at the hearing.  I  now  give  my
    reasons.

16. In my considered view the matters set out in the grounds of  appeal  in
    respect of which permission was ultimately granted on all grounds raise
    errors of law in the judge's decision.  In particular, the  judge  fell
    into error in the manner in which he considered the documents from  Sri
    Lanka.  On the face of the judge's findings at [56] through to [61] the
    judge conducts  a  balancing  exercise.   At  [57]  however  the  judge
    questions the circumstances in which the  Appellant  had  provided  her
    statement on the erroneous basis that there  was  no  reference  to  Mr
    Fonseka within the Appellant's affidavit to the LLRC.  However, as [11]
    of the grounds of appeal makes clear, the judge in so doing  overlooked
    the reference by the  Appellant  in  [11]  of  that  affidavit  to  the
    commander in chief of the army who was, at that time, General  Fonseka.
    The judge at [58] found that, given that the Appellant did not  provide
    a more detailed statement, the extent to  which  the  LLRC  would  have
    placed reliance on  her  initial  affidavit  is  likely  to  have  been
    extremely limited.  However in so  finding  the  judge  fails  to  take
    account of the fact that the material issue is the  perception  of  the
    Appellant by the Sri Lankan authorities given that she was prepared  to
    make a statement to the LLRC in the first place and  in  so  doing  may
    have fallen into the category of risk  set  out  at  356(7)(a)  of  the
    decision in GJ (Sri Lanka).

17. At [59] the judge expressly accepted that the Appellant  had  witnessed
    the abduction of her Tamil employee.  He then went on to  consider  the
    court documents including a warrant for the Appellant's  arrest  issued
    in March 2011.  At [61]  the  judge  noted  that  the  court  documents
    specifically named the Appellant.  He then considered the  letter  from
    the  Appellant's  attorney,  Ms  Nayana  Nirantha  at  page  3  of  the
    Appellant's bundle and found  that  it  was  generalised  and  was  not
    entirely consistent with  the  Appellant's  account  in  terms  of  the
    sequence of events.  The judge therefore attached limited weight to the
    letter and weighed against it the generic  evidence  from  the  British
    High Commission.  In respect of the court documents he held:

         "I did not regard the court documents as reliable evidence even  to
         the lower evidential standard of the Appellant being the subject of
         an arrest warrant or prosecution"

    and said:

         "It was not plausible that the Appellant having not responded to  a
         request from the LLRC to provide a detailed statement  in  November
         2010,  the  Sri  Lankan  authorities  would  then  have  progressed
         prosecution in March 2011".

    I find the judge's reasoning process in respect of these key  documents
    to be inadequate in light of the potential effect  of  those  documents
    and  the  fact  that  when  considered  cumulatively,  clearly  provide
    corroboration of the Appellant's claim.  The  judge's  approach  rather
    was to consider them individually and reject them individually.

18. Lastly, I turn to the failure by the judge to apply the guidance in  MA
    (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA Civ  705  in  relation  to  the  fact  that  the
    Appellant's daughter has resided in the United Kingdom  for  more  than
    seven years.  Ms Harris also submitted, and I accept,  that  the  judge
    also failed to consider Section 117B(6) of the NIAA 2002.  This  aspect
    of the decision is at [66] and [67] where the judge took  into  account
    section 55 of the 2009 Act and noted that the Appellant's daughter  was
    8  years  of  age.   There  was  in  fact  no  consideration   of   the
    reasonableness  of  her  return  whatsoever.   That  is  a  clear   and
    fundamental error of law in the decision of the judge.  Consequently  I
    find the matters raised in all three grounds of appeal to be made  out.



Directions

      1) The appeal is remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal  sitting  at
         York House for a hearing de novo.

      2) The hearing should  be  listed  for  two  hours  with  a  Sinhalese
         interpreter.

      3) Whilst the hearing is de novo I preserve two  of  the  findings  of
         fact which survive the errors of law in the  judge's  decision  viz
         that the Appellant witnessed the abduction of  her  Tamil  employee
         and that she gave evidence in the form of an affidavit to the  LLRC
         dated 11 February 2009.



Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed and remitted for a hearing de novo  before  the  First
tier Tribunal.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.





Signed   Rebecca Chapman                     Date 24.11.17


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman
