
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12085/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Oral Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 29 January 2019                       |On 26 March 2019                   |
|                                         |                                   |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JORDAN


                                   Between

                                 Zahoor [S]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S. Iengar of Counsel, SMA Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T. Lindsay, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan who was  born  on  1  January
    1990.  He appeals against the decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  D
    Barker heard at Hatton Cross on 10 August 2018 but made the subject  of
    his determination on 11 September 2018.

 2. The issue before me is confined to a  single  issue  and  that  is  the
    decision of the judge to refuse to grant an adjournment.  It  is  dealt
    with simply in paragraph 25 of the determination in which it is said an
    application was made for an adjournment in order to obtain medical  and
    psychiatric evidence and obtain legal aid for this.

         "The issue raised on the basis of  the  documents  which  had  been
         presented to the Tribunal this morning and in particular the letter
         to the doctor  dated  July  2018  which  included  details  of  the
         medication prescribed.  No arrangement had been  made  for  such  a
         report but it is argued that it was  relevant  to  the  appellant's
         claim.  The applicant was opposed by the Home  Office.   I  retired
         and  considered  the  representations.   The  relevant  Rules  were
         considered and the application for adjournment was refused."

 3. Clearly there are no reasons provided by the judge  for  refusing  that
    adjournment.  It is however to be noted that the grounds of  appeal  to
    the Upper Tribunal were dismissed by the First-tier Tribunal Judge  and
    then allowed by the grant of permission by the Upper Tribunal Judge  in
    circumstances where they took a very different view as  to  whether  or
    not an adjournment should have been  or  might  have  been  the  proper
    outcome.  It is therefore necessary for me to set out  in  some  detail
    the circumstances which give rise to this issue before me.

 4. Reliance is made on behalf of the appellant by Ms Iengar  on  questions
    and answers that were provided in  the  substantive  interview  and  in
    particular questions 2, 3 and 23 of  the  interview.   In  my  judgment
    those do not materially assist in that the appellant was asked  whether
    he had any medical conditions and he said that he had severe  headaches
    since he came to the country, he felt dizzy and he got faint  as  well.
    He was asked, 'Have you seen a doctor or anyone about  this?'  and  the
    response by the appellant was, 'Nobody told me to see  a  doctor  about
    it.'  The interviewer correctly said, 'You may  want  to  seek  medical
    help if you are in pain and going dizzy.'

 5. I do not think that gives rise to a claim that either the Secretary  of
    State or the interviewer should have  been  alerted  to  an  underlying
    medical condition or, indeed, on page 23 of the interview, the comment,
    'I have nightmares and I feel scared' does not materially add  to  that
    issue.  Consequently, when the  matter  was  decided  by  the  decision
    maker, and apart from a reference at paragraph 98 to  headaches,  there
    was nothing to alert the decision maker that there  was  an  underlying
    mental or psychiatric difficulty.  Therefore, it was not  possible  for
    the decision maker in the decision letter to  say  any  more  than  was
    said.

 6. The grounds of appeal to the Tribunal only refer to Articles  2,  3,  5
    and  8  make  no  substantive  claim  that  there  was  an   underlying
    psychiatric difficulty.

 7. The matter then came before the judge.   He  had  before  him  a  small
    bundle of material.  It is important  to  set  out  the  chronology  of
    events.  There is a referral letter  dated  17  April  2018  where  the
    Laburnum Health Centre referred the appellant to the NELFT  Access  and
    Assessment Service.   This  made  reference  to  the  appellant  having
    difficulties with sleeping, feeling sad and anxious and where the issue
    was  raised  as  to  whether  he  was  suffering  from  PTSD  or  major
    depression.  That referral was contained in a  history  set  out  in  a
    letter from the Laburnum Health Centre dated 9  July  2018,  where  the
    writer, when referring  the  patient  to  another  GP,  summarised  his
    history.  It was described then as probable PTSD and reference was made
    to his being currently managed in primary care for PTSD and a  referral
    to local psychiatric services in June 2018.  However, the  outcome  was
    still awaited.

 8. There then followed in the bundle a letter from St Luke's Health Centre
    to the appellant's new solicitors where his history was  recorded,  the
    fact that he was on medication and that he had been recently moved to a
    new practice as a result of relocation and  had  only  been  registered
    with St Luke's in July 2018.  The  letter  written  by  the  St  Luke's
    Health Centre is dated  8  August  2018.   He  was  registered  at  the
    practice only some two weeks before on 20 July  2018  and  the  hearing
    took  place  on  10  August  2018.   Consequently,  there  was   little
    opportunity for the appellant's current solicitors, or indeed St Luke's
    Health Centre, to make any realistic appraisal of the appellant.

 9. There were however indications that there  was  something  wrong.   The
    correspondence refers to a June 2018 referral for psychiatric  services
    and also deals with an A&E printout suggesting perhaps that  there  had
    been an incident which had required his admission  to  the  Accident  &
    Emergency Department.  On that basis there was very little  before  the
    judge to say that  there  was  something  that  needed  to  be  further
    pursued; although there was, as I suggested in argument,  the  germ  of
    the argument but no more.  However, we  have  now  got  a  considerably
    greater amount of material in the form of a small bundle.  It  sheds  a
    considerable amount of additional light and,  tellingly,  there  was  a
    report of  14  August  2018  where  there  was  a  diagnosis  of  PTSD.
    Importantly, the assessment was made on 6 June 2018  and  predates  the
    hearing before the First-tier Tribunal Judge, although of course he was
    entirely unaware of it.

10. The letter postdates his hearing although predates the promulgation  of
    the determination but a copy of the letter was not apparently  sent  on
    to the judge following that hearing.  It speaks of a diagnosis of  PTSD
    and incidents of self-harm.  It deals with insomnia and anxiety as well
    as depression and it speaks  of  therapy  being  required  and  therapy
    indeed  having  been  organised  by  Havering  Psychological  Services.
    Consequently, there was material that could have been available to  the
    judge about the depths of the appellant's mental health difficulties.

11. There follows a number of other documents, one dated 25  October  2018,
    making a reference to cogitative behavioural therapy and a letter of 14
    November 2018 which deals with an admission that must have taken  place
    on 12 or 13 November 2018, following an incident  where  the  appellant
    had overdosed and required admission to a psychiatric unit for a period
    of ten days between 17 and 27 November.  There is also a  letter  dated
    12 December 2018 in which, whilst it is not a  medical  report  in  its
    fullest sense, speaks of the history of self-harm and  the  psychiatric
    difficulties faced by the appellant.   Whilst  some  of  this  material
    postdates the decision, it plainly sheds  light  upon  the  appellant's
    psychiatric condition and in particular whether he was suffering at any
    material time from PTSD.

12. That, in my judgment is bound to be a material consideration  when  one
    considers issues of credibility.  When one looks at the  determination,
    it is clear that the judge made an adverse credibility finding  and  he
    did so very much on the basis of his assessment of  the  appellant  and
    the way he gave evidence.  That may in part have been influenced by the
    judge's finding that there was little that supported a need  for  there
    to be further exploration of his psychiatric condition.

13. For these reasons I have come to the conclusion that,  whilst  this  is
    material which postdates the decision,  it  is  material  which  I  can
    properly take into account as shedding light on what the  position  was
    at the time the determination was made.

14. There has still not been a psychiatric report, but I am told that  this
    is more likely than not because the funding is not available  for  that
    at present.  The appellant himself is not in a position to fund it  out
    of his own resources. The  material  that  has  been  now  adduced  was
    material which, had the judge known of  it,  would  have  affected  his
    decision on the adjournment.  I find that this amounts to an  error  of
    law, notwithstanding the fact that the Judge was  entirely  unaware  of
    it.

15. For these reasons, I consider that the decision made by the  judge  not
    to allow the medical evidence to be further investigated amounted to an
    error of law, albeit one which was unwittingly conducted by the  judge.
    In those circumstances I set  aside  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and direct that the matter be reheard.

DECISION

The First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  made  a  material  error  of  law  and  the
determination is set aside.

The de novo hearing will be re-made in the First-tier Tribunal.


                                                               ANDREW JORDAN
                                          DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                                        Date:  20 March 2019

