

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/12131/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                   |Decision and Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 1 November 2019                  |On 05 November 2019                   |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

                                     M A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the appellant:      Mr Hussain, Counsel
For the respondent:     Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI2008/269) an Anonymity Order is made. Unless the Upper Tribunal or  Court
orders otherwise, no report of any proceedings or any  form  of  publication
thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the original  Appellant.  This
prohibition applies to, amongst others, all parties.


Introduction

       1. The appellant is a citizen of Sudan, who claims  to  be  from  the
          Berti tribe.  His claim for asylum was refused by  the  respondent
          ('the SSHD') in a decision dated 26 October 2016 and  he  appealed
          against this decision to the First-tier Tribunal ('FTT').

       2. In a decision sent on  10  August  2018,  the  FTT  dismissed  the
          appeal on protection and  human  rights  grounds.   Permission  to
          appeal to the Upper Tribunal ('UT') was initially refused  by  FTT
          Judge Stephen Smith, before being granted by UT Judge  C  Lane  on
          15 July 2019.

Appeal to the UT

       3. The renewal grounds of appeal were drafted by Mr Hussain  and  are
          as follows:


              i) The FTT failed to consider the country expert  evidence  of
                 Ms  Crowther  when  considering  the  plausibility  of  the
                 appellant's account;


             ii) When considering whether in any event (if it  was  accepted
                 that the appellant is  Berti)  he  would  face  prospective
                 risk, the FTT erred in law in departing from  the  relevant
                 country guidance.

       4. The SSHD did not submit a rule 24 notice.

       5. At the beginning of the hearing before  me,  Mr  Hussain  accepted
          that it was only  necessary  to  address  ground  two  if  he  was
          successful on  ground  one.   Mr  Hussain  merely  relied  on  his
          grounds of appeal and invited me to find that the  FTT  failed  to
          engage with Ms Crowther's report.  Mr Diwnycz submitted  that  the
          decision was adequately reasoned and the appeal against it  should
          be dismissed.

       6. In his reply, Mr Hussain faintly  raised  a  new  matter  alleging
          that the FTT  had  engaged  in  speculation,  that  had  not  been
          pleaded and did not form any part of his earlier submissions.   It
          was far too late to raise this and I need say no more about it.

Error of law discussion

       7. The FTT clearly acknowledged at [39] that "the  appellant  gave  a
          broadly consistent account which is  prima  facie  plausible  when
          considering  country  evidence.   These   features   enhance   his
          credibility."  This must be read in the  context  of  the  country
          background  evidence  the  FTT  had  already  referred  to.   This
          included two country expert reports from Dr Verney and a  separate
          report from  Ms  Crother  dated  25  July  2018.   The  latter  is
          summarised in some detail at [33] and the FTT expressly  noted  Ms
          Crowther's conclusion that the appellant's account  is  consistent
          with the 'objective evidence'.


       8. The FTT then turned its attention  at  [40]  to  several  features
          which  significantly  undermined  the   appellant's   credibility.
          These are set out at (a) to (f) of [40].  The FTT judge  concluded
          at [41] that having considered all the evidence in the  round  and
          having noted aspects of the case  that  supported  the  appellant,
          that he was not satisfied to the low standard of  proof  that  the
          appellant is Berti or had come to the  adverse  attention  of  the
          authorities in Sudan.

       9. Mr Hussain's criticism of the  FTT  credibility  findings  focuses
          entirely  upon  the  failure  to  address  Ms  Crowther's   report
          specifically, when Dr Verney's report was addressed at [40e].   Mr
          Hussain submitted that the FTT excluded  the  supportive  material
          from Ms Crowther and this constitutes an error of law.   I  accept
          that Ms  Crowther's  report  explains  at  [15-24]  that  material
          aspects  of  the  appellant's  account  are  consistent  with  the
          country  background  materials,  and   is   therefore   plausible.
          However, the FTT expressly accepted that the  appellant's  account
          was plausible and took this into account at  [39]  and  [41]  when
          making credibility findings.  There was therefore no  need  to  go
          into any further detail: in effect Ms  Crowther's  conclusions  on
          plausibility  were  accepted  and  balanced  with  other  matters.
          Having referred to Ms Crowther's report  at  [33],  it  cannot  be
          assumed that  her  evidence  was  left  out  of  account.   In  my
          judgment,  when  the  decision  is  read  as  a  whole,  the   FTT
          adequately addressed the country expert  evidence  as  part  of  a
          holistic credibility assessment.  It follows that I do not  accept
          that the first ground of appeal is made out.

      10. Mr Hussain accepted that in these circumstances the second  ground
          of appeal must fail, as it entirely depends upon  the  success  of
          the first.

Decision

      11. The decision of the FTT did not involve the making of  a  material
          error of law and is not set aside.



Signed:  UTJ Plimmer

Ms M. Plimmer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date:
1 November 2019

