
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12951/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On: 7 January 2020                   |On: 14 January 2020                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                                     SS
                         (Anonymity Direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     In Person
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a citizen of India born on 9 May 1981.  He  has  been
      given permission to appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal
      Judge  Trevaskis  dismissing  his  appeal  against  the   respondent's
      decision to refuse his asylum and human rights claim.

   2. The appellant married his wife, S, in India in  a  traditional  Muslim
      marriage, on 9 August 2009. On 1 December 2010 he came to the UK  with
      a visa valid until 30 January 2012 and was granted further periods  of
      leave as a Tier 2 migrant until 14 March 2019, returning to India  for
      a few days in September/October 2012. On 10  March  2017  he  made  an
      asylum claim, as a result of which his leave was curtailed. His  claim
      was refused on 19 September 2017.

   3. The appellant's asylum claim was made on  the  basis  that  he  feared
      being arrested and prosecuted under section 498A of the  Indian  Penal
      Code on false charges laid by  his  former  wife  and  her  family  in
      revenge for him refusing to bring her  to  the  UK  to  join  him  and
      divorcing her by Talaq pronouncement. The appellant divorced his  wife
      by pronouncing Talaq on 2 March 2012 following harassment from her and
      her family. After the divorce, his ex-wife posted  propaganda  against
      him on social media and her brothers called him  and  threatened  him,
      telling him to return  to  India  and  reconcile  with  her.  He  also
      received threats from S's father's friend in the  UK  and  he  made  a
      formal complaint to the police in the UK. In 2012 he returned to India
      for his father's funeral but was unable to attend due to his ex-wife's
      harassment. In 2012 his ex-wife submitted an FIR against him and filed
      court proceedings against him and his mother under section 489A of the
      Indian Penal Code, claiming that he had subjected her to cruelty. On 5
      December 2012 his mother and sister  were  arrested.  His  sister  was
      released as she was pregnant, but his mother remained in custody until
      she was  bailed  on  her  second  attempt.  She  lost  her  job  as  a
      superintendent in the magistrates' court in the meantime  due  to  her
      arrest. An arrest warrant was issued for the appellant's arrest and he
      was denied renewal of his passport as a result. There was  a  "lookout
      circular" issued to all international airports in India and  he  would
      be arrested on return. He would not receive a fair trial  because  S's
      father was politically well-connected and influential. His extradition
      to India had also been requested of the UK government.

   4. In  the  decision  refusing  the  appellant's  claim,  the  respondent
      declined to accord weight to the numerous documents he had produced in
      support of his claim and did not accept that his ex-wife had influence
      over his passport renewal or other matters. The respondent  considered
      in any event that the appellant's fear related to prosecution and  not
      persecution and considered that the appellant could  return  to  India
      and fight his case through the correct legal channels. The  respondent
      considered that the appellant's fear of  his  ex-wife's  brothers  was
      speculative and that in any event there was sufficiency of  protection
      available to him from the Indian authorities and that  he  could  also
      relocate to another part of India. The respondent did not accept  that
      the appellant was at risk in India and  considered  that  his  removal
      would not breach his human rights.

   5. The appellant appealed against that decision. His appeal was heard  on
      5 September 2019 before First-tier Tribunal Judge Trevaskis, following
      several adjournments granted to obtain  further  documentary  evidence
      from India. The appellant gave evidence before the judge, referring to
      the arrest warrant issued against  him  in  India  and  the  resulting
      refusal by the Indian High Commission to renew his passport, to his ex-
      wife's father being a close aide to the  Minister  for  Minorities  Mr
      Farouk, to a recording of a  Skype  conversation  involving  him,  his
      uncle, his  father-in-law,  his  ex-wife  and  the  rural  and  circle
      inspectors where he was  told  to  return  to  India  and  resume  his
      marriage and to his last contact with his  ex-wife  and  father-in-law
      being in 2014.

   6. Judge Trevaskis accorded weight to the documentary  evidence  relating
      to the court proceedings in India and accepted that  such  proceedings
      had been instigated against the appellant, although he noted that they
      had been stayed, that the arrest warrant had been stayed and that  the
      extradition application had not been granted. He considered  that  the
      background country evidence showed that there was due process  of  law
      in India and that the judiciary in India acknowledged the abuse of the
      legislation  under  which  charges  had  been  brought   against   the
      appellant. The judge concluded that the appellant  would  be  able  to
      return to India and defend the proceedings with the assistance of  the
      lawyer already instructed by his family. The judge did not accept that
      the evidence demonstrated that the appellant's  ex-wife's  family  had
      political influence through Mr  Farooq  which  would  enable  them  to
      manipulate the judicial process. The judge accorded no weight  to  the
      Skype transcript as it was only a small excerpt  of  the  conversation
      and was incomprehensible. He concluded that the appellant's  fear  did
      not amount to a fear of persecution within the meaning of the  Refugee
      Convention and rejected his claim that he would  not  receive  a  fair
      trial. He did not accept that the appellant was at risk on  return  to
      India and considered that his  removal  would  not  breach  his  human
      rights under Article 3 or 8 of the ECHR. He accordingly dismissed  the
      appeal on all grounds.

   7. The appellant sought permission to appeal  on  the  grounds  that  the
      judge had failed to consider the country expert report which had  been
      produced for the hearing; that the judge had failed to provide reasons
      why he rejected the appellant's explanation for the delay in  claiming
      asylum and why he found the appellant's evidence about  the  political
      influence of his ex-wife's family to be incredible; that  the  judge's
      assessment of credibility was erroneous and incomplete; that the judge
      failed to assess all the evidence in regard to fair trials and  police
      corruption; and that  there  had  been  an  inadequate  assessment  of
      internal relocation.

   8. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was refused in  the  First-
      tier Tribunal but was subsequently granted by the Upper Tribunal  with
      particular reference to the assessment of the expert evidence.

   9. At the hearing,  the  appellant  was  unrepresented  and  appeared  in
      person. Accordingly, Mr Avery made his submissions first. He submitted
      that the "expert report" referred to in the grounds was a report  from
      a practising lawyer in India who may well be an expert on the law  but
      did not have expertise on the  facts  of  the  case  and  provided  no
      reasons for the conclusions reached on the political influence of  the
      appellant's ex-wife's family. The  judge  was  clearly  alive  to  the
      evidence as he referred to it in his decision and the fact that he did
      not make specific findings on the report was immaterial as it did  not
      take the case any further. The appellant, in response, relied  on  the
      expert's explanation as to the abuse of section  498A  of  the  Indian
      Penal Code and submitted that the judge had failed to address that. He
      submitted further that the judge had failed to consider  his  evidence
      such as the Skype transcript which showed the conversation with police
      officers and confirmed that the purpose of the  lodging  of  the  case
      against him had been to make him return to India and  compromise  with
      his ex-wife.  The judge  failed  to  consider  that  his  ex-wife  had
      influenced the regional passport office so that they refused to  renew
      his passport. The judge was wrong to say that this  was  a  matter  of
      prosecution and not persecution.

Discussion and conclusions

  10. Although permission was granted on all grounds it is  plain  that  the
      main challenge considered to be arguable was the judge's assessment of
      the expert report. Indeed, that was  the  main  issue  argued  in  the
      appellant's renewed grounds. Having read the "expert  report",  to  be
      found at page 13 of the appellant's court bundle,  I  find  myself  in
      agreement with Judge Shaerf in his decision refusing permission in the
      First-tier Tribunal and with Mr Avery's submissions. It  is  the  case
      that the judge did not make specific findings on  the  report,  but  I
      agree with Mr Avery that that was clearly evidence he  considered  and
      took into account in making his overall findings, as he summarised the
      conclusions of the report at [40] and referred to the  submissions  of
      both parties in that regard at [51] and [54]. As Judge  Shaerf  found,
      and for the reasons he gave,  the  report  was  not  one  which  would
      properly be considered as a country expert report. Furthermore, as  Mr
      Avery submitted, the author's expertise lies in matters not in dispute
      and is of little or no assistance in assessing the  factual  basis  of
      the appellant's claim.

  11. As a practising lawyer in India, the expert is clearly in  a  position
      to explain how section 498A of  the  Indian  Penal  Code  is  misused.
      However, that was not a matter in dispute and Judge Trevaskis did  not
      find otherwise. He accepted that the  appellant  was  the  subject  of
      proceedings filed under section 498A and at [67] he  referred  to  the
      evidence produced by the respondent showing  that  the  abuse  of  the
      legislation was in  fact  acknowledged  by  the  judiciary  in  India.
      Indeed, paragraph 53 of the refusal  decision  refers  to  the  Indian
      Supreme Court re-evaluating how they dealt with 498A cases, given  the
      trend in abusing that provision. However, in so far as  the  appellant
      was claiming that his ex-wife's family would be able to manipulate the
      judicial process and succeed in making a false claim against him,  the
      "expert" does not explain how he was  in  a  position  to  provide  an
      expert opinion on the matter  and  provided  no  explanation  for  the
      opinion given at paragraph 4 and no identification of  the  source  of
      the information provided. The manner in which the report is  expressed
      (I refer by way of example to paragraphs 1.03, 3.01  and  4)  suggests
      that the opinion is far from objective and  relies  upon  the  account
      provided by the appellant. Accordingly I am in agreement with Mr Avery
      that the "expert report" takes matters no further  for  the  appellant
      and that any omission by the  judge  in  specifically  addressing  the
      report in his findings is immaterial. There is simply no merit in this
      ground of challenge.

  12. As for the other grounds, it seems to me  that  the  judge  gave  full
      consideration to all the evidence and made properly reasoned  findings
      on the evidence. Contrary to the appellant's submission before me, the
      judge specifically considered the Skype transcripts, at  [69]  of  his
      decision. Having read the transcripts myself, I find no error  in  his
      findings at [69] and conclude that he was perfectly entitled to accord
      the limited weight that he did to that evidence for the reasons given.
      At [66] the judge considered the documentary evidence relating to  the
      criminal proceedings in India and  the  application  for  extradition,
      noting that the proceedings had been stayed and that, in  relation  to
      the proposed extradition, there had been no further evidence from  the
      Indian authorities to substantiate the basis of  the  charges  against
      the appellant since a request was made by  the  Home  Office  in  July
      2017.   The judge considered  the  evidence  in  the  context  of  the
      background country  information  and  relevant  country  guidance  and
      provided full and proper  reasons  for  concluding  that  it  did  not
      support the appellant's claim that he would not receive a  fair  trial
      in India. The judge gave consideration to the appellant's  account  of
      the political influence of his ex-wife's family but  was  entitled  to
      conclude that that was not supported by any reliable evidence. He  was
      perfectly entitled to reject the  account  for  the  reasons  properly
      given.

  13. Accordingly it seems to me that the judge gave detailed  consideration
      to all  relevant  matters,  he  fully  engaged  with  the  documentary
      evidence and country evidence and he provided clear and cogent reasons
      for reaching the conclusions that he did. He  was  fully  entitled  to
      reach the conclusions that he did on risk on return to  India  and  to
      dismiss the appeal on the basis that he  did.  He  did  not  make  any
      errors of law in doing so.

DECISION

  14. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not  involve
      an error on a point of law. I do  not  set  aside  the  decision.  The
      decision to dismiss the appeal stands.




   Anonymity
   The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 13 of the Tribunal
   Procedure (First-tier Tribunal) (Immigration and  Asylum  Chamber)  Rules
   2014.  I continue that  order  (pursuant  to  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal
   Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).



Signed   [pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede                           Dated:  7 January
2020
