
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)
                                            Appeal Number: PA/12365/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House via Skype for Business   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 7 December 2020                            |On 31 December 2020           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH

                                   Between

                                     S O
                                                                   Appellant
                                    -and-

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr D Ball, Counsel instructed by Duncan Lewis Solicitors
For the Respondent: Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.

Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
An anonymity order was made by the  First-tier  Tribunal.   As  this  appeal
involves a protection claim, I consider it is appropriate to  continue  that
order.  Unless  and  until  a  Tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
Appellant is  granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.  This
direction applies, amongst others, to both parties. Failure to  comply  with
this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

                            DECISION AND REASONS


BACKGROUND

1. The Appellant appeals against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
   Mr J C Hamilton promulgated on 12 May 2020 ("the Decision"). By the
   Decision, the Judge dismissed the Appellant's appeal against the
   Respondent's decision dated 6 December 2019 refusing his protection and
   human rights claims.


2. The Appellant is a national of Ghana.  He arrived in the UK on 2 October
   2019 with a business visit visa.  He had asserted in the application form
   that he was married and had a child. Although he continued to say that
   this was the case when stopped on arrival, he says that this was a false
   assertion and that he was told to give that story by the person who
   completed the visa application.  The Appellant was refused entry at port.
    He was detained pending removal and claimed asylum on 4 October 2019.
   The Appellant claimed asylum on the basis of his sexuality - he claims to
   be gay.  He also claimed to have been the subject of exploitation/forced
   labour.  That claim was rejected by the National Referral Mechanism
   ("NRM") by a decision dated 28 October 2019.


3. The Judge found as a fact that the Appellant is not gay.  The
   Appellant's account of past ill-treatment was not accepted.  The Judge
   therefore went on to find that the Appellant would not be at risk on
   return to Ghana.  He also rejected the claims made based on Article 3 and
   8 ECHR.

4. The Appellant challenges the Decision on two grounds.  First he says
   that, although the Decision is "in many places patient and thoughtful",
   it is deficient in its reasoning, in particular as regards the
   relationship which the Appellant claims to have entered into in the UK in
   November 2019 with another (Nigerian) asylum seeker, "SMO".  Second, he
   says that the Judge's conclusion that "the Appellant's account of his
   developing awareness of his sexuality was vague, implausible and lacked
   emotional depth" ([53] of the Decision) was "not reasonably open to him".
    The Appellant draws attention to an extract from the Home Office's
   Asylum Policy Instruction entitled "Sexual Orientation in Asylum Claims"
   Version 6.0, 3 August 2016 ("the API") and contends that the Judge's
   approach runs counter to what is there said.

5. Permission to appeal was refused on the papers on 12 June 2020 by First-
   tier Tribunal Judge Davidge in the following terms so far as relevant:

         "..2.    I find that the grounds are not arguable.  The judge has
         reached his conclusions after careful and correct self-direction.
         As the grounds acknowledge this is a careful and thoughtful
         decision.  The grounds take no issue with the adverse credibility
         findings of the judge at paragraph 45 when he notes that contrary
         to the representative's skeleton argument the claim was not made on
         arrival and that the Appellant when interviewed at the immigration
         desk continued to assert that he was married consistently with the
         marriage certificate that he had produced in his visa application.
         A certificate which he subsequently asserted as false.  The
         Appellant's account of his mother reporting him to the police on
         account of his sexuality was not accepted.  The difficulties with
         the documentary evidence brought forward in that regard have been
         fairly dealt with by the judge.  The assertive evidence that the
         Appellant brought forward in the context of the claimed gay
         relationship was not determinative and contrary to the grounds it
         was open to the judge to conclude that the Appellant had not
         established that he was gay."

6. On renewal of the application to this Tribunal on the same grounds,
   permission to appeal was granted by UTJ O'Callaghan on 17 August 2020 on
   the basis that both grounds are arguable.


7. The Respondent filed a Rule 24 Reply on 2 October 2020 seeking to uphold
   the Decision. The Respondent pointed out that she had taken the position
   at the hearing in the First-tier Tribunal that, even if the Appellant was
   gay as claimed, he would not be at risk on return.   It was "regretted
   that the FTT did not go on to consider the claim at its highest given the
   Appellant's claimed sexuality was not conceded as being determinative of
   risk".  Neither Mr Ball nor his instructing solicitor had seen the Rule
   24 Reply.  I therefore read out the above as the remainder merely sought
   to uphold the Decision.  I heard submissions from Ms Everett as to the
   impact of the point made in the Rule 24 Reply.

8. The hearing before me was conducted via Skype for Business. Aside some
   minor issues with the sound on Mr Ball's connection (which did not affect
   his submissions), there were no technical difficulties and both parties
   confirmed that they were able to follow the proceedings throughout. I was
   helpfully provided with a consolidated Appellant's bundle for the hearing
   which included the bundle previously before the First-tier Tribunal. I
   refer to documents in that bundle as [AB/xx].

9. The matter comes before me to determine whether the Decision contains an
   error of law and, if I so conclude, to either re-make the decision or
   remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal to do so.

DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS

10. I take each of the grounds in order although there is a degree of
   overlap between the two and I will need to consider the two together in
   my conclusions in order to assess the Decision as a whole.


Ground 1

11. As I have indicated above, the person with whom the Appellant claims to
   be in a relationship (SMO) is himself an asylum seeker.  Presumably he
   seeks asylum also based on his sexuality although he does not say as much
   in his statement or letter dated 16 December 2019 ([AB/75]).  Neither
   representative was able to tell me whether SMO's own claim has been
   accepted.  The Appellant was also present remotely at the hearing but did
   not participate.  In addition to the statement/letter from SMO, written
   whilst both he and the Appellant were in detention, the Judge heard oral
   evidence from SMO.  He also had before him e-mails between the Appellant
   and SMO which he described at [78] of the Decision as "quite explicit".


12. The Judge considered this aspect of the Appellant's claim at [79] to
   [81] of the Decision as follows:


         "79. By the time of the appeal hearing, SMO had been released from
         detention.  When he gave evidence, the Appellant said that they
         were seeing each other about 3 times a week.  They would hang out
         together and sometimes SMO would come back to the Appellant's home
         and they would have sex there.  SMO gave evidence and said he had
         been released from detention for 19 days.  His account of his
         relationship was consistent with the account given by the
         Appellant.
         80.  However apart from the e-mails, which were generated by the
         Appellant and SMO themselves, there was no independent or other
         evidence to support their claim to have been in a relationship.
         There was no independent or other evidence of contact between them
         after SMO was released.  There was no independent or other evidence
         to support SMO's claim to be gay or to show the basis upon which he
         had applied for asylum.  Furthermore, it is arguable the email
         correspondence between them between the time the Appellant was
         released and SMO was released was limited and not consistent with
         the apparent intensity of their relationship.  The Appellant said
         they communicated mainly by telephone but no evidence of this was
         produced.
         81.  The Appellant's claimed relationship with SMO is consistent
         with the Appellant being gay.  However it could also be consistent
         with an attempt to create the false impression that this is the
         case.  I take all this into account when considering the evidence
         as a whole."


13. I accept as Mr Ball submitted, that it is difficult to see what
   evidence of telephone contact would add to the e-mails as such evidence
   would only show contact between telephone numbers and not what was
   discussed.  Such evidence might, I suppose, indicate the frequency of
   contact.   The frequency of contact disclosed by the e-mails is a point
   taken against the Appellant.


14. In any event, though, as Ms Everett pointed out, this was not the only
   "independent" evidence which the Appellant could have adduced.  He is
   living with his uncle and aunt.  The Judge records at [82] of the
   Decision the Appellant's evidence that "[a]ll the members of his uncle's
   family were aware of what had happened and were sympathetic towards the
   Appellant and accepted his sexuality".  He was asked why his uncle or
   aunt had not made statements or attended to give evidence and said only
   that "his uncle was in Ghana and his aunt was at work" ([83] of the
   Decision).  As the Judge there records, "[i]t should have been relatively
   easy for the Appellant to obtain statements from them and secure their
   attendance or provide credible evidence for not doing so".  Particularly
   in circumstances where the Appellant claimed that he and SMO were having
   sexual relations at the Appellant's home (which is with his uncle and
   aunt - [82] of the Decision) such evidence might, as the Judge found,
   have been helpful.


15. Mr Ball was particularly critical about what is said by the Judge at
   [81] of the Decision.  However, I agree with Ms Everett's submission in
   that regard.  It is no more than the Judge indicating the two possible
   alternative views which he could reach about this evidence when
   considered as part of the whole picture; either the evidence supported
   the other evidence and showed that the Appellant is indeed gay or he and
   SMO have fabricated it in an attempt to bolster both the Appellant's case
   (and probably also that of SMO).


16. Leading on from that submission, Mr Ball was also critical about the
   way in which the Judge has reached his findings both here and elsewhere
   in the Decision, indicating what of the evidence assists the Appellant
   and what does not but then simply adding that into the balance without
   reaching a firm finding.  It was, Mr Ball submitted, difficult to know
   therefore why the Judge had reached the concluded findings he had.  I
   reject that submission.  I agree with Ms Everett's submission that this
   is simply indicative of a careful and cautious approach by the Judge who
   has balanced all the evidence before reaching any conclusion. I will need
   to return to this point below after I have considered the Appellant's
   second ground.


17. For the moment, on ground one taken alone, I do not consider that there
   is an inadequacy of reasons when those reasons are weighed in the balance
   with the rest of the Judge's findings.  I accept of course that just
   because the Appellant is not believed on part of his account does not
   mean that it is all untrue.  However, if the Judge found and was entitled
   to find that other parts of the Appellant's case as to his sexuality,
   were untrue, that would need to be weighed in the balance with what is
   said about this aspect of the claim.

Ground 2


18. The Appellant's second ground is directed at [53] of the Decision which
   reads as follows:


         "In view of the above, I accept the Respondent's argument that the
         Appellant's account of his developing awareness of his sexuality
         was vague, implausible and lacked emotional depth.  I take this
         into account when considering the evidence as a whole.  However I
         also take into account that some people may find describing and
         articulating the development of their sexuality difficult and the
         possibility that the Appellant may not have been comfortable
         talking about these issues."


   That last sentence takes the same approach as at [81] of the Decision to
   which I have already referred.  The fact that the Appellant was unable
   plausibly to explain how he came to realise that he is gay might be
   explained by a reluctance to discuss such issues or it may be indicative
   of a lack of credibility of the claim.  However, if the latter is to be
   the conclusion reached, that must be as part of a consideration of the
   entirety of the claim and evidence.


19. The Appellant's pleaded ground in this regard refers to the API which
   reads as follows:


         "Not every LGB person will have experience of, or be able to
         communicate any sense of being different.  Caseworkers must be
         mindful that a narrative, from which the idea of difference is
         absent, should not imply that the claimant is being untruthful in
         presenting their claim.  For some the process of understanding and
         accepting their sexual orientation may not have been accompanied by
         life changing 'turning points' or experiences which can be helpful
         in providing narrative to present their case at interview.
         Caseworkers should not expect narratives to contain evidence of any
         such turning points or milestones such as first romantic
         encounters, declarations of feelings to others or the joining of
         LGB organisations" (pg 27 of 41)


20. I make two points at the outset.  First, the API is guidance for Home
   Office caseworkers and not judges who are entitled (indeed required) to
   consider all evidence before them.  Second, whilst it might be right that
   a caseworker and for that matter a judge should not "expect" a person to
   provide evidence about the realisation of their sexuality, where a person
   offers some explanation (as here), the judge should consider it.


21. In any event, the Judge has clearly taken into account that the
   Appellant might not be comfortable when discussing his sexuality and has
   therefore weighed that in the balance.  That approach is not inconsistent
   with the API if that did apply (which, as I have said, it does not).


22. Obviously, [53] of the Decision has to be read with the preceding
   paragraphs.  The reasoning on this aspect of the Appellant's account
   begins at [47] of the Decision.  There has been no challenge to
   paragraphs [47] to [52] of the Decision including the inconsistencies in
   the Appellant's account identified at [52] of the Decision.

23. For those reasons, I am unpersuaded that there is any error of law or
   approach disclosed by the Appellant's second ground.


24. That brings me on to a consideration of the Appellant's case that the
   "Judge's approach is one of cumulative errors".  That is countered by Ms
   Everett's submission that what the Judge was required to do and has done
   is to look at the evidence as a whole.  I therefore turn to look at the
   Judge's consideration of the sexuality issue on this basis.


25. I note and accept Mr Ball's submission that the Judge refers to the
   Appellant's account at [57] of the Decision as "quite detailed".  That
   has to be read in context however.  The comment relates only to the
   Appellant's account of attacks which he had suffered in Ghana on account
   he says of his relationship there with another man (BR).


26. I begin by setting out the way in which the Judge approached his
   credibility findings.  Having noted that the Appellant did not seek to
   produce any documents relating to SMO's claim, that the Respondent's
   claim that the Appellant had used a false passport was rejected and that
   he did not accept the Appellant's contention that he claimed asylum on
   arrival, the Judge directed himself that he had to "assess his evidence
   in the light of the evidence as a whole" ([46] of the Decision).  The
   totality of the claim made by the Appellant fell into three parts.
   First, the manner in which he claimed to have discovered his sexuality.
   Second, the past ill-treatment which he claimed to have suffered on this
   account in Ghana (including the details of his claimed relationship with
   BR).  Third, his current claimed relationship with SMO in the UK.


27. That then is the way in which the Judge approached the claim.  I have
   already referred to [47] to [53] of the Decision where the Judge
   considered the first part of the claim.  I have reached the conclusion
   that there is no error in that approach.  I have also set out [79] to
   [81] of the Decision where the third part of the account is considered.
   I have also reached the conclusion that the independent consideration of
   that aspect does not contain an error.



28. Turning then to the Judge's consideration of the second part of the
   account, I begin by noting that there is no challenge to this part of the
   Decision in the grounds.   Since it formed the most detailed part of the
   Appellant's account and the largest part of the credibility findings,
   however, it is appropriate for me to consider what is said at [54] to
   [79] of the Decision which I now turn to do.


29. The first point to be noted is that the Appellant's application for a
   visa asserted that he was married with a child.  That is the account
   which he continued with on arrival ([45] of the Decision).  The Appellant
   says that the assertion was untrue and that he was told to maintain it on
   arrival by the agent who procured the visa.   The Judge noted the
   Appellant's acceptance that he had therefore obtained the visa by
   deception ([44]).


30. Dealing then with the Appellant's claim to have been in a relationship
   with BR whilst in Ghana, the Judge gave reasons at [54] to [59] of the
   Decision for disbelieving the Appellant's account in this regard.  Those
   included inconsistencies and that the account was not plausible when
   considered in the context of the background evidence.   At some points in
   that consideration, the Judge gives the Appellant the benefit of the
   doubt (for example at [55]), in others, he takes into account his finding
   of a lack of credibility but does not reach an overall conclusion (for
   example at [56]).  That is a reflection of the careful assessment of all
   the evidence.  Overall, though, at [59] of the Decision, the Judge
   reaches a provisional view that the relationship and how it is said that
   it was discovered is not credible.


31. The Judge then goes on to consider the evidence which might be said to
   corroborate the Appellant's account in this regard including the medical
   evidence, the police report, a letter from BR and BR's brother and
   letters from those said to have witnessed the attack ([60] to [71] of the
   Decision).  In that section, the Judge notes various inconsistencies in
   the documents and some lack of plausibility about the content and the way
   in which the documents were obtained.


32. At one point in his oral submissions, Mr Ball suggested that some of
   the inconsistencies relied upon by the Judge were not truly inconsistent
   (for example at [68] of the Decision).  That was not part of the pleaded
   grounds but in any event the submission is not well-founded.  Whether
   BR's brother is said to have known of the relationship because he was
   told or because he walked in on the couple matters not because the
   finding in that paragraph is based on an inconsistency within the
   Appellant's own evidence (see reference to "prevarication" and the
   reference to three versions of his account).   The point made in the
   final sentence that it was "reasonable to expect [the Appellant] to have
   mentioned that BR's brother know about the relationship" also holds good
   however it is said that the brother came to know of the relationship.


33. The Judge reaches his conclusion at [71] of the Decision in relation to
   the documentary evidence and written evidence of witnesses.  As he there
   notes, there are various issues raised by the witness evidence and since
   the witnesses were not or could not be called, less weight was given.
   The Judge's consideration of the documents also identified issues
   affecting the reliability of those documents.  He was therefore entitled
   not to place weight on this evidence when reaching his credibility
   findings.


34. Paragraphs [72] to [76] of the Decision concern other aspects of the
   claim to be at risk which are not challenged.  However, as the Judge
   notes at [76] of the Decision, "this part of his account [to have been a
   victim of forced labour] is inextricably bound up with his account of
   having to leave his family because of his sexuality".  The claim in that
   regard had already been rejected by the NRM.  The Judge was entitled to
   take that into account when assessing the Appellant's credibility.


35. Having thereafter dealt with the claimed relationship with SMO, the
   Judge noted the absence of evidence from  the Appellant's aunt and uncle
   (as I have referred to above) and then concluded as follows:


         "84. Nevertheless, looking at the evidence as a whole, for the
         reasons set out above, I have concluded that the implausible,
         incredible and inconsistent aspects of the Appellant's evidence go
         to the core of his account.  Even applying the lower standard of
         proof applicable in these cases, I do not find he is telling the
         truth.  In particular I do not find:
         1) He has shown that he is gay.
         2) He has been in same sex relationships with BR or SMO.
         3) He is at risk from his family in Ghana.
         4) He is at risk from the agent he says he paid to obtain his visa.
         5) He has shown he was the victim of forced labour or exploitation.
         It follows that I do not find he would face any risk of
         mistreatment were he to return to Ghana."


36. That paragraph makes clear findings with an appropriate self-direction
   as to the lower standard of proof.  The Judge was not required to repeat
   his reasoning in the preceding paragraphs.  He had made clear in the
   course of his reasoning which parts of the account he found not to be
   credible at all (based on either inconsistencies or implausibility when
   the claim was compared with either background evidence or other evidence)
   and which parts might be accepted so that the Appellant should be given
   the benefit of the doubt on those parts.  He considered the evidence
   carefully and as a whole before reaching his conclusions.  There is no
   error in his approach or in relation to the adequacy of his reasoning.
   It cannot sensibly be said that the Decision read as a whole does not
   contain adequate reasons for rejecting the individual elements of the
   claim or the claim considered holistically.


37. In light of that conclusion, I do not need to say anything about the
   point made by the Respondent in the Rule 24 Reply that, even if the
   Appellant were gay, he would not be at risk on return to Ghana.  Ms
   Everett did not seek to persuade me that this was relevant to materiality
   at the error of law stage.  It is an issue which might have arisen for
   consideration if I had found an error and the appeal was to be
   redetermined.

38. As it is though, for the foregoing reasons, I conclude that there is no
   error of law in the Decision and I uphold it.



   DECISION

   The Decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Mr J C Hamilton promulgated on
   12 May 2020 does not involve the making of an error on a point of law. I
   therefore uphold the Decision with the consequence that the Appellant's
   appeal remains dismissed.


   Signed: L K Smith

   Upper Tribunal Judge Smith

   Dated: 11 December 2020

