
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/12589/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8 October 2019                    |On 9 October 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                     o A
                         (anonymity directioN MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules  2008,
I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper  Tribunal  or  a  Court  directs
otherwise, no report  of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of  publication
thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the Appellant  or  members  of
her family. This direction applies to,  amongst  others,  all  parties.  Any
failure to comply with this direction could give rise to contempt  of  court
proceedings.


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms C Meredith, Counsel, instructed by Birnberg
                    Peirce and Partners
For the Respondent:    Ms A Holmes, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant challenges the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Herbert, promulgated  on  7  June  2019,  in  which  he  dismissed  the
    Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's refusal of  her  protection
    and human rights claims.

 2. Upon considering the papers, I deemed  it  appropriate  to  direct  the
    Respondent to provide a rule 24 response. Such  a  response  was  filed
    with the Upper Tribunal on 3 October 2019. It  contains  the  following
    statement:

         "The respondent does not oppose  the  appellant's  application  for
         permission to appeal and invites the Tribunal to remit  the  matter
         to the First-tier Tribunal, to be heard afresh before a judge other
         than First-tier Tribunal Judge Herbert."

 3. At the hearing before me it was confirmed that this passage represented
    an acceptance that the First-tier Tribunal had materially erred in  law
    and that the matter should be remitted for a complete re-hearing.

 4. On this unopposed basis, I  conclude  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    decision contains material errors of law. I set that decision aside and
    remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.

 5. Ordinarily, where both parties are agreed that a decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal is flawed and should be remitted, nothing further need be
    said about that decision. However, in the circumstances of  this  case,
    it is appropriate to make the following observations.

 6. First, the errors of law were quite clear on the face of the  decision.
    This is a case in which it might have been appropriate for  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge considering  the  permission  application  to  have
    undertaken a review of the decision pursuant to rule 35 of the Tribunal
    Procedure (First-tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Rules
    2014.

 7. Second, a more proactive approach by the Respondent to this  case  once
    permission had been granted might well have led to a  more  expeditious
    resolution of the error of law issue, quite possibly without  the  need
    to have had a hearing at all. Instead, the rule 24  response  was  only
    obtained following a specific direction issued by the Upper Tribunal.

 8. Third, the decision of Judge Herbert contains a relatively  significant
    number of typographical, grammatical, and factual errors,  examples  of
    which are set out in paragraphs 19-21 of  the  Appellant's  grounds  of
    appeal. I cannot be sure of course, but it might be  the  case  that  a
    draft version of the decision was sent for promulgation  in  error.  If
    this was not the case, there is merit to the points made in  paragraphs
    21-22 of the grounds, which, in summary form, complain that the  errors
    may be perceived as indicating a lack of care and/or  anxious  scrutiny
    of the Appellant's case.

 9. Fourth, Judge Herbert did not make an anonymity direction in this  case
    despite a request for one being made in the Reply to an IAC  Notice  of
    Hearing, dated 12 November 2018 and a confirmation  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal in the Directions compiled at the Case Management Review stage
    this would be done. It is unclear why no order was made by the Judge.

10. Fifth, at  the  hearing  before  me  Ms  Meredith  confirmed  that  the
    Appellant's representatives are seeking to obtain a medico-legal report
    in preparation for the remitted hearing. In respect of the  listing  of
    the remitted hearing, I  advised  that  it  would  be  better  for  the
    representatives to liaise directly with the Taylor House hearing centre
    about appropriate timeframes.



Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

I remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.


Signed      [pic]            Date:  8 October 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor


Directions to the First-tier Tribunal

    1. This appeal is remitted for a complete re-hearing with no findings of
       fact preserved;

    2. The remitted hearing shall not be conducted  by  First-tier  Tribunal
       Judge Herbert;

    3. The time estimate for the remitted hearing is 4 hours;

    4. A Turkish interpreter will be required for the remitted hearing.


Directions to the parties

    1. The Appellant's representative shall, no later than  14  days  before
       the remitted hearing, file with the First-tier Tribunal and serve  on
       the Respondent a consolidated bundle of all evidence relied upon;

    2. The Respondent shall, no later 7 days before  the  remitted  hearing,
       file with the First-tier Tribunal and  serve  on  the  Appellant  any
       further evidence relied upon.
