







UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12641/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On: 16 May 2019                      |On: 23 May 2019                      |


                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer


                                   Between

                                 Alamgir [K]
                       (anonymity direction NOT made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Ms M Malhotra, counsel, instructed by City Heights
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a national of Bangladesh, born on  15  May  1985.  He
      appeals  with  permission  against  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge, promulgated on 22 March 2019,  dismissing  his  appeal
      against the respondent's decision dated 17 October 2018 to refuse  his
      asylum, humanitarian protection and human rights claims.

   2. The appeal was heard by the Tribunal on 30 November 2018. The decision
      was  promulgated  on  22  March  2019.  The   substantial   delay   in
      promulgating the determination  constituted  one  of  the  grounds  of
      appeal, namely that the Judge's credibility findings were "vitiated."

   3. The  appellant  claimed  that  he  is  gay  and  that  he  had  casual
      relationships from 2009 until 2017.  He  claimed  that  on  return  to
      Bangladesh, his family, extended family and the police would  kill  or
      arrest him because he is gay.

   4. The Tribunal produced a 43 page decision containing 347 paragraphs. It
      was also contended in the grounds seeking permission  to  appeal  that
      the findings are  difficult  to  locate  because  there  are  numerous
      paragraphs prior  to  the  commencement  of  his  "reasons"  at  [157]
      onwards, which also appear to contain  "reasons"  or  "findings,"  for
      example, at [73-75] and [82].

   5. Moreover, some paragraphs, for example [78] and [148] run  to  over  a
      page in length without any sub-paragraphing. Even within the "reasons"
      section, the Judge simply repeats large swathes of the evidence rather
      than providing proper reasoning for his findings.

   6. Moreover, in his "reasons" at  [172-178]  sub-clauses  are  used  with
      regard to his findings, which are at the  same  time  interspersed  by
      other paragraphs [179-187] which then returns to sub clauses at  [188]
      and [189].

   7.  Designated  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  MacDonald   granted
      permission to appeal on all grounds, including the assertion that  the
      determination is prolix, confusing and incoherent. The  second  ground
      referred  to  the  inordinate  delay  between  the  hearing  and   the
      promulgation of the decision. The third ground was that  in  fact  the
      Judge did have the determination of Mr Rahman but for some reason  had
      not seen it.

   8. In that respect, Ms Malhotra, who  did  not  represent  the  appellant
      before the First-tier Tribunal,  contended  that  the  Judge  did  not
      properly consider all the relevant documents in the appellant's  case,
      including the determination of one  of  the  key  witnesses  whom  the
      appellant called, namely, Mr Rahman. He  was  a  key  witness  in  the
      appellant's case and his evidence provided  crucial  support  for  the
      appellant.

   9. Mr Rahman's appeal was allowed by the First-tier Tribunal  sitting  at
      Taylor House in a decision promulgated on 10 April 2018. His claim was
      also based on his homosexuality in Bangladesh. The  determination  was
      not  available  to  the  Tribunal  at  the  date  of  hearing  of  the
      appellant's appeal  in  November  2018.  Accordingly,  the  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge  allowed  a  short  time  period  for  the  appellant's
      solicitors to send it to him.

  10. I was informed that the hearing before the Tribunal took place  on  30
      November 2018 and that the appellant's solicitors sent the  First-tier
      Tribunal  Judge  an  email  directly  on  3  December  2018  with  the
      determination attached. It was  accordingly  received  on  3  December
      2018. However, the First-tier Tribunal Judge stated at [109]  that  "I
      have not seen the determination."

  11. Ms Malhotra submitted that the First-tier Tribunal Judge did not  find
      Mr Rahman to be credible. He had regard to the statement  provided  by
      Mr Rahman from [101] onwards. Mr Rahman  also  gave  evidence  at  the
      appellant's hearing. At the end of his evidence,  the  Judge  directed
      the appellant's solicitors to serve the determination in  Mr  Rahman's
      appeal within ten days following the hearing [108].

  12. The decision allowing Mr Rahman's appeal found him to be credible.  Ms
      Malhotra submitted that he was accordingly a reliable witness.

  13. At [205] the First-tier Tribunal Judge  found  that  it  was  somewhat
      surprising that Mr Rahman said  the  same  thing  that  the  appellant
      claimed in his oral evidence,  namely  that  he  had  never  seen  the
      appellant with girls, as an explanation why Mr  Rahman  believed  that
      the appellant is gay. That he found was a fundamental  misapprehension
      to the point of being crass and superficial,  in  that  it  seemed  to
      equate being gay with having a misogynistic approach to life [206].

  14. Ms Malhotra submitted that "the difficulty is that  the  determination
      is all over the place." The Judge  found  at  [240]  that  it  is  not
      credible that Mr Rahman and Mr Miah did not mention a  person,  Ahmed,
      in their appeal statements.  At [293] he  found  that  the  witnesses,
      including Mr Rahman, were to all  intents  and  purposes  professional
      witnesses in gay asylum appeals. They have dishonestly  supported  the
      appellant in an asylum claim that they know to be fabricated. He found
      the evidence of Mr Hart and Mr  Rahman  to  be  untrustworthy  and  so
      lacking in credibility that little weight could be  attached  to  what
      they say.

  15. She submitted that the  latter  finding  is  particularly  problematic
      given that in Mr Rahman's appeal, heard at Taylor House  on  26  March
      2018, First-tier Tribunal Judge Neville  found  that  the  appellants,
      including Mr Rahman, easily met the lower  standard  of  proof  as  to
      their sexual identity and their relationship. He found that they  were
      gay men and in a relationship.

  16. The First-tier Tribunal Judge in the appellant's appeal  however,  did
      not consider that important determination and the principle of natural
      justice has been infringed.

  17. Ms Malhotra also submitted that  the  assessment  of  the  appellant's
      medical evidence, and  in  particular  his  mental  illness,  was  not
      properly assessed.

  18. On behalf of the respondent, Mr Walker agreed that the  delay  coupled
      with the lack of findings relating  to  the  determination  in  Rahman
      cumulatively leads to a material error.

  19. Although other grounds are relied on, he accepted that  the  two  main
      points advanced are sufficient to justify the  setting  aside  of  the
      decision.




      Assessment

  20.  It  has  been  accepted  that  there  was  excessive  delay  in   the
      promulgation of the decision. Moreover, the First-tier Tribunal  Judge
      failed to consider as  part  of  the  assessment  of  his  credibility
      findings, the determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Neville  who
      found that Mr Rahman had given credible  evidence.  The  decision  had
      been sent to the First-tier Tribunal on 3 December 2018 as part of  an
      attachment.

  21. In the event, the Judge determined the appellant's appeal in ignorance
      of the fact that the appellant had provided this  determination  which
      confirmed the credibility of his witness, Mr Rahman.

  22. The Judge had permitted the appellant  to  provide  the  decision.  No
      subsequent enquiries or efforts were made after the expiry of ten days
      to ascertain why he had not been  provided  with  that  decision.  His
      decision was moreover not promulgated for almost four months.

  23. In the circumstances, Mr Walker has  very  fairly  accepted  that  the
      decision cannot stand. Both  parties  are  agreed  that  it  would  be
      appropriate in the circumstances to remit the appeal to the First-tier
      Tribunal for a fresh decision to be made.

      Notice of decision

      The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making  of  an
      error on a point of law.

      Having set it aside, I remit  the  case  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
      (Hatton Cross) for a fresh decision to be made by another Judge.

      Anonymity direction not made.





             Signed                             Date 21 May 2019


                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer

