
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/12437/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields          |Decisions & Reason Promulgated  |
|On 28 June 2019                 |On 05 July 2019                 |
|Prepared on 1 July 2019         |                                |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JM HOLMES


                                   Between

                                    A. K.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Pickering, Counsel, instructed by Freedom
                    Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Pettersen, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The Appellant, a citizen of Iran, entered the UK  illegally  and  then
      claimed asylum on 21 September 2016. His protection claim was  refused
      on 4 May 2017, and his appeal against that  decision  was  heard,  and
      dismissed on 17 July 2017 by decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      Hindson. There were three elements to Judge Hindson's decision;  first
      he accepted that the Appellant was  Iranian  as  claimed  rather  than
      Iraqi as asserted by the Respondent  in  the  light  of  the  language
      analysis evidence he  had  obtained  upon  the  Appellant,  second  he
      rejected as untrue the Appellant's claim to have been involved in PJAK
      in Iran, and, third he rejected as untrue  the  Appellant's  claim  to
      have undertaken a genuine  conversion  to  the  Christian  faith.  The
      Appellant's appeal rights against that decision were  exhausted  on  1
      August 2017.
   2. The Appellant lodged further submissions on  4  September  2018  which
      were accepted by the Respondent as  constituting  a  fresh  protection
      claim, but this too was refused on 12 October  2018.  The  Appellant's
      appeal against this decision  was  heard  on  26  November  2018,  and
      dismissed by decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Fisher  dated  28
      January 2018.
   3. The Appellant was granted permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal
      by decision of Upper Tribunal Judge Grubb of 23 April 2019. The  grant
      was principally made on the basis it was arguable that the Judge erred
      in failing to consider the  evidence  in  the  light  of  the  country
      guidance decision of HB (Kurds) Iran CG [2018] UKUT 430 which had been
      reported between the date of the hearing and the date of  promulgation
      of his decision. The Appellant was however cautioned that it would  be
      for him to demonstrate that there were sufficient risk factors  beyond
      his undisputed  Kurdish  ethnicity,  to  constitute  a  real  risk  of
      persecution in the event of his removal to Iran. Permission  was  also
      given to advance two further grounds concerning the Judge's  treatment
      of the posts made by the Appellant to his Facebook  account,  and,  to
      the evidence of the Ministers of the  Church  that  had  accepted  the
      Appellant for baptism in the light of the guidance to be found in TF &
      MA [2018] CSIH 58.
   4. The Appellant applied in writing on 12  June  2019  pursuant  to  Rule
      15(2A) for permission to admit further evidence in the remaking of the
      decision, should the decision of the First tier Tribunal be set aside.
      That evidence consisted of a witness statement of 12  June  2019,  and
      screen shots of the posts placed by him upon a Facebook account in his
      name since the date of the hearing before the Judge.
   5. The Respondent lodged no Rule 24 response to the grant of  permission.
      Thus the matter comes before me.




Error of Law?
   6. Neither of the representatives who appeared before me appeared  below,
      and the following remarks are not therefore to be  taken  as  personal
      criticism of either of them. It is however  common  ground  before  me
      that the Judge was not assisted to the extent that he should have been
      by the way in which the appeal  was  presented  on  behalf  of  either
      party.
   7. The decision in HB was reported on 12 December 2018, and  the  Judge's
      decision was not written and promulgated until 17 January 2019. It  is
      accepted that neither party  sought  at  any  point  to  make  written
      submissions upon HB to the Judge, or, to request that the  hearing  of
      the appeal be reconstituted to allow for further evidence to be taken,
      or oral submissions to be made upon it. Since both parties now  accept
      that HB contained relevant country guidance, given the  way  in  which
      the Appellant's case was put before the Judge, it is  far  from  clear
      why neither representative was alert to the need to draw the reporting
      of HB to the Judge's attention and to seek further directions from him
      upon how its guidance would impact upon the appeal, and thus should be
      handled.
   8. Ms Pettersen conceded on behalf of the  Respondent  that  the  Judge's
      decision makes no reference to HB and that this of itself  constituted
      an error of law. On the other hand the Judge was plainly alert to  the
      earlier  decision  in  AB  and  Others  (internet  activity-state   of
      evidence) Iran CG [2015] UKUT 257; the real  concern  is  whether  the
      appeal was presented in such a way as to highlight the correct issues,
      and thus whether the Judge was alert to the correct principles.
   9. The second ground of complaint concerned the Judge's treatment of  the
      evidence of the posts that had been placed by the Appellant  upon  his
      own Facebook account, by  re-posting  material  originally  posted  by
      others. It appears to have been accepted by the Respondent  that  this
      was an account in his own name, and that the re-posts relied  upon  by
      the Appellant were still publicly visible at the date of the  hearing,
      because no issue appears to have  been  taken  by  reference  to  this
      before the Judge. Ms Pettersen confirmed she did not seek to take such
      a point now.
  10. The focus of the representatives for both parties appears therefore to
      have been upon whether the re-posts upon the  Facebook  account  would
      have brought the Appellant to the adverse  attention  of  the  Iranian
      authorities before  the  date  of  the  hearing.  The  Judge  was  not
      persuaded that they would have done so,  and  neither  party  suggests
      before me that this  conclusion  was  flawed.  Given  the  undisturbed
      findings of Judge Hindson, he had left Iran without  having  attracted
      any adverse attention from the Iranian authorities. There was  nothing
      other than the Facebook re-posts that was relied upon  to  suggest  he
      would have attracted any adverse attention subsequently.
  11. The Respondent does not appear to have argued before  the  Judge  that
      the Appellant had lied when he had denied upon arrival in the UK  that
      he had ever been issued with an  Iranian  passport,  or  retained  any
      identity documents. Thus, for his removal to Iran  to  take  place  he
      would need to be issued with some  form  of  travel  document  by  the
      Iranian authorities. An approach from the Respondent for the issue  of
      such a document would necessarily alert the Iranian authorities to his
      existence, and, it would be likely to create the  perception  that  he
      was a failed asylum seeker. It  is  now  accepted  on  behalf  of  the
      Respondent (although it would  appear  that  no  such  concession  was
      offered to the Judge below) that the  Appellant  would  therefore  not
      only face a real risk of enquiries into  his  identity  prior  to  his
      removal, but also enquiries into his activities in the UK at the point
      of return; AB & Others (internet activit - state of evidence) Iran  CG
      [2015] UKUT 257 [455-7], and, HB [114-20].
  12. Although the vast majority of the re-posts to the Facebook account are
      indeed pictures inspired by the Christian faith which would give  rise
      to a risk that the Appellant would be perceived as an apostate, it  is
      now  accepted  before  me  that  a  few  should  properly  have   been
      characterised as political since they demonstrate  opposition  to  the
      regime and support for Kurdish freedom, and indeed,  accepted  by  the
      Respondent at the hearing below to have had such a character.  Instead
      what appears to have happened is that  both  parties  focused  at  the
      hearing  upon  whether  the  Appellant  had  genuinely  undertaken   a
      conversion to  the  Christian  faith,  and  whether  the  re-posts  of
      Christian images would place him at risk upon return in the event they
      were viewed by the authorities, presumably in the context  of  whether
      he would be viewed as an apostate.
  13. In turn it would appear that the Judge's attention was not directed to
      the few re-posts that should have been characterised as political, and
      that no consideration was given to them at the hearing  as  a  result.
      This appears to be the explanation for why they were not considered by
      the Judge in the course of his decision, and in turn for why they were
      not part of his assessment of what would be likely to be viewed at the
      point of return in the course of the enquiries that would be made into
      the Appellant's activities in the UK. It is  accepted  that  this  too
      constituted an error of law.
  14. The third complaint advanced is that the  Judge  failed  to  give  the
      appropriate weight to the evidence of the officers of the  Church  who
      gave evidence in support of the Appellant, and who asserted  a  belief
      that he had undertaken a genuine conversion of faith.
  15. The Judge's starting point, correctly,  was  the  rejection  by  Judge
      Hindson  of  the  Appellant's  claim  to  have  undertaken  a  genuine
      conversion. Judge Hindson had found the Appellant to have  lied  about
      his experiences in Iran, and had noted that despite his claim to  have
      already undertaken a conversion  to  Christianity,  he  had  not  been
      baptised into that faith. There was no evidence before  Judge  Hindson
      from an ordained Minister of the Church  to  support  the  Appellant's
      claimed conversion, but there was evidence from a lay  member  of  the
      management committee who advised that if and when the Church  acquired
      an ordained Minister, is understanding was that candidates for baptism
      would be accepted at face value and without any enquiry  into  whether
      their faith  was  genuine.  Thus  the  Dorodian  guidelines  were  not
      followed. In the circumstances Judge Hindson was  not  satisfied  that
      there  had  been  a  genuine  conversion.  Whilst  he   accepted   the
      Appellant's regular Church attendance he concluded that  this  was  no
      more than a device to bolster his asylum claim.
  16. The new evidence placed before the Judge was however quite  different,
      and thus Judge Hindson's  finding  required  a  re-evaluation  in  its
      light. The Appellant had now been baptised by an ordained  presbyteral
      minister (roughly twelve months before the appeal  hearing),  who  had
      given written evidence in support of the appeal  confirming  a  belief
      that the Appellant's conversion was genuine. That presbyteral minister
      had been  unable  to  attend  the  appeal  hearing  because  of  other
      commitments, but an ordained diaconal minister had  attended  instead,
      and she too had offered evidence of  a  belief  that  the  Appellant's
      conversion was genuine, both on her own account, and  to  confirm  the
      evidence of the presbyteral minister. Neither  minister  addressed  in
      their written  evidence  the  attitude  towards  baptismal  candidates
      described in evidence to Judge Hindson.
  17. The Judge concluded that only very limited weight could  be  given  to
      the weight of the two ministers, partly  because  one  had  failed  to
      attend the hearing so that their  evidence  was  untested   by  cross-
      examination, partly because of the failure  to  address  the  evidence
      given to Judge Hindson no enquiry into faith was  made  of  candidates
      for baptism, and, partly because the diaconal minister  who  did  give
      oral evidence before him was unaware that the Appellant had been found
      by Judge Hindson to have lied.
  18. As Ms Pettersen accepted,  there  was  a  failure  by  the  presenting
      officer to explore with the  diaconal  minister  in  cross-examination
      what, if any, substance lay behind the beliefs held by  both  herself,
      and her colleague the presbyteral minister: that the Appellant  was  a
      genuine convert to  the  Christian  faith.  There  was  a  failure  to
      approach their evidence on the basis that as ministers they were in  a
      position  to  offer  the  Tribunal  opinion  evidence  concerning   an
      individual's attitudes and beliefs,  and  not  just  factual  evidence
      about when and how often an individual attended a Church or  the  role
      played within the congregation. Thus Ms Pettersen  accepted  that  the
      analysis of the opinion evidence offered by the two  ministers  lacked
      the focus that was required in the light of the guidance to  be  found
      in TF, and thus the Judge's assessment of whether  the  Appellant  was
      indeed a genuine convert was in consequence flawed.


The decision remade
  19. Ms Pettersen accepts in these circumstances that the decision upon the
      asylum and article 3 grounds of appeal should be set aside and remade,
      so that the appeal should be allowed on those grounds. I agree for the
      following reasons.
  20. The further evidence from the  minister  who  baptised  the  Appellant
      addresses the issue of why she believes his faith to be genuine. There
      is no reason to suppose that her own belief is not genuinely held, and
      it was not put to her on behalf of the Respondent  that  it  was  not.
      Thus, unless the Tribunal could be persuaded that she and  her  fellow
      minister, and the congregation, had all been cynically  duped  by  the
      Appellant over an extended period of time, there would  be  no  reason
      for her evidence not to be  given  weight,  and  indeed  accepted.  Ms
      Pettersen does not seek to pursue such an argument, and so there is no
      need to have a further hearing at which the  minister  can  attend  to
      give oral evidence to  me.  In  the  circumstances,  in  turn,  it  is
      accepted by the Respondent that the  Appellant  is  indeed  a  genuine
      convert to the Christian faith.
  21. The Appellant has failed to establish that he had any reason to  leave
      Iran unlawfully. On the other hand there is no evidence  that  he  has
      ever held a passport. To return him to Iran will require enquiries  to
      be made  by  the  Iranian  authorities,  at  the  instigation  of  the
      Respondent, into his identity prior to his removal, and in turn  there
      is a real risk that he will be perceived to be a failed asylum  seeker
      in the UK. Those enquiries will identify that he is a  Kurd,  although
      they will not establish that he had ever come to the adverse attention
      of the Iranian authorities prior to leaving Iran, because he  had  not
      done so. Thus any intelligence led enquiries into  his  activities  in
      advance of his return to Tehran would identify no grounds for  concern
      beyond his ethnicity, and the probability that he was a failed  asylum
      seeker.
  22. The available country guidance of HB, requires the conclusion that the
      Appellant would be temporarily detained and questioned at the  airport
      upon return to Iran, and that this process would  include  questioning
      about his use of Facebook and require him to log onto his Facebook and
      email accounts. This process would allow the questioner  to  view  his
      postings and his email activity.
  23. This process of temporary detention and questioning upon return  would
      not automatically mean a breach of his Article 3 rights. There  is  no
      proper foundation for that assumption to be found in either HB  or  in
      AB and Others (internet activity-state of  evidence)  Iran  CG  [2015]
      UKUT 257, or, in SSH and HR (Illegal exit: failed asylum seeker)  Iran
      CG [2016] UKUT 308. Had matters been otherwise, every Iranian national
      able to demonstrate that they would be perceived to be a failed asylum
      seeker upon return, would have been bound to succeed in an  Article  3
      claim. That has not been the Tribunal's approach to date, and  it  did
      not become the Tribunal's approach as a result of HB.
  24. At the date of the hearing before the Judge there were only a few  re-
      posts upon the Appellant's Facebook page of  material  that  could  be
      considered to be opposed  to  the  Iranian  regime  or  supportive  of
      Kurdish rights movements. There were however some,  and  the  homepage
      also displayed thumbnail photographs of the Kurdish  flag  [ApB  pp30,
      44, 45, 47, 49, 51, 57, 64].
  25. Since that hearing the Appellant has continued, and indeed  increased,
      the volume of his political postings [Article 1, 2, 5, 6, 8,  10,  11,
      14]. He has also posted photographs of  himself  outside  the  Iranian
      Embassy  in  London  participating  in  a  demonstration  and  holding
      placards [SpBdl p130-2]. These are very recent, indeed  dated  9  June
      2019, but however cynically created, they exist, and  it  is  accepted
      that they are visible  today  on  his  Facebook  account,  as  is  the
      material posted earlier.
  26. Thus, whilst the Iranian authorities' intelligence enquiries into  the
      Appellant prior to his return to Iran would have disclosed no  adverse
      interest in him, because he has done nothing  to  give  rise  to  such
      interest, there is a real risk that material would be disclosed in the
      course of questioning at the airport at the point of return that would
      alter their perception of  the  Appellant.  If  asked  directly,  upon
      return to Iran, the Appellant would not truthfully be able to  confirm
      that he had never been engaged in any political activity outside Iran,
      however cynical that  participation  might  have  been.  Thus  without
      having to decide whether the Appellant genuinely  held  any  political
      views that he would wish to continue to express, it is  accepted  that
      he would be placed at risk of persecutory ill treatment as a result of
      the questioning he would face at the point of return to Iran.
  27. In all the  circumstances,  and  upon  due  reflection,  Ms  Pettersen
      invited me by consent to allow the protection  appeal  on  asylum  and
      Article 3 grounds, which I do. The decision to dismiss the  appeal  on
      humanitarian protection and Article 8 grounds is not challenged before
      me, and is therefore confirmed.









DECISION


    The Decision of the First Tier Tribunal to dismiss the  appeal  on  all
    grounds which was promulgated on 28 January 2019 did involve the making
    of an error of law that requires the  decision  to  be  set  aside  and
    remade.


    The appeal is allowed on asylum and Article 3 grounds.



Direction regarding anonymity - Rule 14 Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008


      Unless and until the Tribunal  directs  otherwise  the  Appellant  is
    granted anonymity throughout these  proceedings.  No  report  of  these
    proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify him.  This  direction
    applies both to the Appellant and to the Respondent. Failure to  comply
    with this  direction  could  lead  to  proceedings  being  brought  for
    contempt of court.









   Signed









Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes

1 July 2019
