
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
PA/12190/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at North Shields                   |Decision & Reason Promulgated |
|On 28 September 2017                     |On 17 October 2017            |



                                   Before


                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     H G
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr M Diwnycz Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent: Ms L Brakaj of Iris Law Firm


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.  To  preserve  the  anonymity  order   which   the   First-tier   thought
appropriate, I make an  anonymity  order  under  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal
Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008,  precluding  publication  of  any
information regarding the proceedings which would be likely to lead  members
of the public to identify the appellant.

2. The Secretary of State for the Home Department brings this appeal but  in
order to avoid confusion the parties are referred to as  they  were  in  the
First-tier Tribunal. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  a
decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Spencer, promulgated on 7 March  2017,
which allowed the Appellant's appeal on asylum and ECHR grounds.

Background


3. The Appellant was born on 01/01/1990 and is a  national  of  Eritrea.  On
21/10/2016 the respondent refused the appellant's protection claim.


The Judge's Decision

4. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge Spencer ("the Judge") allowed  the  appeal  against  the  Respondent's
decision on asylum and ECHR grounds.

5. Grounds of appeal were lodged and  on  20  June  2017  Judge  Pedro  gave
permission to appeal stating inter alia

      3. The grounds assert that the Judge  materially  misdirected  himself
      regarding issues  of  the  appellant's  entitlement  or  otherwise  to
      alternative nationality, including misapplying  relevant  caselaw  and
      making inconsistent findings.


      4. The grounds disclose arguable errors of law  capable  of  affecting
      the outcome.

The Hearing

6. Mr Diwnycz, for the respondent, moved the grounds of appeal. He  told  me
that he had now considered the appellant's rule 24 response,  and  considers
that the Judge has engaged with all of the  evidence.  Having  reviewed  the
file, Mr M Diwnycz told me that there was  evidence  before  the  First-tier
which showed that the appellant had gone to  the  Ethiopian  embassy  (there
are photographs showing the appellant within the  Ethiopian  embassy;  there
are travel tickets vouching his journey to  London).   Mr  Diwnycz  told  me
that it was apparent that that evidence was before the  Judge,  and  it  was
that evidence that the Judge took account of when reaching his  conclusions.
He told me that it was a question of what the appellant could reasonably  be
expected to do. He did not argue the grounds of appeal any further.

7. For the appellant, Ms Brakaj adopted the terms of the  rule  24  response
for the appellant. She told me that the Judge's decision  does  not  contain
errors of law, material or otherwise. She told me that the Judge  considered
the relevant caselaw. She relied on UKVI guidance, which says that in  cases
of disputed nationality the burden of proof rests with the Home Office.  She
told me  that  the  Judge  carefully  considers  whether  the  appellant  is
entitled  to  Ethiopian  or  Sudanese  nationality,  and  decided  that  the
appellant cannot meet the criteria for naturalisation. She told me that  the
appellant was rebuffed when he approached the Ethiopian  embassy.  She  told
me that the Judge's decision  is  carefully  reasoned  and  is  informed  by
country guidance and the respondent's policy. She urged me  to  dismiss  the
appeal and allow the decision to stand.





Analysis

8. Between [1] and [8] the Judge sets out the background to this appeal  and
draws a clear focus on the  issues  to  be  determined.  At  [8]  the  Judge
records that there is agreement that if the appellant is  only  entitled  to
Eritrean nationality his appeal succeeds. If the appellant  is  entitled  to
either Ethiopian or Sudanese nationality his appeal will be dismissed.

9. Between [9] and [16] the Judge sets out the appellant's  claim.  At  [15]
the Judge records that it is the appellant's position that  on  27  November
2016 the appellant attended both the Ethiopian Sudanese  Embassies  both  of
whom were

      .... less than helpful and told him that they could not help him.

10. Between [17] and [21] the Judge reminds  himself  of  the  law  and  the
burden and standard of proof. The Judge  correctly  refers  himself  to  the
relevant country guidance cases.

11. The Judge's findings of fact are between [29] and [41] of the  decision.
At [36] the Judge finds that the  appellant  unsuccessfully  approached  the
Ethiopian embassy. Between [36] and [38] the  Judge  considers  whether  the
appellant can obtain Ethiopian nationality and at [39]  concludes  that  the
appellant cannot. He concludes [39] by finding that the respondent  has  not
substantiated that the appellant is entitled  to  Ethiopian  nationality  by
naturalisation.

12. At [40] and [41] the Judge considers whether the appellant  could  be  a
Sudanese citizen and finds that he cannot be,  because  the  respondent  has
not substantiated her position that the appellant is Sudanese.

13. Those findings draw the Judge to the conclusion that  the  appellant  is
Eritrean. The Judge's finding that the appellant is Eritrean  is  sufficient
for the appellant to succeed on asylum and article 2, 3 and 4 ECHR grounds.

14. In ST (Ethnic Eritrean- nationality-  return) Ethiopia  CG  [2011]UKUT
00252 (IAC) the Tribunal held that pursuant to  MA  (Disputed  Nationality)
Ethiopia [2008] UKAIT 00032, each claimant must demonstrate that he  or  she
has done all that could be reasonably expected to  facilitate  return  as  a
national of Ethiopia, the present procedures and practices of the  Ethiopian
Embassy in London will provide the backdrop  against  which  judicial  fact-
finders  will  decide  whether  an  appellant   has   complied   with   this
requirement. A person who is regarded by the  Ethiopian  authorities  as  an
ethnic Eritrean and who left Ethiopia during or in the  immediate  aftermath
of the border war between Ethiopia and  Eritrea,  is  likely  to  face  very
significant practical  difficulties  in  establishing  nationality  and  the
attendant right to return, stemming from the  reluctance  of  the  Ethiopian
authorities  to  countenance  the  return  of  someone  it  regards   as   a
"foreigner", whether or not in international law the person concerned  holds
the nationality of another country.

15. In MST and Others  (national  service  -  risk  categories)  Eritrea  CG
[2016] UKUT 00443 (IAC)  it was held that (i)  Although  reconfirming  parts
of the country guidance given in MA (Draft evaders -  illegal  departures  -
risk) Eritrea CG [2007] UKAIT 00059 and MO (illegal exit - risk  on  return)
Eritrea CG [2011] UKUT  00190  (IAC),  this  case  replaces  that  with  the
following: (ii) The Eritrean system  of  military/national  service  remains
indefinite and since  2012  has  expanded  to  include  a  people's  militia
programme,  which  although  not  part  of  national  service,   constitutes
military service; (iii) The age limits for national service  are  likely  to
remain the same as stated in MO, namely 54 for men and 47 for  women  except
that for childre a  48  n  the  limit  is  now  likely  to  be  5  save  for
adolescents in the context of family  reunification.  For  peoples'  militia
the age limits are likely to be 60 for  women  and  70  for  men;  (iv)  The
categories of lawful exit have not significantly changed since  MO  and  are
likely to be as follows: (a)  Men aged over 54; (b) Women aged over  47  (c)
Children aged  under  five  (with  some  scope  for  adolescents  in  family
reunification cases; (d) people exempt  from  national  service  on  medical
grounds; (e) People travelling abroad  for  medical  treatment;  (f)  People
travelling abroad  for  studies  or  for  a  conference;  (g)  Business  and
sportsmen;  (h)  Former  freedom  fighters  (Tegadelti)  and  their   family
members; (i)  Authority  representatives  in  leading  positions  and  their
family members; (v) It continues to  be  the  case  (as  in  MO)  that  most
Eritreans who have left Eritrea since 1991 have done so illegally.  However,
since there are viable, albeit still  limited,  categories  of  lawful  exit
especially for those  of  draft  age  for  national  service,  the  position
remains as it was in MO, namely that a person whose  asylum  claim  has  not
been found credible cannot be assumed to have left illegally.  The  position
also remains nonetheless (as in MO) that if such a person is found  to  have
left Eritrea on or after August/September 2008, it may  be  that  inferences
can be drawn from their health  history  or  level  of  education  or  their
skills profile as  to  whether  legal  exit  on  their  part  was  feasible,
provided that  such  inferences  can  be  drawn  in  the  light  of  adverse
credibility  findings.  For  these  purposes  a  lengthy  period  performing
national service is likely to enhance a  person's  skill  profile;  (vi)  It
remains the case (as in MO) that failed asylum seekers as such  are  not  at
risk of persecution or serious harm on return;  (vii)  Notwithstanding  that
the round-ups (giffas) of suspected evaders/deserters, the "shoot  to  kill"
policy and the targeting of relatives  of  evaders  and  deserters  are  now
significantly less likely occurrences,  it  remains  the  case,  subject  to
three limited exceptions set out in (vii) (c) below, that if a person of  or
approaching draft age will be perceived on  return  as  a  draft  evader  or
deserter, he or she will face a real risk of persecution,  serious  harm  or
ill-treatment contrary to Article 3 or 4 of the ECHR.  (vii)  (a)  A  person
who is likely to be perceived as a  deserter/evader  will  not  be  able  to
avoid exposure to such real risk merely by showing they have  paid  (or  are
willing to pay) the diaspora tax and/have signed (or are  willing  to  sign)
the letter of regret; (vii) (b) Even if such a person may  avoid  punishment
in the form of detention and ill-treatment it is likely that he or she  will
be assigned to perform (further)  national  service,  which,  is  likely  to
amount to treatment contrary to Articles 3 and 4 of the ECHR  unless  he  or
she falls within one or  more  of  the  three  limited  exceptions  set  out
immediately below in (vii)(c); (vii)(c)) It remains  the  case  (as  in  MO)
that there are persons likely not to face a  real  risk  of  persecution  or
serious harm notwithstanding that they will be perceived on return as  draft
evaders and deserters, namely: (1) persons whom the  regime's  military  and
political  leadership  perceives  as  having  given  them  valuable  service
(either in Eritrea or abroad); (2) persons who are  trusted  family  members
of,  or  are  themselves  part  of,  the  regime's  military  or   political
leadership.  A further possible exception, requiring a  more  case  specific
analysis is (3) persons (and their children born afterwards) who fled  (what
later became the territory of)  Eritrea  during  the  War  of  Independence;
(vii) Notwithstanding that many Eritreans are effectively reservists  having
been discharged/released from national service and unlikely to face  recall,
it remains unlikely that they will have  received  or  be  able  to  receive
official confirmation of completion of national  service.  Thus  it  remains
the case, as in MO that "(iv) The general position adopted  in  MA,  that  a
person of or approaching draft and not medically unfit who  is  accepted  as
having left Eritrea illegally is  reasonably  likely  to  be  regarded  with
serious  hostility  on  return,   is   reconfirmed,   subject   to   limited
exceptions..." (ix) A person liable  to  perform  service  in  the  people's
militia and who is assessed to have left Eritrea illegally,  is  not  likely
on return  to  face  a  real  risk  of  persecution  or  serious  harm.  (x)
Accordingly, a person whose asylum claim has not been  found  credible,  but
who is able to satisfy a decision-maker (a) that he or she  left  illegally,
and (b) that he or she is of or approaching  draft  age,  is  likely  to  be
perceived on return as a draft evader or deserter from national service  and
as a result face a real risk of persecution  or  serious  harm;  (xi)  While
likely to be a rare case, it is  possible  that  a  person  who  has  exited
lawfully may on forcible return face having to resume or  commence  national
service. In such a case there is a real risk of persecution or serious  harm
by virtue of such service constituting forced  labour  contrary  to  Article
4(2) and Article 3 of the ECHR; (xii)  Where  it  is  specified  above  that
there is a real risk  of  persecution  in  the  context  of  performance  of
military/national service, it is highly likely that it will  be  persecution
for a Convention reason based on imputed political opinion.

16.  Despite  what  is  said  in  the  grounds  of  appeal,  there   is   no
inconsistency in the Judge's findings of fact. Despite  what  is  said  that
the grounds of appeal, the Judge does not reverse the burden of  proof.  The
Judge manifestly takes guidance from caselaw before considering each  aspect
of the appellant's case. The Judge correctly assigns the  burden  of  proof,
reminding himself at [21] that it is for the appellant to  show  substantial
grounds for believing that there is a real risk  that  his  rights  will  be
breached, and that it is for the appellant  to  show  that  protection  from
persecution is not provided within his country of origin. At [17] the  Judge
reminds himself that the burden of proof rests  on  the  appellant  to  show
that he is a refugee.

17. It is the Judge's  comments  between  [36]  and  [41]  which  leads  the
respondent to suggest that the burden of proof  has  been  reversed.  It  is
there that the Judge analyses the evidence and makes findings  of  fact.  Is
there the Judge explains why he can find no substance  in  the  respondent's
position that the appellant is either Ethiopian or Sudanese. That is  not  a
reversal of the burden of proof.

18. Mr Diwyncz correctly focused on the ratio in ST.  The  test  is  whether
the appellant has done  what  he  can  reasonably  be  expected  of  him  to
facilitate return to a country of  alternative  nationality.  It  is  common
ground that there was evidence before the First-tier that the appellant  had
approached the Ethiopian & Sudanese embassies to ask  for  travel  documents
to facilitate return to  those  countries,  and  that  his  approaches  were
rejected. The Judge clearly relied on that evidence and  made  his  findings
of fact that  neither  the  Ethiopian  nor  the  Sudanese  authorities  will
entertain the appellant. Those findings of  fact  form  the  foundation  for
finding that the appellant is an Eritrean  national.  The  Judge's  findings
from [36] to [41] build on that foundation and  explain  why  the  appellant
cannot be either Ethiopian or Sudanese.

19. The fact that the Judge finds of the appellant  is  not  a  credible  or
reliable witness when discussing the core aspects  of  his  claim  does  not
lead to inconsistent findings of fact. The Judge correctly  identifies  that
the determinative issue is the appellant's  nationality.  It  is  with  that
determinative issue that the  Judge  grapples.  The  Judge  identifies  that
nationality is the central issue at [8] of the decision.

20.    In Shizad (sufficiency of reasons: set aside) [2013] UKUT  85  (IAC)
the Tribunal held that the Upper Tribunal would not normally  set  aside  a
decision of the First-tier Tribunal where there has been no misdirection of
law, the fact-finding process cannot be criticised and the relevant Country
Guidance has been taken into account,  unless  the  conclusions  the  Judge
draws from the primary data were not reasonably open to him or her.

21. In this case, there  is  no  misdirection  in  law  &  the  fact-finding
exercise is beyond criticism.  The decision is not  tainted  by  a  material
error of law. The Judge's decision, when read as a whole, sets out  findings
that are sustainable and sufficiently detailed.

CONCLUSION

22. No errors of law have been established. The Judge's decision stands.

DECISION

23. The appeal  is  dismissed.  The  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
promulgated on 7 March 2017 stands.


Signed


               Paul Doyle                                             Date
30 September 2017
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle

