
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/12486/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at Field House, London Decision & Reasons Promulgated
On the 22nd January 2019     On the 14th February 2019

Before:
                           DISTRICT JUDGE MCGINTY
                  SITTING AS A DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE
Between:
                                  Mrs O.M.
                         (Anonymity Direction made)
                                                                    Claimant
                                     And
               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                             Appellant in the Upper Tribunal

Representation:
For the Claimant:      Mr Georget (Counsel)
For the Secretary of  State:   Mr  Tarlow  (Senior  Home  Office  Presenting
Officer)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against the decision of First-
       tier Tribunal Judge Isaacs promulgated on the 8th October 2018.

    2. At the First-tier Tribunal, Judge Isaacs in her decision  found  that
       the Claimant had been a victim of domestic violence at the  hands  of
       her husband and that her husband had continued to  be  interested  in
       committing violence against her after  they  separated  in  2012  and
       after she had moved away from him.  The Judge found that there was  a
       particular problem with domestic violence in Zimbabwe, although  some
       moves  had  been  made  to  address  that,  but  when  examining  the
       particular facts of the Claimant's case  found  that  there  was  not
       sufficiency of protection for her. Even an Interim  Protection  Order
       had not halted her husband's threats, and that her husband  had  been
       able to track her  down  even  after  she  relocated  away  from  the
       matrimonial home and continued to be violent towards her  thereafter.
       The Judge found  that  were  the  Claimant  to  return  there  was  a
       reasonably likelihood that her estranged  husband  would  repeat  her
       former behaviour, as that is what had happened in the  past,  despite
       the involvement of the police,  the  Claimant's  relocation  and  the
       involvement  of  the  Court.   The  Judge  firstly  took  account  of
       anomalies contained within her previous visa  application,  but  this
       was not sufficient to mean it was  not  reasonably  likely  that  she
       would face persecution and she would be at risk of suffering domestic
       violence upon her return.  The Judge  found  that  the  Claimant  was
       entitled to asylum.

    3. Within the Grounds of Appeal, it is argued by the Secretary of  State
       that the Judge failed  to  resolve  conflicts  of  fact  on  material
       matters and failed to make findings or giving adequate  reasons.   In
       respect of the risk from her former husband it is argued that  within
       the refusal of asylum decision from the Secretary of  State,  it  was
       stated that within her visa application made on the 29th October 2015
       the Claimant had given her home address as the  same  as  her  former
       husband stating that she had resided there for the past 7 years. This
       is said to be in contrast to the Claimant's claim to  have  relocated
       to Domboshava due to the threat from her former  husband  and  it  is
       argued that the  Claimant's  evidence  regarding  the  distance  from
       Domboshava was not consistent with objective evidence.   It  is  said
       the Judge noted some of these issues at paragraph 51 of the  decision
       and other information from the visa  application  but  it  is  argued
       there is no finding on these points of  conflict  as  raised  in  the
       refusal of the asylum decision, which it is  submitted  goes  to  the
       core of the claim.  It is argued that the Judge only speculated as to
       why the Claimant or her solicitor gave her husband's  former  address
       as the Claimant's contact address but failed to  make  any  findings.
       It is said no reason was given  for  the  Judge's  finding  that  her
       husband continued to be violent towards her.

    4.  In the second ground of appeal it is  argued  that  the  Judge  only
       briefly considered sufficiency of protection at paragraph 66  and  68
       of the Judgment and the Judge failed to  engage  with  the  objective
       information quoted within the decision letter.  It was further argued
       that the Judge's analysis of internal relocation at paragraph  67  is
       brief and the  Judge  concluded  that  internal  relocation  was  not
       possible due to claimed political connections, but that  finding  had
       been made despite her  evidence  her  former  husband  knew  she  was
       leaving Zimbabwe and that she did not know whether her former husband
       would know if she returned to Zimbabwe.

    5. Permission to appeal has been granted in this case by Upper  Tribunal
       Judge Kekic on the 12th December 2018 who found that it was  arguable
       that the Judge failed to engage with material matters as set  out  in
       the grounds specifically the inconsistencies in her account regarding
       the Claimant's  place  of  residence  and  information  on  her  visa
       application form  and  that  it  is  arguable  the  Judge  failed  to
       adequately  consider  whether  sufficiency  of  protection  would  be
       available to the Claimant.

    6. In his oral submissions before  the  Upper  Tribunal,  Mr  Tarlow  on
       behalf of the Secretary of State conceded that in  fact  the  Learned
       First-tier Tribunal Judge had made a finding  at  paragraph  63  that
       "therefore, I find that the Appellant's husband had continued  to  be
       interested in her and interested in committing violence  against  her
       after they separated in 2012  and  she  moved  away  from  him".   He
       conceded that this was a finding and that the Judge had accepted that
       notwithstanding  the  discrepancy  in  the   evidence   between   the
       Claimant's asylum claim and the information  given  in  her  previous
       visa application, the Judge had made findings that the  Claimant  and
       her ex-husband had in fact separated in 2012 and that she  had  moved
       away from him and relocated as claimed.

    7. However, Mr Tarlow argued that the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  when
       considering the question of internal relocation at paragraph  67  had
       not  adequately,  in  his  submission,  dealt  with  that  issue,  in
       determining whether or  not  the  Claimant  could  safely  internally
       relocate anywhere within the country.

    8. Mr Tarlow conceded further that although reference  was  made  within
       the Secretary of State's refusal notice to the Secretary  of  State's
       policy in the  form  of  the  Country  Policy  and  Information  Note
       Zimbabwe: Women Fearing Gender-Based Harm or Violence  from  February
       2017, that he could  not  state  whether  in  fact  that  policy  had
       actually been put in evidence before  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   He
       conceded that reference to a policy within the refusal notice was not
       actually evidencing the policy itself, that the policy itself  should
       have been put before the Tribunal, had the Secretary of State  wanted
       to rely upon the same and  that  the  simple  references  to  certain
       paragraphs of the same within the refusal notice was insufficient  on
       the part of the Secretary of State.

    9. In his oral submissions, Mr Georget relied upon his Rule  24  Notice,
       which I have fully considered.  He further sought to argue  that  the
       Secretary of State's  arguments  regarding  the  Judge's  failure  to
       resolve significant conflicts of fact and give  adequate  reasons  is
       nothing more than a disagreement with the findings made in an attempt
       to re-argue the case.

   10. It was argued within the Rule 24 Notice that the Judge had  initially
       indicated at paragraph 57 that she had given careful consideration to
       all the evidence put before her in the case and even if she  did  not
       refer to parts of it in her reasons or findings  that  she  was  only
       setting out the evidence that was necessary to explain  her  decision
       to the parties.  It is argued that in respect of the  inconsistencies
       between the Claimant's evidence and the visa  application,  it  could
       not reasonably be  said  that  these  were  not  considered  or  left
       unresolved, as they were considered at paragraph 61  of  the  Judge's
       decision and findings made about them at paragraph 63.  In respect of
       the internal relocation sufficiency of protection it is  argued  that
       the Judge referred to relevant country  information  and  found  that
       there was no  sufficiency  of  protection  or  reasonable  relocation
       alternative in the particular circumstances of this case in that  the
       Claimant reported her husband to the authorities, without success and
       despite a protective Court Order and that  because  her  husband  had
       political connections enabled her ex-husband to find her despite  her
       relocation.

   11. Mr Georget further argued orally that the Judge had taken account  of
       the country information provided by both parties and had properly and
       adequately dealt with the question of sufficiency  of  protection  in
       any internal relocation.  He noted that the Judge had said  that  the
       Secretary  of  State  had  not  challenged  the  Claimant's  evidence
       regarding her husband's political links.  He argued that although the
       Judge  has  not  specifically  stated  that  she  could  not   safely
       internally relocate anywhere within the country, given  her  findings
       regarding her previous attempt at internal relocation,  the  findings
       in that regard would have been the same irrespective.

   My Findings on Error of Law and Materiality

   12. Although within the Grounds of Appeal it is argued that there were no
       findings in  respect  of  the  discrepancy  highlighted  between  the
       Claimant's asylum claim and her visa application in that in her  visa
       application it said that she had given her home address as  the  same
       as being that of her husband and that she had resided there  for  the
       past 7 years whereas in contrast in the asylum claim she  claimed  to
       have relocated to Domboshava due to a threat from her former  husband
       and that the refusal letter said that the Claimant's evidence on  the
       distance of Domboshava was not consistent with objective evidence, at
       paragraph 61 of the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  the
       Judge  had  noted  the  discrepancies  within  the  visa  application
       compared to the asylum claim, not only in terms of whether or not the
       fact that within the application she had given the address which  was
       the same as that for her husband on an Interim Protection  Order  and
       said that she had lived there for 7 years but also that  she  claimed
       to work as a teacher and given contact details for  that  employment,
       whereas in her evidence to the Tribunal on the asylum claim  she  had
       said that she was a shop  assistant.   However  the  Judge  noted  at
       paragraph 61 the Claimant explained this by saying that  it  was  her
       sister in the United Kingdom who had completed the form and that  the
       Claimant had merely signed it and that she could not explain why  her
       sister had thought it best to provide those  details.   At  paragraph
       63, the Judge went on to find that her husband had  continued  to  be
       interested  in  committing  violence  against  her  after  they   had
       separated in 2012 and after she had moved away from him.   He  stated
       he could not explain why the Claimant or her sister would have  given
       the former matrimonial home as her parents' contact address when  she
       applied for the visa and that it may be that her sister believed that
       the Claimant stood a better chance of securing a visa  if  it  looked
       like she had a stable setup to  return  to.   He  stated  that  "even
       though I accept the Appellant and/or her  sister  lied  on  the  visa
       application, there is nothing  to  suggest  the  Appellant's  husband
       would have stopped his violent tendencies towards her whether or  not
       she  had  voluntary  contact  with  him  at  the  time  of  the  visa
       application, I believe it is reasonably likely that he  continued  to
       be violent towards her as she described".  In that regard, the  Judge
       has made clear findings that she has in fact accepted the  Claimant's
       evidence that they did in fact separate in 2012 and  that  she  moved
       away and relocated as claimed.  Mr Tarlow conceded as much before me.
        The Judge at paragraph 62 had noted that in late 2014  the  Claimant
       had sought help from the Zimbabwean authorities with  regard  to  her
       husband's behaviour and the Secretary of State had not challenged the
       validity of the documents relating to the applications to the Courts.
        The Judge therefore has made clear  findings  in  respect  of  these
       issues, and given sufficient reasons for her findings.  The Judge has
       not simply speculated as claimed, but has made  clear  findings  that
       the Claimant and her husband did separate in 2012 and that she  moved
       away, but notwithstanding that, he continued to  be  violent  towards
       her.  The Judge has given clear, adequate and sufficient  reasons  in
       respect thereof, and the arguments of the Secretary of State in  that
       regard simply amount to a disagreement with the findings made.

   13. In respect of the second ground of appeal  regarding  sufficiency  of
       protection of internal relocation, although it  is  argued  that  the
       Judge has not engaged with the objective information  quoted  in  the
       decision letter, as Mr  Tarlow  properly  conceded,  referencing  the
       Secretary of State's policy within  the  refusal  letter  is  not  in
       itself producing the policy for the consideration of  the  Judge,  to
       put it in evidence before the Judge.   However,  in  any  event,  the
       paragraphs referred to from the  policy  quoted  within  the  refusal
       notice, related to the availability of shelters for  women  suffering
       domestic violence in Zimbabwe, and the availability of treatment  and
       other  support  services  to  survivors  of  gender-based   violence.
       However, at paragraph 65 the Judge specifically  noted  and  accepted
       that the country information provided by both parties indicated  that
       there was a problem with domestic violence in Zimbabwe and also  that
       moves are being made to address that, but then went on to examine the
       facts of the particular Claimant's case and  in  paragraph  66  noted
       that in  regard  to  the  sufficiency  of  protection  she  had  made
       complaints to the police previously,  as  evidenced  by  the  Interim
       Protection Order, and believed that she had reported the assaults  to
       the police, but this did not halt her husband's threats according  to
       her evidence which the Judge found to be generally credible  for  the
       reasons stated within the decision.  The Judge went  on  to  consider
       the fact that the Claimant had also relocated away  from  the  former
       matrimonial home and yet her husband had still managed to  track  her
       down and continued to be violent towards her.

   14. The Judge stated at paragraph 67 that the Secretary of State did  not
       challenge the Claimant's evidence  that  her  husband  had  political
       connections which enabled him to find her despite her  relocation  or
       that the police had always released him when  they  had  investigated
       her complaints.  The Judge therefore has as she has stated herself at
       paragraph 65 considered the country  information  provided  regarding
       domestic violence and the  moves  made  to  address  the  problem  in
       Zimbabwe. The Judge gave clear, adequate and sufficient  reasons  for
       finding that there was not adequate sufficiency of protection for the
       Claimant upon return, given the  fact  that  the  Interim  Protection
       Order and reports to the police had not provided protection for  her.
       In respect of internal relocation, the Judge  had  also  specifically
       accepted the Claimant's case that she had already relocated away from
       the former matrimonial home and yet her husband had still managed  to
       track her down and continued to be violent towards her because of his
       political connections which enabled  him  to  find  her  despite  her
       relocation, which she noted the Secretary of State did not  challenge
       in regard to the Claimant's evidence in  that  respect  nor  had  the
       Secretary of State challenged the evidence that the police had always
       released her husband when they had investigated her complaints.   The
       Judge therefore has  clearly  considered  the  question  of  internal
       relocation due to the fact that the Claimant had sought to internally
       relocate  herself  to  Domboshava.   Although  the  Judge   has   not
       specifically stated that internal relocation anywhere within Zimbabwe
       was not possible, given that the Judge has  already  found  that  the
       Claimant had herself sought to  internally  relocate  away  from  her
       husband, but because of his political connections,  he  was  able  to
       find her, that the Claimant's evidence in that regard being  that  he
       fixes boats for some prominent ZOPF officials, I  am  satisfied  that
       the Judge's findings in respect of  internal  relocation  would  have
       been the same irrespective, and the Judge clearly has considered  the
       question of internal relocation and not  considered  that  it  was  a
       viable option for her.  It was not  argued  by  the  Judge  that  her
       husband had found her because of Domboshava being close to where  she
       previously lived, but that he had found her because of his  political
       connections.  Nor was it argued that it was only local officials with
       whom he had connections who only had local knowledge.  I therefore do
       not consider that there is any material error in the reasons  of  the
       First-tier Tribunal Judge in this regard.

   15. The decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Jane  Isaacs  does  not
       contain any material error and is maintained.

Notice of Decision

The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Jane Isaacs does not  contain  any
material error and is maintained.

I do make an Order  of  anonymity,  such  Order  having  been  made  by  the
previous Tribunal.  Unless and until a Tribunal or Court otherwise  directs,
the Claimant is granted anonymity.  No report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify the Claimant or any member  of  her  family.
This direction applies both to the Claimant and to the Secretary  of  State.
Failure to comply with this  direction  could  lead  to  contempt  of  Court
proceedings.

Signed

[pic]
District Judge McGinty
Sitting as a Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge     Dated 22nd January 2019
