

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/12345/2019 (V)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at George House, Edinburgh             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|by Skype for Business                        |On 09 December 2020            |
|on 2 December 2020                           |                               |
|                                             |                               |


                                   Before

                              UT JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                                    M A A
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant:     Ms Dingwall, of Latta & Co, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This determination is to be read with:

      i) The decision of FtT Judge Landes,  dated  12  April  2018,  in  the
         appellant's previous appeal, PA/01879/18.

     ii) The respondent's decision, dated 25 November 2019.

    iii) The appellant's grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.

     iv) The decision of FtT Judge Bell, promulgated on 1 July 2020.

      v) The appellant's  grounds  of  appeal  to  the  UT,  stated  in  the
         application for permission, dated 11 August 2020.

     vi) The grant of permission by UT Judge Keith, dated 1 September 2020.

 2. I conducted the hearing from George  House.   Representatives  attended
    remotely. No members of  the  public  attended,  either  in  person  or
    remotely.   The technology enabled an effective hearing.

 3. Representatives agreed that if either  or  both  of  the  grounds  were
    established, the result would be a remit to the FtT.

 4. I am obliged to both representatives for their  succinct  and  accurate
    submissions.  Having heard those, I indicated that the  decision  could
    not stand.

 5. Dealing with the grounds in the order taken by Ms Dingwall,  the  judge
    erred by stating at [74] that "no other enhanced risk factors were  put
    forward".  The appellant had argued that there were two  such  matters,
    ethnicity and westernisation, and that those were particularly relevant
    in his area of origin.

 6. Mr Diwyncz accepted that there was an omission, but submitted that  the
    nature of Iraqi society was such that this was immaterial.

 7. The second error is that the  judge  recorded  at  [31]  and  [62]  the
    evidence of a witness who attended church regularly with the appellant,
    and interpreted for him, but gave that little or  no  weight  at  [67],
    stating no good reason; and effectively at [57]  took  the  absence  of
    evidence from a church leader as conclusive, contrary to TF & MA [2019]
    SC 81 at [58].

 8. There was no effective resistance to this ground.

 9. The grounds together require the decision of the FtT to be  set  aside.
    It stands only as a record of what was said at the hearing.

10. The case is remitted to the FtT for  an  entirely  fresh  hearing,  not
    before Judge Bell.

11. The FtT made an anonymity direction.  The matter was not  addressed  in
    the UT.  Anonymity is preserved at this stage.

      [pic]

      2 December 2020
      UT Judge Macleman



                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS

1. A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must  make  a
written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any  such  application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:

2. Where the person who appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).

 3. Where the person making  the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).

4. Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is  outside  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if the notice  of
decision is sent electronically).

5. A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or  a  Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.

6.  The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on  the  covering
letter or covering email.




