
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12337/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 25th September 2017                |On 29th September 2017                |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between

                                   M S R S
                           (anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Biggs of Counsel instructed by Reymond
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to Rule 13  of  the  Tribunal
Procedure (First-tier  Tribunal)  (Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber)  Rules
2014.  I continue that order pursuant to Rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008: unless the Upper Tribunal or  a  court  directs
otherwise, no report  of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of  publication
thereof  shall  identify  the  original  appellant,  whether   directly   or
indirectly.  This order  applies  to,  amongst  others,  all  parties.   Any
failure to comply with this order could  give  rise  to  contempt  of  court
proceedings.

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal dismissing his appeal against the  respondent's  decision
    to refuse him refugee protection, humanitarian protection or  leave  to
    remain on  human  rights  grounds.   The  appellant  is  a  citizen  of
    Bangladesh.

Background

 2. The appellant  has  been  in  the  United  Kingdom  since  March  2011,
    initially as a Tier 4 Student, but that leave was curtailed  to  expire
    on 23 April 2013.  He has not had extant leave since then.

 3. The appellant's case is that before coming to the  United  Kingdom,  he
    was involved with Chhatra Shibir, the student wing of Bangladesh Jamaat-
    e-Islami, that he was President of the local branch of Chhatra  Shibir,
    and that he organised demonstrations against the illegal practices  and
    policies of the Bangladeshi Government who were  torturing  members  of
    Jamaat-e-Islami.  He was never personally arrested or detained,  always
    managing to hide in time [28].

 4. On arrival in the United Kingdom in 2011 (see [31]) the  appellant  did
    not claim asylum because, he says, he thought that  the  Government  in
    Bangladesh would change and he could  return  to  his  country  on  the
    completion of his studies.  However, in 2010 he says there was  an  FIR
    lodged against him.  He now says that  he  is  at  risk  on  return  in
    Bangladesh by reason of his political profile and activities.

First-tier Tribunal decision

 5. The First-tier Tribunal  Judge  dismissed  the  appeal,  rejecting  the
    credibility of the appellant's core account and  finding  it  to  be  a
    fabrication.  The Judge found that there  were  points  of  discrepancy
    between the  appellant's  evidence  and  that  of  his  witnesses,  and
    rejected the core account in the following terms:

         "53. There are inconsistencies in  the  appellant's  evidence  with
         regards to his claimed membership  of  the  JI  group  CS  and  his
         claimed fear from the AL.  I do not find the  appellant's  evidence
         credible or consistent.

         52.  The appellant has produced no documentary  evidence,  such  as
         membership card of his membership of Jamat-e-Islami, he  said  that
         Mr Ahmed will give evidence as to his membership.  The evidence  of
         the appellant is contradictory to that given by the witness, I find
         that on the lower standard of  proof  I  do  not  accept  that  the
         appellant was a member of the JIP or that the authorities  had  any
         interest in him as he claims.

         54.  I find that the appellant has fabricated the whole evidence to
         support his asylum claim.  The appellant has  provided  many,  many
         documents in support or [sic] his  claim,  I  have  assessed  these
         documents in the round in the light or [sic]  olive  oral  evidence
         before me and I find that these documents  have  been  provided  to
         support the appellant's assertions he was an active member  of  JIP
         and that he was on an interst [sic] to the Bangladeshi  authorities
         whilst he was in Bangladesh, these claims have not been established
         on the lower standard of proof."

 6.  The  Judge  rejected  the  appellant's  account  of  taking  part   in
    demonstrations,  finding   his   evidence   to   have   been   'totally
    discredited'.

Grounds of appeal

 7. The  appellant  appealed  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  alleging  bias  and
    inappropriate treatment  of  one  of  the  appellant's  witnesses,  and
    challenging the Judge's reasoning on  credibility,  in  particular  his
    failure  to  deal  with  the  mass  of  supporting  documents  in   the
    appellant's  bundle,  and  in  failing  to  consider  the   appellant's
    credibility in  the  round,  taking  into  account  all  the  evidence,
    including the  documents,  instead  of  applying  negative  credibility
    findings on the oral evidence to the weight which the  documents  would
    bear.

 8. The grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal were accompanied by  a
    witness statement from one of the appellant's witnesses, alleging  that
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge MA Khan was offensive  and  disrespectful
    to him during his evidence, telling him to slow down, that he spoke too
    fast and should know how to speak as the witness was a solicitor.

 9. During cross-examination, the  witness  said  the  Judge  abruptly  and
    aggressively interrupted  his  evidence,  shouting  about  whether  the
    witness had advised the appellant to seek asylum in the United Kingdom,
    which he found rude,  disruptive,  humiliating  and  intimidating.  The
    witness said that the Judge continued to be angrier  and  angrier,  and
    that although he had  attended  many  Courts  and  hearings,  including
    Magistrates Courts, County Courts and various Council  panel  hearings,
    he had never faced such hostility, aggression and intimidation.  He did
    not expect the judgment fairly to reflect his evidence,  but  that  the
    Judge would make his judgment based on his own opinion and views.

Permission to appeal

10. Permission to appeal was granted as follows:-

         "2.  The grounds in support of the application  for  permission  to
             appeal, which was made in time, assert that  the  Judge  erred
             materially in law:
             (I)  in that there was a perception of bias cf.  Elayi  [2016]
                  UKUT 508 (IAC) in respect of his treatment of the witness,
                  [RS]; ...
             (iii)    in failing to make  findings  as  to  the  supporting
                  documents and  in  failing  to  consider  the  Appellant's
                  credibility in light of the  documents,  rather  than  the
                  other way around; ..."

    Permission was not granted on grounds (ii) or  (iv),  which  challenged
    the reasons for the negative credibility finding  and  the  failure  to
    make a finding regarding the  witness  evidence  of  JA,  a  recognised
    refugee.

Rule 24 Reply

11. The respondent in her Rule 24  reply  dealt  with  both  bias  and  the
    document issue as follows:-

         "3.  [In relation to bias] The questions posed by the Judge to  the
             appellant do not suggest that the Judge  was  cross  examining
             the appellant but merely seeking to  clarify  certain  issues.
             The Judge was entitled to ask the witness questions.   Clearly
             the appellant could not answer the questions and thus appeared
             vague and evasive.

         4.   The Judge was entitled to find that  little  weight  could  be
             attached t the documents and did very  little  to  assist  the
             appellant's claim.  The documents were only one  part  of  the
             evidence.  The Judge also heard evidence  from  the  appellant
             and the witness and concluded that they were not credible."

Judge's comments on the bias allegation

12. The Judge has been given an opportunity to comment on the allegation of
    bias and he said this:-

             "Dealing with [the witness'] complaint about his appearance as
             a witness before me on 9 December 2016 as  a  witness  in  the
             above-mentioned case, I do not agree with his  claims  that  I
             interrupted him during his evidence, mistakenly,  stating  his
             evidence, spoke harshly to him during  oral  testimony  before
             me.  I accept that I did asking (sic) him to speak  slowly  so
             that I could write down his evidence, I do my utmost to make a
             full note of the  proceedings.   Mr  Islam  is  recalling  his
             assessment of the proceedings one  month  10  days  after  the
             hearing,   while   the   notes   of   the    proceeding    are
             contemporaneous, at page 13 of my  handwritten  note,  I  have
             noted that he was vague and evasive.

             The court staff and Home Office Presenting  Officers  are  all
             aware  of  my   practice   in   treating   appellants,   their
             representatives, witnesses,  interpreters  and  everyone  else
             connected with my court with utmost, respect and  dignity.   I
             cannot understand why Mr Islam feels that he  was  treated  in
             the manner that he sets out in his statement."

13. That was the basis on which this appeal came before me for error of law
    decision.

Discussion

14. I begin with ground (iii), the credibility approach taken by the  Judge
    to the appellant's documents.  I am guided by the judgment in the Court
    of Appeal of Mr Justice Wilson, giving the judgment of  the  Court,  in
    Mibanga v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2005]  EWCA  Civ
    367 at [24]:

         "It seems to me to be axiomatic that a fact-finder must  not  reach
         his or her conclusion before surveying all  the  evidence  relevant
         thereto. Just as, if I may take a banal  if  alliterative  example,
         one cannot make a cake with only one ingredient, so also frequently
         one cannot make a case, in the sense  of  establishing  its  truth,
         otherwise than by combination of a number of  pieces  of  evidence.
         ...What the fact-finder does at his peril is to reach a  conclusion
         by reference only to the appellant's evidence and then,  if  it  be
         negative, to ask whether the conclusion should be  shifted  by  the
         expert evidence. Mr Tam  has  drawn  the  court's  attention  to  a
         decision of the tribunal dated 5 November 2004, namely  HE  (DRC  -
         Credibility and Psychiatric Reports) [2004] UKIAT 00321  in  which,
         in paragraph 22, it said:

             "Where the report  is  specifically  relied  on  as  a  factor
             relevant to credibility, the Adjudicator should deal  with  it
             as an integral part of the findings on credibility rather than
             just as an add-on, which does not undermine the conclusions to
             which he would otherwise come.""

    In this appeal, the Judge undoubtedly fell into the Mibanga error.   He
    decided, on the basis of the oral evidence alone,  that  the  appellant
    was not a credible witness, then discounted the bundle of documents for
    that reason.

15. It is of course a matter for the fact-finding judge the  weight  to  be
    given to documentary evidence, but it  is  reasonably  clear  from  the
    robust  findings  made  in  this  decision  that  despite  the  judge's
    assertion to the contrary, he did not examine the bundle  of  documents
    to  which  he  was  taken.   The  bundle  included,  for  example,  his
    membership card for Jamiat-e-Islami, and the original was available  at
    the hearing.  I have consulted his handwritten  Record  of  Proceedings
    which contains clear references  to  particular  page  numbers  in  the
    bundle which are not reflected in the determination.  The  decision  is
    unsound for that reason and cannot stand.

16. As regards the bias allegation, there is a direct conflict of  evidence
    and the proceedings were not recorded.  Since I have decided that there
    is a material  error  of  law  in  the  decision  in  relation  to  the
    documents, I do not need to reach a conclusion on the  bias  allegation
    and I do not do so.

17. The decision will be set aside and remade.  The decision of the  First-
    tier Tribunal in  the  appeal  of  the  appellant's  wife  remains  the
    Devaseelan starting point for the remaking of the decision, which  will
    be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for hearing afresh.

DECISION

9.   For the foregoing reasons, my decision is as follows:

    The making of the previous decision involved the making of an error  on
    a point of law.   I set aside the previous decision.

    The decision in this appeal will be remade in the  First-tier  Tribunal
    on a date to  be  fixed,  with  no  findings  of  fact  or  credibility
    preserved.

Signed:  Judith A J C Gleeson           Dated:        28 September 2017
         Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson
