
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                    Appeal Number:
PA/12410/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 30 July 2019                         |On 8 August 2019                     |
|                                        |                                     |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE

                                   Between

                                  ALI SALIH
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:          Mr J Howard of Fountain Solicitors
For the Respondent:       Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and  evidence  I
do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.


2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  the  decision  of  First-tier
Tribunal Judge O'Hagan promulgated on 21 March  2019,  which  dismissed  the
Appellant's appeal.



Background


3. The Appellant was born on 6 June 1998 and is a national of  Iraq.  On  11
October 2018 the respondent refused the appellant's protection claim.

The Judge's Decision

4. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge O'Hagan ("the Judge") dismissed the appeal  against  the  Respondent's
decision. Grounds of appeal were lodged and on 18 April  2019  Judge  Grant-
Hutchison granted permission to appeal stating inter alia

      3. The Judge has considered all the documentary  and  oral  (evidence)
      and has made appropriate  findings  which  he  was  entitled  to  make
      including the fact that the appellant has access to his CSID in  Iraq.
      It was open  for  the  Judge  to  consider  what  weight  he  felt  it
      appropriate to place on all the evidence before  him.  The  Judge  has
      given adequate reasons for his decision.


      4. However it is arguable that the Judge has  misdirected  himself  by
      failing to consider  the  terms  of  paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)  of  the
      immigration rules as to whether or not there would be very significant
      obstacles to the appellant's integration in Iraq on return.

The Hearing

5. For the appellant, Mr Howard moved the grounds  of  appeal.  He  told  me
that the article 8 findings are at [53] of the decision.  He  told  me  that
[53] contains no reference to  the  private  life  that  the  appellant  has
established in the UK, and that the Judge has  not  considered  any  factors
relevant to an article 8 proportionality assessment. He  told  me  that  the
decision is devoid of consideration of paragraph 276 ADE of  the  rules.  He
told me that at [45] and [46]  the  Judge  applies  the  wrong  standard  of
proof. He urged me to set the decision aside.

6. For the respondent, Mr Mills told me that  the  grant  of  permission  to
appeal limits the focus in this appeal to paragraph 276  ADE(1)(vi)  of  the
rules. He conceded that the Judge does not cite paragraph 276ADE,  and  told
me that if that is an error it is not a material error.  He  invited  me  to
look at all of the Judge's findings. The Judge finds that the  appellant  is
not a refugee; the Judge finds that the appellant can safely return to  Iraq
and can safely relocate to IKR. He told  me  that  those  findings  are  not
challenged and argued that, in the light of those findings, the Judge  could
not,  rationally,  find  that  there  are  very  significant  obstacles   to
integration. Mr Mills asked me to dismiss the appeal.

Analysis

7. The grounds of appeal set out three challenges. The first related to  the
adequacy of reasoning; the second related to consideration of the manner  in
which the appellant might obtain a replacement CSID; the  third  focuses  on
paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi)

8. The grant of permission to appeal says that there is nothing  wrong  with
the Judge's reasoning in relation to the asylum appeal and that the  Judge's
findings in relation to the availability of a CSID are adequately  reasoned.
Permission to appeal was granted  on  the  narrow  issue  of  paragraph  276
ADE(1)(vi) only.

9. To meet the requirements of paragraph 276 ADE(1)(vi)  of  the  rules  the
appellant  would  have  to  establish  very  significant  obstacles  to  his
integration  in  either  Iraq  or  IKR.  In  submissions,  the   appellant's
solicitor said that the balancing exercise has not been fully  undertaken  &
that the Judge does not consider the negative findings surrounding what  the
appellant will face on return.  The  appellant's  solicitor  said  that  the
Judge did not consider that the appellant is Kurdish, that  he  is  a  Sunni
Muslim, that he did not have an education and that he says he left  Iraq  at
16 years old.

10. The fact that the appellant is a Sunni Muslim and a Kurd  who  lived  in
Iraq until he was 16 years old are not (on their own) factors  which  create
obstacles to integration. There is a dispute about the appellant's  age.  On
the appellant's account he is now 18 years of age, the  respondent  believes
he is 20 years of age. In any event he is a young adult who has  spent  most
of his life in Iraq.

11. The  Judge  rejected  the  appellant's  asylum  claim.  In  his  witness
statement (which was before the First-tier Tribunal) the  appellant  focused
on his asylum claim saying that he has a fear of both  ISIS  and  Arabs.  He
summarises his claim at paragraph 36 of his witness statement by saying

      I confirm I cannot relocate to another  area  of  Iraq  because  I  am
      Kurdish, and I cannot speak Arabic. I am a Sunni Muslim and  therefore
      I will be killed and not save(d). I do not have  any  family  left  in
      Kurdistan.  I  cannot  relocate  because  other  areas  in  Iraq   are
      controlled by ISIS. ISIS are still attacking innocent people in Iraq.

12. The only other evidence  to  support  the  appellant's  article  8  ECHR
appeal is that he has lived with his brother since soon after he arrived  in
the UK.

13. Between  [14]  and  [20]  of  the  decision  the  Judge  summarises  the
evidence. Between [21] and [28] he  summarises  the  submissions  that  were
made. At [28] the Judge says that the only submission made  in  relation  to
article 8 ECHR grounds of appeal was that  the  appellant  had  developed  a
strong private life, the evidence for which is in his witness statement.

14. The Judge's findings and conclusions lie between [29] and  [54]  of  the
decision.  The  Judge  rejects  the  appellant's  asylum  and   humanitarian
protection claim  in  its  entirety.  At  [47]  the  Judge  finds  that  the
appellant has been dishonest. At [48] and [49]  the  Judge  finds  that  the
appellant is not entitled to humanitarian protection.  Those  findings  were
made by considering what would face the appellant in Iraq & IKR.

15. At [53] the Judge turns to article 8 ECHR grounds of appeal.  The  Judge
bemoans the paucity of evidence of article 8 private life. The  Judge  finds
the public interest in immigration control outweighs any  article  8  rights
the appellant may have.

16. It is true that the Judge does not cite paragraph 276 ADE(1)(vi) of  the
rules. But the Judges findings of  fact  (drawn  from  the  evidence  placed
before the Judge) indicate  that  there  are  no  significant  obstacles  to
integration. The only evidence driving at article 8 is  in  the  appellant's
witness statement. Paragraph 276 ADE is consideration of article  8  private
life. The  only  part  of  the  appellant's  witness  statement  that  could
possibly drive at very significant obstacles relates to  his  asylum  claim.
If the appellant's asylum claim had been successful, by analogy there  would
be evidence of very significant obstacles to integration.

17.  The  cold  fact  is  that  the   appellant's   protection   claim   was
unsuccessful. His appeal against the refusal of  his  protection  claim  was
unsuccessful.  The  Judge  gives  adequate   reasons   for   rejecting   the
appellant's protection appeal. In doing so the Judge makes  a  finding  that
there are no significant obstacles to integration.  Nothing  else  is  plead
which could relate to paragraph 276 ADE.

18. It  would  have  been  helpful  if  the  Judge  said  that  because  the
appellant's protection  appeal  is  unsuccessful  he  cannot  succeed  under
paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi), but his failure to do so is not  a  material  error
of law. The Judge's unchallenged findings of  fact  can  only  lead  to  the
conclusion that there are no significant obstacles to integration.  What  is
now  plead  for  the  appellant  (his  ethnicity,  religion  and  lifetime's
experience) are all factors which indicate  that  he  is  well  equipped  to
integrate both in IKR and Iraq.

19.   In VV (grounds of appeal) Lithuania [2016] UKUT  00053  (IAC)  it  was
held that (i) An application for permission to  appeal  on  the  grounds  of
inadequacy of reasoning in the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  must
generally demonstrate by reference to  the  material  and  arguments  placed
before that Tribunal that  (a)  the  matter  involved  a  substantial  issue
between the parties at first instance  and  (b)  that  the  Tribunal  either
failed to deal with that matter at all, or gave reasons on that point  which
are so unclear that they may well conceal an error of law. (ii)  Given  that
parties are under a duty to help further the overriding objective and to co-
operate with the Upper  Tribunal,  those  drafting  grounds  of  appeal  (a)
should proceed on the basis that decisions of the  First-tier  Tribunal  are
to be read fairly and as a whole and without excessive legalism; (b)  should
not seek to argue  that  a  particular  consideration  was  not  taken  into
account by the Tribunal when it can be seen from the  decision  read  fairly
and as a  whole  that  it  was  (and  the  real  disagreement  is  with  the
Tribunal's assessment of the evidence or the merits);  and  (c)  should  not
challenge the adequacy of the  reasons  given  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal
without demonstrating how the principles in (i) above  have  been  breached,
by reference to the materials placed before that Tribunal and the  important
or substantial issues which it was asked to  determine  in  that  particular
case.

20. A fair reading of the decision demonstrates that the Judge  applied  the
correct test in law. The Judge carried out a holistic assessment of  all  of
the evidence. There is nothing unfair in the procedure adopted  nor  in  the
manner in which the evidence was considered. There  is  nothing  wrong  with
the  Judge's  fact-finding  exercise.  The  appellant  might  not  like  the
conclusion that the Judge arrived at, but that conclusion is the  result  of
the correctly applied legal equation. The  correct  test  in  law  has  been
applied. The decision does not contain a material error of law.

21.   The decision does not contain a material error  of  law.  The  Judge's
decision stands.

DECISION

22.   The appeal is dismissed. The  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
promulgated on 21 March 2019, stands.

Signed
                   Date 5 August 2019



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle
















