
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12884/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at   Priory Courts Birmingham           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 18 January 2019                            |On 18 February 2019           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                                     J F
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:       Mr H Samra of Harbans Singh Solicitors
For the Respondent:      Mr D Mills Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The appellant appeals against the decision of  Judge  AK  Hussain  (the
    judge) of the First Tier Tribunal (the FTT) promulgated on  12  January
    2018.

 2.  The  appellant  is  an  Iranian  national  who  arrived  in   the   UK
    clandestinely on 12 April 2015 and claimed asylum. His asylum and human
    rights claim was refused on 22 November 2017. His appeal was heard  and
    dismissed on 5 January 2018.

 3. The appellant claimed that he and his wife, who had travelled to the UK
    with him, would be at risk from the authorities if  returned  to  Iran.
    This was because the appellant had come to the adverse attention of the
    authorities because of his activities as a site acquisition manager for
    a Chinese company in Teheran, and because he and his wife had converted
    from Islam to Christianity and they are evangelical Christians.

 4. Following dismissal of his appeal the appellant applied for  permission
    to  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  contending  that  the  judge  had
    materially erred in law in finding that although the appellant and  his
    wife had converted to Christianity in the UK, they would not be at risk
    if returned to Iran

 5. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Brunnen of the FTT who  noted
    that the judge had accepted that the appellant had converted from Islam
    to  Christianity  and  accepted  that  the  appellant  belonged  to  an
    evangelical church. Judge Brunnen found it arguable  that  the  judge's
    finding that the appellant had not evangelised in the UK, would not  do
    so in Iran, and could if necessary relocate to conceal  his  conversion
    and consequently would not be at risk in Iran is perverse.

 6. Following the grant of permission to appeal  the  respondent  lodged  a
    response pursuant to rule 24 of the  2008  Procedure  Rules  indicating
    that the application for permission  to  appeal  was  not  opposed  and
    inviting the Upper Tribunal to hold an oral hearing to consider whether
    the appellant is a convert who actively pursues evangelism.

Consideration and Conclusions

 7. At the oral hearing Mr Mills adopted the rule 24  response  and  stated
    that the respondent accepted that the judge had erred in law in finding
    that the appellant would not be at risk of persecution in Iran  because
    of his conversion from Islam to Christianity,  and  accepted  that  the
    decision of the FTT should  be  set  aside  and  remade,  allowing  the
    appellant's appeal. This was because the findings  made  by  the  judge
    indicated that the appellant would be at risk if returned to Iran.

 8.  I find the concession made by the respondent to be rightly  made.  The
    judge at paragraph 31 of his decision was satisfied that the  appellant
    and his wife are Christians and that they became Christians in the UK.

 9. The judge rightly placed  considerable  weight  upon  the  evidence  of
    Reverend Austin who gave evidence in support of the appellant. Reverend
    Austin confirmed that  his  is  an  evangelical  church  and  that  the
    appellant is a member of that church and had been evangelising and  had
    converted a fellow asylum seeker to Christianity. The judge also  found
    at paragraph 34 that part of the appellant's faith is to evangelise.

10. Country guidance case law and the respondent's own  guidance  indicates
    that individuals who have converted from Islam to Christianity and  who
    are evangelical Christians and therefore to evangelise is part of their
    faith would be at risk in Iran.

11. I therefore accept what has been conceded by the  respondent,  in  that
    the judge erred in law in finding that the appellant as an  evangelical
    Christian who had converted from Islam would not be at  risk  in  Iran.
    The decision of the FTT is set aside  and  I  remake  the  decision  by
    allowing the appeal on asylum grounds as the appellant has demonstrated
    to the lower standard of proof that  he  has  a  well-founded  fear  of
    persecution by reason of his religion. The appeal is also allowed  with
    reference to article 3 of the 1950 European Convention as the appellant
    has proved that he would be at risk of being subjected to torture or to
    inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment if returned to Iran.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the FTT involved the making of an error of law such that  it
is set aside.

The appeal is allowed on asylum grounds.

The appeal is allowed on human rights grounds with reference  to  article  3
of the 1950 European Convention.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed  [pic]                           Date 27 January 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.

Signed  [pic]                           Date 27 January 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall
