
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: pa/12125/2019 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided under rule 34                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On: 29 July 2020                     |On: 03 August 2020                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                                     FH
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS

This decision has been made on the papers, under Rule  34  of  The  Tribunal
Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules  2008,  further  to  directions  issued  by
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson on 28 May 2020.

The appellant is a  national  of  Iraq  of  Kurdish  ethnicity,  born  on  2
November 1994, from Erbil. He arrived in the United Kingdom on 4 April  2019
and claimed asylum the same day.

The appellant's claim was made on the basis that he was at  risk  on  return
to Iraq from his uncles as a result of his refusal to kill his mother  after
she had eloped with a  man,  K,  and  thus  dishonoured  their  family.  The
appellant claimed that K made three marriage proposals to  his  mother,  but
his uncles did not accept the proposals and his mother  then  eloped  on  28
February 2019. The appellant claimed  that  his  uncles  had  high  military
ranks within the KDP. They contacted the court and  had  an  arrest  warrant
issued for his mother. He claimed that his  uncles  would  kill  him  if  he
returned to Iraq and that he was at risk of being persecuted as a member  of
a particular social group, namely a potential victim of an honour killing.

The respondent refused the  appellant's  claim  on  28  November  2019.  The
respondent rejected the appellant's account and considered that  he  was  at
no risk on return to Iraq. Even if it was accepted that he was  at  risk  in
his home area, the respondent considered that the appellant  could  relocate
to another part of the IKR. He would be able to obtain his CSID in order  to
do so. He could support himself with the help of his maternal aunt  and  her
husband as they had helped him leave Iraq.  The  respondent  concluded  that
the appellant's removal would not breach his human rights.

The appellant appealed against that decision. His appeal was heard by  First
tier Tribunal Judge Hawden-Beal on 13 February 2020. Judge  Hawden-Beal  had
before her photographs of the appellant's uncles  which  his  cousin  N  had
sent to him. The appellant explained that he had asked N  to  send  him  his
identity documents as well as information about the  ranks  of  his  uncles,
but N had only been able to obtain the photographs as his  eldest  uncle  S,
his mother's brother, had kept hold  of  everything  else.  The  appellant's
evidence before the judge was that his father had died of  cancer  in  2010.
He had a brother aged 11 and a sister aged 13. His sister had left with  his
mother when she eloped. He claimed that he could not live  in  any  part  of
Iraq because his uncles were powerful and were highly connected  within  the
government and would find him. He claimed that his  maternal  uncle  S  beat
him badly when he refused to kill his mother and would have killed  him  but
he was stopped by his paternal uncle F. It was his mother's sister  who  had
helped him flee Iraq.

Judge Hawden-Beal considered that the  respondent's  reasons  for  rejecting
the appellant's account were based upon speculation  and  she  accepted  the
appellant's account. She accepted that his mother had  eloped  and  that  he
was considered to have dishonoured his family by refusing to kill  her.  She
accepted that he was in  danger  on  that  basis  and  was  a  member  of  a
particular social group, namely a man who was perceived to  have  failed  to
protect his family honour and who feared honour violence. The judge did  not
accept that the appellant was at risk from his paternal uncles  because  one
of them had tried to protect  him  against  S  at  the  beginning,  but  she
accepted that he was at risk from his maternal uncle  S.  However,  she  did
not accept that the evidence showed S to be as powerful  or  influential  as
the appellant claimed, she did not find the photographs to be  determinative
of his position or rank and she did not accept that  he  would  be  able  to
find the appellant anywhere in  Iraq.  She  considered  that  if  S  was  so
powerful, he would have been able to find the appellant's  mother.  She  did
not accept that S was still looking for the appellant, as claimed by N,  but
in any event she considered  that  the  appellant  could  live  in  the  IKR
without being found by his uncle, as he had managed  to  do  before  leaving
the country. She considered that the appellant  could  relocate  to  another
part of the IKR and could receive support and assistance from  his  maternal
aunt and her husband. She did not, therefore,  consider  that  he  qualified
for asylum. The judge found further that the appellant was not at Article  2
or 3 risk and that his removal would not breach his Article 8  human  rights
and she accordingly dismissed the appeal.

Permission to appeal was sought by the appellant on the  following  grounds:
that  the  judge  was  wrong  to  find  that  the   photographs   were   not
determinative of S's rank as they showed him in military  uniform  and  also
showed him standing near the Deputy Prime Minister; that the judge had  made
contradictory and speculative  findings  about  the  appellant's  uncle  S's
ability to find his mother; that the judge had made speculative and  unclear
findings about his cousin being afraid to help him;  and  that  the  judge's
finding  that  the  appellant  was  not  at  risk  from  his  uncle  S   was
incompatible with the positive findings of fact made.

Permission was granted on 7 April 2020 on all grounds, but  with  particular
reference to  the  arguably  speculative  findings  made  by  the  judge  in
relation to S's ability to find the appellant's mother.

The appellant's case was then reviewed by the  Upper  Tribunal  due  to  the
circumstances relating to Covid 19. In a Note and Directions sent out on  28
May 2020 Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson  indicated  that  he  had  reached  the
provisional view that the question  of  whether  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
decision involved the making of  error  of  law  and,  if  so,  whether  the
decision should be set aside, could be made without a  hearing.  Submissions
were invited from the parties.

Written submissions have been received  from  both  parties,  from  Fountain
Solicitors on behalf of the appellant dated 8 June 2020 and  from  Ms  Aboni
for the respondent dated 15 June 2020. Neither party had  any  objection  to
the matter being decided on the papers. In  the  circumstances,  and  having
considered further whether deciding the matter without a hearing would  give
rise to any unfairness, I conclude that I am  able,  fully  and  fairly,  to
consider the error of law issue on the basis of  the  papers  before  me  in
accordance with rule 34 of the Procedure Rules. I have  therefore  proceeded
to consider whether or not Judge Hawden-Beal's decision contains  errors  of
law such that it should be set aside. I conclude that there  are  no  errors
of law in her decision. I do so for the following reasons.

Having accepted that the appellant was  a  member  of  a  particular  social
group and was at risk  from  his  maternal  uncle  S  by  reason  of  having
dishonoured his family, the judge dismissed the appeal  on  the  basis  that
the appellant could safely and reasonably relocate to another  part  of  the
IKR where his uncle would not be able to find him. She did  not  accept  the
appellant's claim that S was powerful and influential and,  as  such,  could
locate him anywhere in Iraq.  The  sole  issue  in  dispute,  therefore,  is
whether the judge erred in her  reasons  for  finding  that  S  was  not  as
powerful and influential as claimed by the appellant.

The ground of appeal upon which permission was specifically granted  (albeit
granted on all grounds) was in  relation  to  the  judge's  finding  on  S's
inability to locate the appellant's mother as a reason for  concluding  that
S was not as influential as claimed. It is argued that such  a  finding  was
speculative and  based  upon  guess  work  as  the  evidence  was  that  the
appellant's mother had left Iraq and the  judge  had  acknowledged  at  [43]
that S could not be expected  to  have  found  her  if  she  had  left  Iraq
completely. However, that does not mean to say, in my view, that  the  judge
was not entitled to consider the  failure  of  S  to  find  the  appellant's
mother prior to her departure from Iraq when assessing his  level  of  power
and influence. In any event, there were various other reasons given  by  the
judge for concluding that S would not be able to find the  appellant  if  he
relocated within the IKR. At [45] the judge noted  that  the  appellant  was
previously able to go into hiding with the help of his aunt and her  husband
without S finding him, that there  was  no  evidence  that  S  was  actively
looking for him at that time and that there  was  no  evidence  that  S  had
found out who had helped him. The judge  also  referred  to  the  background
evidence, at [45], in considering the extent to which  the  appellant  could
relocate within the IKR, a matter not challenged in  the  grounds.  Further,
the judge had regard to the photographs relied  upon  by  the  appellant  as
evidence of his uncle's high ranking position and influence,  at  [39],  and
concluded that they were not sufficient to demonstrate that he held  such  a
position. The grounds challenge the findings in that regard, but  the  judge
provided proper reasons for so concluding. She was  entitled  to  reach  the
conclusions that she did and to accord the photographs the weight  that  she
did.

As a final comment at [3(vi)] of the grounds, there is the suggestion  that,
having accepted that the appellant was  a  member  of  a  particular  social
group and at risk of being the victim of an honour killing at the  hands  of
his uncle, the judge contradicted herself by concluding that he was  not  at
risk on return to Iraq. However, that is clearly not the  case  because  the
judge gave proper reasons for concluding that  the  appellant  could  safely
and reasonably live elsewhere in the IKR without his uncle knowing  that  he
was there. It is clear from [46] that the judge was not satisfied about  the
credibility of the appellant's claim that his uncle was  still  looking  for
him, but in any event, the  judge's  findings  as  to  the  availability  of
relocation within the IKR were fully and properly open  to  her.  The  judge
had the benefit of hearing from the appellant and assessing the  documentary
evidence and it is clear that she gave  careful  consideration  to  all  the
evidence in making her findings. The grounds are essentially a  disagreement
with the judge's conclusion as to the ability of the appellant's uncle S  to
find him in another area of the IKR, but  that  was  a  conclusion  she  was
entitled to reach.

Accordingly,  I  find  no  error  of  law  in  the  judge's   findings   and
conclusions. Her conclusion, that the appellant could safely and  reasonably
relocate to another part of the  IKR,  that  he  had  or  could  obtain  the
relevant documentation to enable  him  to  return  there  and  that  he  was
therefore not at risk on return  to  Iraq,  was  one  which  was  fully  and
properly open to her  on  the  evidence.  I  therefore  uphold  the  judge's
decision.



DECISION

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  did  not  involve  an
error on a point of law. I do not set aside the decision.  The  decision  to
dismiss the appeal stands.




    Anonymity

    The anonymity direction made by the First-tier Tribunal is maintained.


Signed:  S Kebede
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede                               Dated: 29 July
2020
