
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12065/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 16th May 2019                    |On 17 May 2019                        |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA

                                   Between

                                     YJB
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr C Timson, instructed by UK & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Bates, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


   1. The First-tier Tribunal ("FtT) has made an anonymity order and for the
      avoidance of any doubt, that order continues.  YJB is granted
      anonymity throughout these proceedings.  No report of these
      proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify him.  This direction
      applies both to the appellant and to the respondent. Failure to comply
      with this direction could lead to proceedings being brought for
      contempt of court.


   2. This is an appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal ("FtT")
      Judge Cox promulgated on 11th June 2018.  The FtT Judge dismissed the
      appellant's appeal against the decision of the respondent dated 31st
      October 2018, to refuse his claim for international protection.


   3. The appellant is a national of Iran. He was born on 1st January 1996
      at the Altash camp in Ramadi, Iraq.  He claims that at the age of 6 or
      7, his family moved to the Barika refugee camp in Iraq. The fact that
      the appellant lived at the Barika refugee camp was accepted by the
      respondent. The appellant claimed that in or about September 2016, he
      left Iraq and travelled to the UK via Turkey, Greece and France. He
      arrived in United Kingdom on 12th March 2018 and made his claim for
      asylum.


   4. The respondent accepted that the appellant's father was a member of
      the KDPI. The appellant's case is that his parents had travelled to
      Iraq during the war between Iran and Iraq.  The respondent accepted
      that the appellant has provided an internally consistent account of
      his family leaving Iran, and of life in the Barika refugee camp. His
      account was also consistent with the external background material
      available.  The claim for international protection made by the
      appellant had two to strands to it. First, he could not return to
      Iran, because of his father's previous political activities and
      membership of the KDPI.  Second, he could not return to Iraq as he has
      no rights, or lawful status there.


   5. The Judge records at paragraph [7] of her decision, that it was common
      ground between the parties at the hearing of the appeal, that the
      issue for the FtT Judge was a narrow one.  The issue was whether the
      appellant would be at risk upon return to Iran as a result of links to
      his father. However, the FtT Judge notes at paragraph [15], that it
      was submitted by the Presenting Officer that the appellant could
      return to Iraq.


   6. At the hearing of the appeal, the appellant relied upon a UNHCR
      Refugee Certificate, issued to him on 13th September 2016, and valid
      until 13th September 2017. The document is said to confirm that the
      appellant has refugee status in Iraq, but that is renewable every
      year.  The appellant claimed that the document had been sent to him by
      his uncle, and that everyone in the camp had such documents.  In
      evidence, the appellant claimed that he had not approached the Iraqi
      Embassy to renew the status document, and said he would not do so, as
      Iraq is not his country of nationality.


   7. At paragraph [12] of her decision, the FtT Judge records the following
      evidence given by the appellant about his father's activities:


          "He confirmed that his father had not been approached at any time
          in the camp about his involvement with the KDPI and said that he
          was unsure if his father was politically active adding that owing
          to his age, he was unsure if he was active. He said that many in
          the camps would sit and discuss politics, and that his father did
          do that, but was much less involved. The appellant confirmed that
          he had never had any involvement with the KDPI. He said he did
          not even like them."


   8. The findings and conclusions of the FtT Judge are set out at
      paragraphs [25] to [46] of the decision.


   9. At paragraph [33], the FtT Judge notes that the objective evidence
      makes clear that the status of those in the camp as identified by the
      appellant, does mean they have no right or pathway to citizenship in
      Iraq.  The FtT Judge however rejected the submission made on behalf of
      the appellant that as the appellant has been granted UNHCR refugee
      status, it must follow that the UK is bound to accept that the
      appellant is a refugee.


  10. At paragraph [35], the FtT Judge states:


          "I find that the appellant is therefore a Kurd, he has not
          illegally exited but has not been in Iran. I find that he could
          establish his Iranian citizenship as his UNHCR document confirms
          that, and I find that he could obtain a laissez-passer. The
          authorities would, as Mr Azmi notes in his skeleton, have the
          details of the appellant from having issued the laissez-passer.
          The registration of his birth in the refugee camp will assist in
          the identity information required. The appellant can obtain that
          via the UNHCR at the camp, or his relatives, as he did his
          certificate before me."


  11. At paragraph [36] of the decision, the FtT Judge again notes that the
      appellant's father left with many others a very long time ago.  She
      noted that the objective evidence shows that the authorities in Iran
      do indeed, on occasion, contact those they consider to be politically
      active, or opponents, even when they are outside of Iran. She noted
      however that there is no evidence at all, that the appellant's father
      has been troubled by the authorities. Insofar as the appellant is
      concerned, the FtT Judge states, at [36], as follows:


          ".. He did not of course leave Iraq as a result of any such risk
          or concern. I find that there is no interest at all in the
          appellant's father from the Iranian authorities as a result of
          activities that took place. The membership of the KDPI dates back
          almost 40 years. I do not find the father and his past activities
          cause the appellant to be of heightened interest or (sic) to
          therefore be at risk. The appellant has his family living without
          difficulty from the Iranian authorities in Iraq."


  12. The FtT Judge found that the appellant would be questioned, but noted
      that there was no evidence that the questioning would be of a kind, or
      in a place, where ill-treatment could be expected. The FtT Judge
      considered the guidance set out in SSH and HR (illegal exit: failed
      asylum seeker) Iran CG [2016] UKUT 00306 (IAC), and found that there
      are no additional factors beyond illegal exit and Kurdish ethnicity.
      The Judge states, at [38], ".. His position is straightforward he has
      been born in a camp, he has no political links and his father I find
      was a member of the KDPI and is of no interest to the authorities. On
      the full factual matrix I do not find that that is a risk that the
      appellant faces. I do not find that he would be interrogated or
      treated in any way so as to place him at risk and succeed in his
      appeal.".


The appeal before me


  13. The appellant refers in the grounds of appeal to the more recent
      country guidance set out in HB (Kurds) Iran CG [2018] UKUT 00430
      (IAC).  That country guidance case was heard by the Upper Tribunal in
      February and May 2018, prior to the hearing of the appellant's appeal,
      but promulgated shortly before the decision of FtT Judge Cox.  That
      more recent country guidance, was plainly capable of having an impact
      upon the outcome of the appeal, but was not referred to by the FtT
      Judge.


  14. Permission to appeal was granted by FtT Judge Hodgkinson on 19th March
      2019.  The matter comes before me to consider whether the decision of
      the FtT involved the making of a material error of law, and if so, to
      remake the decision.


  15. Before me, Mr Bates accepts that the failure to having regard to the
      country guidance decision in HB (Kurds) Iran CG, discloses a material
      error of law capable of affecting the outcome of the appeal.  He
      concedes, rightly in my judgment, that in the circumstances, the
      decision of the FtT cannot stand.  He concedes that the decision of
      the FtT contains a material error of law and should be set aside.


  16. As to disposal, there is in my judgement no reason why I should not re-
      make the decision.  Mr Bates accepts that the factual background is
      uncontroversial. The appellant is an Iranian national, of Kurdish
      ethnicity, who was born in a refugee camp in Iraq. The respondent has
      accepted that the appellant's father was a member of the KDPI.  He
      submits that in re-making the decision, the question for me is whether
      the appellant will be at risk upon return, in light of the guidance
      set out in HB (Kurds) Iran CG.  Iranian Kurdish asylum-seekers are not
      at risk on account of their Kurdish ethnicity alone.  However, Mr
      Bates acknowledges that since 2016, the Iranian authorities have
      become increasingly suspicious of, and sensitive to, Kurdish political
      activity. Those of Kurdish ethnicity are thus regarded with even
      greater suspicion than hitherto, and are reasonably likely to be
      subjected to heightened scrutiny on return to Iran.  He also
      acknowledges that Kurds involved in Kurdish political groups or
      activity are at risk of arrest, prolonged detention and physical abuse
      by the Iranian authorities.  The threshold for suspicion is low, and
      the reaction of the authorities, is reasonably likely to be extreme.
      Mr Bates submits that each case must be determined upon its own facts,
      but is prepared to accept that on the facts here, and having in mind
      the standard of proof, there appears to be a reasonable likelihood
      that the appellant will face more than reasonable questioning upon
      returning to Iran, such as to cross the threshold required to
      establish a consequent risk of persecution.


  17. On the uncontroversial facts here, I find that the appellant has
      discharged the burden of proof of having a well-founded fear of
      persecution for a Convention reason, and that the removal of the
      appellant to Iran would cause the United Kingdom to be in breach of
      its obligations under the 1951 Convention.


  18. It follows that I allow the appeal on Refugee Convention grounds.  For
      his part, Mr Timson did not pursue the appeal on Article 2, 3 and 8
      grounds, and the appeal is dismissed on human rights grounds.


Notice of Decision


  19. The appellant's appeal against the decision of FtT Judge Cox is
      allowed and the decision of the FtT Judge is set aside.


  20. I allow the appeal on asylum grounds.


  21. I dismiss the appeal on Article 2, 3 and 8 ECHR grounds.

Signed                                  Date          16th May 2019




      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia




TO THE RESPONDENT


FEE AWARD

I have allowed the appeal but as no fee is payable,  there  can  be  no  fee
award.


Signed                                                16th May 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia
