
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12471/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard remotely via Skype for Business|Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 7 April 2021                      |On 19 April 2021                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                     ON
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Hashmi
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a female citizen of Zimbabwe who was born in 1985. She
    appeals against  a  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  which  was
    promulgated on 4 March 2020.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  dismissed  her
    appeal against a decision of the Secretary of State  dated  5  December
    2019 refusing her international protection.

 2. The parties agree that the appellant is a  victim  of  trafficking  and
    that she is bisexual. I find that the judge has erred in  law  for  the
    following reasons and that his decision should be set aside.

 3. First, it is not clear from a reading of the decision  whether  or  not
    the judge found that the issue of internal flight should be  considered
    because the appellant is at risk in her home area.   The  appellant  is
    from Bulawayo. The judge at [21], in a series of findings   which  have
    been rendered very unclear in part by poor proof  reading,  finds  that
    the appellant whilst in Bulawayo  'probably  did  practice  her  sexual
    leanings discreetly' and  that  'given  her  bisexual  status  are  not
    satisfied she would be any more than harassed were she returned to  her
    home area (sic)' I am not entirely sure what that sentence  means.  The
    judge seems to be saying that the appellant would not be at  real  risk
    in her home area and that the worst problem she might experience  there
    is harassment rather than serious harm. If that is what he  is  saying,
    then no adequate reasons have been provided. Later in the decision, the
    judge at [34] agrees with the appellant's counsel that the 'key  issue'
    is internal  flight.  However,  internal  flight  need  not  have  been
    addressed if the judge had found that the appellant would  be  safe  in
    her home area. It is, of course, common practice for a Tribunal to find
    that there is no risk to an appellant in the  home  area  and  then  to
    consider internal flight in the alternative (i.e. in the event that the
    findings regarding the home area may be incorrect). I am not  persuaded
    that that is what the judge has done in this  instance.  The  appellant
    was entitled to know why she lost her appeal and, in  my  opinion,  the
    judge has not provided a sufficiently clear explanation.

 4. Secondly, I find that the judge has failed to give cogent reasons as to
    exactly why the appellant would choose  to  conceal  her  sexuality  on
    return to Zimbabwe. It is unclear whether  the  judge  found  that  the
    appellant would  behave  discreetly  and  not  reveal  her  bisexuality
    because she feared ill treatment or that she would do so solely out  of
    loyalty to her husband (see HJ (Iran) [2010] UKSC 31). The judge  seems
    to find that the appellant may be able to engage without real risk with
    'bisexual/LGBT' persons and organisations 'in  so  far  as  they  exist
    secretly' but finding that the appellant may 'continue to  seek  sexual
    adventures' is not consistent with the finding that the appellant would
    remain loyal to her husband.

 5. Thirdly, as Upper Tribunal Judge Norton  Taylor  observed  when  making
    directions and  as  I  have  already  observed  regarding  the  judge's
    discussion of internal flight, parts  of  the  decision  are,  frankly,
    barely intelligible. For example, at [25] the judge writes:

         The Tribunal is invited Not to apply a burden but  ask  whether  it
         would be on appellant to the lower  standard.  The  'unduly  harsh'
         test is not the same as the test for persecution, however.

    The judge starts the next paragraph  with  the  words,  'Applying  that
    standard...' One might reasonably ask: what standard? I can just  about
    understand what the judge is trying to say but the decision  should  be
    written in such a way that the appellant  can  understand  it.   Issues
    addressed in a decision may be complex but a reader should not have  to
    struggle to understand the  reasons  why  a  Tribunal  decides  upon  a
    particular outcome.

 6. In the light of what I have said, I find that the  decision  should  be
    set aside. There will need to be a fresh fact-finding exercise and that
    is better conducted in the First-tier Tribunal to which this appeal  is
    now returned for it to remake the decision.

    Notice of Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  is  set  aside.  None  of  the
    findings of fact shall stand. The appeal is returned to the  First-tier
    Tribunal for that Tribunal to remake the decision following  a  hearing
    de novo. Both parties may rely on new evidence provided copies  of  any
    documentary evidence (including witness statements)  are  sent  to  the
    other party and the Tribunal no less  than  10  days  before  the  next
    hearing.

    LISTING  DIRECTIONS:  Bradford;  not  Judge  Hanbury;   2   hours;   No
    interpreter; first available date; First-tier  Tribunal  to  decide  if
    remote or face to face hearing.



Signed                                                               Date  7
April 2021
Upper Tribunal Judge Lane



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.




