
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12048/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|Oral judgment given at hearing                |                              |
|On 21 September 2018                          |On 23 October 2018            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK


                                   Between

                                     la
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J. Trumpington, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms A. Fijiwala, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Ghana born in 1979.  He arrived in the UK
    in  March  2011  with  limited  leave  until  2012.   It  appears  that
    thereafter he overstayed.  He made a claim for asylum  and  that  claim
    was refused by the  respondent  on  2  November  2017.   The  appellant
    appealed against that decision and his appeal  came  before  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Telford on 25 January 2018. Judge Telford dismissed  the
    appeal on all grounds.  Permission to appeal  against  Judge  Telford's
    decision was granted by a judge of the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The basis of the appellant's claim is a fear of persecution  on  return
    to Ghana on account of his sexuality.  Judge Telford  did  not  believe
    his claim as to his sexuality and decided that he could  return  safely
    to Ghana.  It is said on behalf of the respondent  that  there  was  an
    alternative finding to the effect that the appellant, even if bisexual,
    could live discreetly on return to Ghana.

 3. The grounds of appeal in  relation  to  Judge  Telford's  decision  are
    lengthy and raise multiple complaints.  Judge Telford's decision itself
    is a lengthy one and is obviously the result of  considerable  industry
    on his behalf.  I have however, concluded that  his  decision  contains
    errors of law which cumulatively, even if not individually, require his
    decision to be set aside.

 4. In giving my reasons and in referring to the grounds in support of  the
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal ("UT") I do not propose to refer  to  each
    and every ground, either because aspects of the grounds have  not  been
    relied on or because I have focused  on  what  I  consider  to  be  the
    grounds which have most force.

 5. I summarise the submissions made on behalf of the parties before me  as
    I give my reasons.

 6. In my giving of  reasons  I  shall  also  refer  to  aspects  of  Judge
    Telford's  decision  which,  together  with   my   reference   to   the
    submissions, will explain why I have  concluded  that  Judge  Telford's
    decision should be set aside for error of law.

    Conclusions and reasons

 7. In paragraph 3 of the grounds complaint is made about  Judge  Telford's
    assessment of background evidence.  There was  background  evidence  in
    the form of the Country of Origin and Information Report on Ghana ("COI
    report").  There was also a Human Rights Watch Report  ("HRW  report"),
    the  US  State  Department  Report  ("USSD  report")  and  an   Amnesty
    International Report ("AI report").  At para 71 Judge Telford said that
    background material is made up of  case  reports,  opinion  pieces  and
    letters, and individual statements.

 8. He said that such "forms some kind of evidence with which to  at  least
    get a sense of what it is like for gays in Ghana".   He  then  said  as
    follows:

         "COIR are much better placed to transfer into  something  objective
         in the sense that there are  more  measured  statements  with  care
         taken to avoid being the tool of an agenda driven organisation."

 9. What Judge Telford appears to have been saying there,  in  effect,  was
    that the document produced by the Country of  Information  service  was
    more likely to be reliable.  The complaint  that  is  made  about  that
    conclusion is that the COI reports are compiled  by  the  Secretary  of
    State for immigration  officials  and  cannot  be  said  to  be  either
    objective or independent.  The complaint is  that  the  readiness  with
    which Judge Telford accepted as objective the evidence produced by  the
    respondent without due consideration of other reports such as  the  HRW
    report and AI report is indicative of a flawed approach.

10. It is true that at paras 72 and 73 Judge Telford referred  to  the  HRW
    report and the USSD report for 2015 and an AI report for  2016/17.   He
    referred to the HRW report as dealing with  information  received  from
    gay people about life in Ghana whereby the  gay  population  hid  their
    sexuality in order to live otherwise normally.  He  made  reference  to
    some content from the USSD report.

11. I am satisfied that it was an error for Judge Telford to conclude  that
    COI reports are more objective and therefore more likely to be reliable
    than the other sources which he obviously had in mind  namely  HRW  and
    AI.  Whether he also meant the USSD is not  clear.  His  conclusion  in
    relation to COI reports as against the others mentioned  is  indicative
    of a flawed approach in his assessment of the  background  information.
    Alone however, I would not have considered that this was a  basis  upon
    which to set aside his decision  because  he  clearly  appreciated  the
    difficulties that arise for openly gay people in Ghana.

12. Aspects of para 6 of  the  grounds  are  disavowed  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant and I need say no more about those.  It  is  however,  argued
    that there are parts of the judge's decision which  are  confusing  and
    difficult to read; certain paragraphs are cited.  I  do  not  think  it
    necessary to make reference to those parts of the  decision  complained
    about in that regard. Having heard the submissions of the  parties,  it
    seems to me that it is possible to make sense of the  judge's  decision
    in those respects.

13. However, I do consider that there is merit in the suggestion that Judge
    Telford made conflicting findings to the effect that on  the  one  hand
    the appellant was not gay or bisexual yet on the  other  hand  that  he
    could live a discreet life.  At para 59 he said:

           "I conclude that he can and would live a discreet  gay  life  in
           Ghana and as this is the key issue in terms of social group  and
           Convention reason, I find that he has not shown that he is  here
           for reasons other than economic betterment and lifestyle choices
           rather than fear of harm for a Convention reason".

14. Although in her submissions  Ms  Fijiwala,  understandably,  sought  to
    present this as an alternative finding, that is not the effect of  what
    Judge Telford said.  If he was making an alternative  finding,  and  to
    avoid the complaint that it was an inconsistent finding, he should have
    made it clear that he was making a finding in the alternative.

15. I should also say that it  seems  to  me  that  there  are  significant
    problems with terminology used in Judge Telford's decision.  At para  6
    he said as follows:

         "I must point out at this stage that purely for reasons of ease  of
         typing, at points where I state 'gay' it also includes bisexual."

16. Quite apart from what seems to me to be an obvious  infelicity  in  the
    judge's  expression  here  by  using  the  terms   gay   and   bisexual
    interchangeably when, for obvious reasons, they are not interchangeable
    terms, this approach has led to confusion in his decision, for  example
    where he refers to the appellant not having given information about gay
    relationships in circumstances where he married a  female.  It  is  not
    clear whether here he is referring to same-sex relationships  in  using
    the term gay. In addition, he has not maintained the mode of expression
    that he identifies at para 6 (gay/bisexual being used  interchangeably)
    throughout his decision.

17. Para 7.1 of the grounds makes complaint about paras  24  and  25  where
    Judge Telford said that both the appellant and the  witness  called  on
    his behalf had either departed from their  witness  statements  or  had
    substantially added to them.  When  I  asked  Ms  Fijiwala  about  this
    aspect of the grounds she ultimately accepted that  it  was  not  clear
    from the decision in what respects Judge  Telford  concluded  that  the
    appellant or his witness's evidence was deficient in this way.

18. Thus, it is not possible for anyone  reading  his  decision  to  assess
    whether there was any merit in this aspect of his  adverse  credibility
    findings. It is necessary for the parties to understand why the  losing
    party has lost and why the winning party  has  won.   In  circumstances
    where one cannot see why a judge  attributed  weight  to  a  particular
    issue there is a clear danger of an error of law in the  assessment  of
    that evidence.  That danger has been realised in this case  because  it
    is impossible to see what he was referring to in that respect.

19. At para 37 of his decision Judge Telford said that  the  appellant  had
    said that he was private with his family about most  matters  including
    sexual emotions and  feelings  due  to  social  conventions,  religious
    conventions, family reasons and cultural factors. He then said that  "I
    have rejected his claim to have told not a trusted family member but  a
    mere employee" about his sexuality. The complaint made in  the  grounds
    is that what the appellant is said to have said about being private was
    not evidence that was before the judge.

20. In relation to this and similar complaints, it was submitted on  behalf
    of the respondent that aside from the fact that otherwise  the  judge's
    decision  was  sustainable,  there  were  no  Home  Office   Presenting
    Officer's notes of the hearing before the First-tier  Tribunal  ("FtT")
    and thus the matter could not be resolved one way or the other,  or  at
    least not so far as the respondent is concerned.

21. I have to say that in my view that  is  not  a  satisfactory  state  of
    affairs. The matters in issue in the grounds have  been  known  to  the
    respondent for long enough. There is nothing to contradict what is said
    in this respect on behalf of the appellant.  In addition,  there  is  a
    witness statement from  counsel  who  appeared  before  the  FtT  which
    attaches a transcript of the record  of  evidence.   Ms  Fijiwala  very
    fairly made  no  complaint  on  behalf  of  the  respondent  about  the
    admission of that evidence. That witness statement is  evidence  as  to
    what was said at that hearing  and  it  supports  this  aspect  of  the
    grounds.

22. Judge Telford also said, at para 38, that the appellant could return as
    a discreetly gay person

         "as the evidence pointed to a person who would not 'rock the  boat'
         because he was a very conservative individual much in tune with his
         family who were there to help him and whom he greatly respected due
         to their shared Christian religious beliefs".

23. A similar complaint is made in this respect to the  one  which  I  have
    previously referred to, namely that it is not clear what evidence Judge
    Telford was referring to, since the appellant had never  asserted  that
    he was either a conservative individual  or  had  a  supportive  family
    which shared Christian beliefs. Indeed on the contrary, his  claim  was
    that his adopted father and  uncle  had  targeted  him  and  sought  to
    convert him to Islam because they were not  supportive  of  his  sexual
    orientation.  On the  face  of  it  therefore,  for  the  reasons  also
    previously given, it is apparent that  Judge  Telford  has  taken  into
    account material that was not before him.

24. At  para  66  there  is  mention  of  evidence  appearing  in  a  sense
    "piecemeal" to use Judge Telford's word and that that was a matter that
    was adverse to the appellant's claim.  The  response  to  that  in  the
    grounds is that the appellant was in the detained  fast  track  process
    and had sought to produce any evidence he could to  support  his  claim
    even if that was to be done in stages. However, Judge Telford also said
    that at no point was he given a straight answer by the appellant as  to
    why he had not taken reasonable steps to obtain any  of  that  evidence
    prior to the various points in  time  that  he  had  provided  it.  The
    appellant was given an opportunity to deal with that matter but  failed
    to do so. Thus, I am not satisfied that the complaint about this aspect
    of the decision has any merit.

25. At paragraph 8.3 of the grounds complaint is made about Judge Telford's
    consideration of letters from friends.  He concluded that there was  no
    evidence apart from the friends who gave evidence at the  hearing  that
    those (other) persons existed, or that if  they  existed  (for  example
    where photographic identity had been provided)  they  were  not  simply
    friends from school who were helping out the appellant in his claim  to
    remain.  The complaints about that are  two-fold.   First  of  all  the
    letters in most cases were supported  by  copies  of  the  individual's
    passports.   Thus  there  was  evidence  that  those  people   existed.
    Secondly, so far as it was  said  that  this  could  be  evidence  from
    friends from school, that failed to take into account that three of the
    witnesses who produced the letters were actually female friends. As was
    accepted by Judge Telford and is uncontentious, the appellant  went  to
    an all-boys school. It is evident therefore that in  this  respect  the
    judge has misunderstood the evidence.

26. At para 69 of his decision Judge  Telford  said  that  in  relation  to
    evidence produced by the appellant it indicated that there  were  three
    gay people in the same school as the appellant  and  virtually  in  the
    same class of close age,  all  of  whom  knew  each  other  and  formed
    relationships "of differing degree" with the appellant.  He  said  that
    the class sizes were not given exactly but were said to be  not  large.
    Judge Telford then said  that  the  school  (which  he  named)  was  an
    exclusive and sought after private school.  The implication  from  this
    paragraph is that he concluded that it  was  not  credible  that  there
    would be three gay people in the same school and virtually of the  same
    age all being together.

27. As to his having said that the school was an exclusive and sought after
    private school, it was submitted on behalf of the  appellant,  and  the
    submission was not resisted on behalf of the respondent, that there was
    no evidence of the  exclusivity  etc  of  that  private  school.   More
    significantly, at para 70 he said this:

         "The respondent thought this must be either the most remarkable  of
         coincidences or a statistical anomaly given the Office for National
         Statistics  ("ONS")  indicate  that  the  actual  level  of   self-
         identifying homosexual males in the population is between 1.5%  and
         3%.  I have no evidence to  counter  that  large  study  which  was
         subject  to  meta-analysis  and  peer  review  and  which  was  not
         conducted by anybody with any political  or  religious  agenda.   I
         have no  evidence  to  indicate  Ghanaians  are  any  different  to
         northern Europeans.  Whilst it is an interesting point, I  find  it
         only assists to a very small degree in  terms  of  likelihoods  and
         propensities."

28. The problems with this aspect of the judge's  decision  are  legion  it
    seems to me.  First and foremost, neither party was able  to  establish
    that there was actually any documentary evidence of the  type  referred
    to in that paragraph.  It is asserted on behalf of the  appellant  that
    there was no such evidence and on  behalf  of  the  respondent  it  was
    conceded that there was nothing to  indicate  that  such  evidence  was
    adduced.

29. Secondly and importantly, according to what Judge  Telford  said,  this
    was a study in relation to northern Europeans.  One does not  know  the
    extent  to  which  that  would  translate  or  read  across  to   self-
    identification in terms of sexuality in Ghana.  There are many  reasons
    to think that it might not.  Although Judge Telford said that  it  only
    assists to a very small degree in terms of likelihoods and propensities
    it is nevertheless a matter that he referred to and took into  account,
    and added it to what he said at para 69. This reveals a  further  error
    of law in his decision.

30. At para 64 he made the point that emails, WhatsApp  and  text  messages
    are easily produced and in relation to emails said that they were  only
    evidence of what the last version of them was.  He  said  that  it  was
    remarkably simple to take an old email, retain the old date, alter  the
    text when sent and print out the results.  He said that given that  the
    appellant had not shown how  he  came  by  this  evidence  he  was  not
    prepared to place any weight on them based solely  on  the  appellant's
    word.

31. There are two problems with this aspect of the judge's decision.  First
    and foremost there is nothing to indicate that this was an  issue  that
    was ever put to the appellant. Secondly, even if what  the  judge  said
    about the emails and the  ease  with  which  they  can  be  altered  is
    correct, the same could not be said to apply to WhatsApp  messages,  as
    asserted in the grounds.

32. Para 14 of the grounds contends that Judge  Telford  erred  in  finding
    that there was no evidence  of  people  in  Ghana  who  knew  that  the
    appellant was gay.  Again that was contrary  to  the  evidence  because
    albeit the judge may for good reasons have been entitled to reject  the
    evidence of those in Ghana that knew the appellant was gay,  there  was
    in fact evidence to that effect. That was evidence from the appellant's
    friends which was in the respondent's bundle. It  supported  the  claim
    that they were aware  of  the  appellant's  sexuality  and  indeed  had
    witnessed the appellant being targeted as a  result  of  it  whilst  in
    Ghana.

33. Lastly, I also consider that there is merit in para 15 of  the  grounds
    which relates to Judge Telford's para 58  under  the  sub-heading  "his
    'journey'".  In that paragraph he said as follows:

         "I look at the refusal letter and  consider  what  was  said  there
         about his lack of credible evidence  of  being  gay.   He  did  not
         contradict in any credible way any of the conclusion drawn  or  the
         reasoning behind them of the respondent.  In particular, he was not
         able to properly explain any of the  journey  into  sexuality  that
         must have gone on if he really were having gay feelings as a  young
         person.  He failed to elaborate on it today."

34. The underlining is mine because it seems to me that that is significant
    in that Judge Telford concluded that the appellant must have gone on  a
    journey in relation to his sexuality. In my judgement that does  amount
    to a stereotypical approach to issues  of  this  nature.   The  obvious
    difficulty with stereotypes is that they are apt to lead to error in an
    assessment of  the  facts.   In  that  respect  also  therefore,  I  am
    satisfied that the judge erred in law.

35. I referred at the outset of this judgment to what I  consider  to  have
    been the judge's flawed approach in terms of terminology, as set out at
    paragraph 6 of his decision. There are two other places in his decision
    where (mis)use of terminology is problematic, to put it mildly.   I  do
    not propose to spell  them  out  but  simply  to  refer  to  the  first
    sentences of paras 50 and 51.  In any appeal care must be taken in  the
    use of terminology. That however, is not an issue which would have  led
    to my deciding to set aside the decision for error of law.

36. Looking at matters cumulatively  however,  for  the  reasons  explained
    above I am satisfied that the decision of Judge  Telford  involved  the
    making of an error on a point of law and his  decision  is  set  aside.
    The appropriate course is for the matter to be remitted to the  FtT  to
    be heard before a judge other than First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Telford,
    with no findings of fact preserved.

37. I have decided to  remit  the  appeal  to  the  FtT  having  regard  to
    paragraph 7.2 of the Practice Statement  of  the  Senior  President  of
    Tribunals. There needs to be a full factual assessment of the basis  of
    the appellant's claim. Despite the fact that there may be  elements  of
    Judge  Telford's  decision  which  identify  reasons   to   doubt   the
    credibility of the appellant's claim,  those  matters  will  require  a
    fresh appraisal before another judge.

    Decision

38. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law. Its decision is set aside and the appeal is remitted
    to the First-tier Tribunal for a hearing de novo before a  judge  other
    than First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Telford,  with  no  findings  of  fact
    preserved.


An anonymity order was made by the First-tier Tribunal and I  continue  that
order.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek                                 18/10/18




