
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/12847/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 20 February 2019                       |On 1 April 2019                  |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CONWAY


                                   Between

                                     MD
                           (Anonymity Order Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:           Ms Degirmenci of Counsel
For the Respondent:          Ms Cunha, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Turkey born in 1986.  He appealed against
    a decision of the respondent made on 17 November  2017  to  refuse  his
    claim for asylum.

 2. The basis of his claim is that he is of Kurdish ethnicity and of  Alevi
    faith who from 2010 had supported the Peace and Democracy  Party  which
    in 2014 became the People's Democratic  Party  (HDP).   He  was  not  a
    member but attended marches, meetings and celebrations. He was detained
    13 or 14 times between 2011 and 2016 and was suspected  of  involvement
    with the  Kurdistan  Workers  Party  (PKK).   He  was  tortured  during
    detentions but not charged or brought before a court.  He  left  Turkey
    in early 2017.  Some months later he learned that a  warrant  had  been
    issued for his arrest.

 3. The basis of the refusal was that while it was accepted he was  a  Kurd
    and of Alevi faith, it was not believed he had been involved  with  HDP
    or that he had been detained.  His answers had been vague, inconsistent
    and lacking in detail.  He would not be at risk on return simply  as  a
    Kurd or Alevi.

 4. He appealed.

    First tier hearing

 5. Following a hearing at Harmondsworth on 26 September 2018 Judge of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Housego dismissed the appeal.

 6. His findings are at paragraph [56]ff.  In summary, he found  [56]  that
    the appellant  was  "a  low  level  supporter  of  the  HDP,  sometimes
    demonstrated and  was  sometimes  picked  up  at  demonstrations,  with
    others, held for a while and released without charge..."   Further,  at
    [70] he stated: "It is reasonably likely that a Kurdish Alevi would  be
    a supporter of the HDP, would demonstrate and be arrested as a  result,
    held for a while and released without charge as part of state sponsored
    discouragement of an opposition party.  That is all that  has  happened
    to the appellant.  It is not persecution such as to need  international
    protection."

 7. He sought permission to appeal which was  refused  but  granted  on  18
    January 2019 on reapplication to the Upper Tribunal.

    Error of law hearing

 8. At the error  of  law  hearing  before  me  Ms  Cunha  agreed  with  Ms
    Degirmenci that the decision was materially flawed such that it must be
    heard again.

 9. First, the judge failed to make findings on a key aspect of his  claim.
    Although the judge  accepted  that  the  appellant  had  been  detained
    numerous times he made no finding on his claim (Q27, 154, 162) to  have
    been tortured during the  detentions.   Under  paragraph  339K  of  the
    Immigration Rules, past ill treatment is an indicator of future harm.

10. Further, the judge failed to conduct a structured assessment of risk on
    return.  In that regard there is no indication he addressed his mind to
    the country guidance in IK (Returnees - Records - IFA Turkey)  CG  2004
    UKIAT 312, which confirmed the risk factors set  out  in  the  previous
    guidance of IA (Turkey) [2003] UKAIT 34 (particularly  at  [46(e)]  and
    [47]).   In particular, that he would be returning  identifiable  as  a
    failed asylum seeker; that he  is  likely  to  be  transferred  to  the
    airport police station; that he is likely to be  subjected  to  lengthy
    interrogation; that he is likely to be asked  why  he  claimed  asylum,
    about his profile, family and political and  religious  background  and
    beliefs; and that given his answers, he  being  not  expected  to  lie,
    further  investigations  are  likely  to  be  carried  out   into   his
    background, including inquiry of the authorities  in  his  local  area.
    Also, that neither a short duration of  detention  or  release  without
    charge are indicative of the interest which the authorities have  in  a
    person.

11. In addition, the judge failed to ask himself,  based  on  the  findings
    made, whether the appellant would be likely  to  come  to  the  adverse
    attention  of  the  authorities  in  the  context  of   the   political
    developments following the failed coup in 2016.  Association  with  HDP
    had to be considered in light of the respondent's  Country  Policy  and
    Information Note: Kurdish political parties, Turkey, August 2018  which
    was before him and which states at 2.4.2:-

           "Since peace talks with the PKK  broke  down  in  mid-2015,  the
           government has used a broad definition of terrorism to prosecute
           some HDP MP's and supporters for being members  of,  or  aiding,
           the PKK."


12. In light of the failure to make adequate findings and to  consider  the
    risk on return it was agreed that the case must be reheard.

Decision

13. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shows material  error  of  law.
    It is set aside.  The nature of the case is such that it is appropriate
    under section 12(2) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement  Act  2007
    and Practice Statement 7.2 to remit to the First-tier  Tribunal  for  a
    fresh hearing on all issues.  No findings stand.  The member(s) of  the
    First-tier Tribunal chosen to consider the  case  are  not  to  include
    Judge Housego.

    An anonymity order is made.  Unless  and  until  a  tribunal  or  court
    directs otherwise the  appellant  is  granted  anonymity.   Failure  to
    comply with this order could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed                                             Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Conway                        28 March 2019

