
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12497/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard remotely via video (Skype for        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|Business)                                  |                                |
|at Field House                             |                                |
|On 6th November 2020                       |On 1st December 2020            |
|                                           |                                |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BLUM


                                   Between

                                     MM
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Bazini, Counsel instructed by Times PBS Ltd
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer


This decision follows a remote hearing in respect of which  there  has  been
no objection by the parties. The form of remote hearing was by  video  (V),
the platform was Skype for Business. A face to face hearing  was  not  held
because it was not practicable and all  issues  could  be  determined  in  a
remote hearing.


                            DECISION AND REASONS



Background

 1. This is an appeal against the decision of Judge of the First-tier
    Tribunal Broe ("the judge") promulgated on 27th March 2020 dismissing
    the appeal of MM ("the appellant").

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan born in 1988. He arrived in
    this country on 11th September 2018 and made an asylum claim on 2nd
    October 2018. This was refused on 16th December 2019.  I summarise the
    appellant's asylum claim. He was born in Logar Province of Afghanistan
    and is of Pashtun ethnicity. From April 2009 until July 2014 he worked
    for Karim Hayat Logistics Company in Kabul as a drivers' supervisor.
    In November 2013 he volunteered to join the team of Dr Ashraf Ghani, a
    politician who was standing in forthcoming elections. The election
    campaign began around February 2014.

 3. In March 2014 his father received a telephone call from Alam Din, a
    distant relative and a member of the Taliban. The appellant was
    threatened that if he did not give up his work he would be killed.
    Three months after the telephone call the Taliban sent a letter
    requesting the appellant again to stop his work for the company. This
    and the earlier threats had been reported to the police.

 4. The second round of the elections in the meantime took place on 14th
    June 2014. The election was between Dr Ghani and his political rival,
    Abdullah Abdullah. The following day the appellant tried to prevent a
    group of armed men from swapping ballot boxes with others filled with
    fraudulent votes.  The appellant maintains that Hamza, a senior
    colleague, told him not to interfere and a fight broke out. The
    appellant and others managed to stop the swapping of the boxes. The
    appellant then found out that Hamza had been bribed. Hamza and the
    armed men threatened to kill the appellant. Hamza and two other men
    were arrested but were later released after two days' detention. Hamza
    threatened revenge on the appellant. On 24th July 2014 the appellant
    was involved in a car crash with another vehicle which he says
    deliberately tried to force him off a cliff. The appellant called the
    police, after which he received a further threatening call from Hamza.
    Fearing for his safety, both from the Taliban and Hamza (and from his
    political party, the Jamaat-e-Islami) the appellant's family arranged
    for his departure from Afghanistan. He travelled through several other
    countries including Turkey, where he remained for some time.

 5. Whilst in Turkey Alam Din was killed by the authorities. Alam Din's
    family believed that the killing had been based on information provided
    by the appellant. The Taliban indicated that it would take revenge on
    the appellant for the death of Alam Din. His father's car was attacked
    in Kabul and a week later the family fled Afghanistan for Pakistan. The
    appellant eventually entered the in the back of a lorry in 2018 and
    claimed asylum.

 6. The respondent did not accept that the appellant worked for Karim Hayat
    Logistics Company or that he had any problems with the Taliban. The
    respondent did not accept that the appellant worked in an election
    campaign or that he had problems with Hamza or Abdullah's men. The
    respondent refused the applicant's protection claim. The appellant
    appealed this decision pursuant to Section 82 of the Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

The judge's decision

 7. The judge heard oral evidence from the appellant. The judge indicated
    that account had been taken of the evidence before the Tribunal,
    including letters purportedly issued by the Karim Hayat Logistics
    Company, and noted that the agreed issues were credibility and risk on
    return. The judge summarised the oral evidence and referred to
    photographs provided by the appellant. One of the photographs appeared
    to show the appellant standing by the open door of a car. Other
    photographs showed what appeared to be the same car at the bottom of a
    cliff, upturned.

 8. The judge's credibility findings are contained from paragraphs 25
    onwards. The judge first considered the appellant's claimed fear from
    the Taliban based on his employment. One of the letters provided by the
    appellant in support of his employment was dated 1st September 2012 and
    was headed 'Letter of Appreciation', the other was dated 15th October
    2014 and addressed 'To Whom it May Concern'.

 9. The judge found the content of the earlier letter to be surprising
    given that the appellant remained with the same company until 25th July
    2014, but then noted that it did coincide with the appellant's move to
    another position within the company.  The judge observed that the
    letters were sent to the appellant when he was in Turkey at the end of
    2014 although the appellant last had contact with the company in 2015.



10. At paragraph 27 the judge was not satisfied that the appellant had
    explained why the letters were sent to him. The judge speculated that
    it may have been because the appellant wanted them as evidence in
    support of an asylum claim.  The judge observed that the letters did
    not refer to the reason why the appellant's employment ended. The judge
    found that the letters had different signatures although, according to
    the judge, they were purportedly signed by the same person.  It was
    surprising to the judge that the appellant had not provided more recent
    evidence from the company addressing the issues raised in the Reasons
    for Refusal Letter, particularly given that the company's telephone
    number and email address were provided.  Having cumulative regard to
    these factors, the judge expressed concern as to their reliability and
    attached limited weight to the letters.

11. The judge then considered the appellant's claimed fear from supporters
    of Abdullah Abdullah or Hamza. While acknowledging that the appellant
    provided a 'letter of appreciation' from a general in charge of Dr
    Ghani's 'Change and Continuity Team', nothing more recent had been
    provided in support of the appellant's involvement as a supporter of Dr
    Ghani in the election.

12. At paragraph 29 the judge summarised the appellant's description of how
    he and his friends, including Ahmed, confronted Hamza and how "those
    higher up than us reported it" to the police. In paragraph 30 the judge
    stated as follows:

"On the appellant's account it is clear that others were involved in the
Hamza incident.  Hamza knew the appellant and I find it likely that he
would have known Ahmed, the appellant's other friends and the people higher
up who reported the matter to the police.  He has not suggested that anyone
else was targeted by Hamza or anyone acting on his behalf.  I find it very
unlikely that the appellant would be singled out for vengeance.  He was not
the only person involved in stopping the ballot rigging.  He was not the
most senior nor was he the one who reported the matter to the police."

13. Then, at paragraph 31 the judge stated:

"As evidence of the car crash the appellant provided various photographs of
a vehicle before and after the incident. There is only one photograph
connecting him to the vehicle.  Much of it is faded but the appellant
appears in bold colour.  He appears to be standing next to the car with his
arm on top of an open door yet his posture is of a person sitting against
something which is not there. His feet are in front of his body in a
position I find to be impossible if he is standing.  There are no shadows
from him. I am satisfied that this is not a genuine photograph and I find
that its use significantly undermines the appellant's credibility. It also
limits the weight I can attach to the other photographs and the documentary
evidence on which the appellant relies."

The judge proceeded to draw an adverse inference from the appellant's
failure to claim asylum in a safe third country.

14. From paragraph 33 onwards the judge considered an expert report
    prepared by Dr Giustozzi. At paragraph 34 the judge considered and
    recorded extracts from Dr Giustozzi's report. Dr Giustozzi found that,
    on the basis of the appellant's claim being true, he was likely to be
    on a Taliban blacklist and would remain at risk even through the
    passage of time.  Dr Giustozzi considered that the appellant would be
    at risk of harassment and discrimination in the future in respect of
    his political involvement but that in respect of any personal threat
    from Hamza this would depend. The expert found that Hamza will be more
    motivated to take revenge against the appellant but it will depend also
    on the context, that is whether he would consider it possible to take
    revenge without being exposed to a level of risk.

15. At paragraph 36 the judge stated: "I note that the appellant has not
    raised the issue of his mental health and Dr Giustozzi does not appear
    to have any qualifications in that area.  It is not clear what he is
    comparing Hamza with when he says he will be more motivated."

16. At paragraph 37 the judge said he found the appellant to lack
    credibility for the reasons he had already given and rejected the
    appellant's account. Whilst acknowledging Dr Giustozzi's expertise, the
    judge found that the expert's opinions were based on the appellant's
    claim which the judge had rejected as lacking credibility.  The judge
    concluded that the appellant had not established that he had a genuine
    fear of persecution. The judge proceeded to consider the older country
    guidance case AS (Safety of Afghanistan) and concluded that the
    appellant would not face a risk of serious ill-treatment if returned to
    Kabul and that it was a place where he could reasonably be expected to
    relocate.

The challenge to the First-tier Tribunal's decision

17. There are essentially two limbs to the grounds of appeal.  The first
    limb challenges the judge's findings in respect of his fear from the
    Taliban and his claimed employment that caused him to be targeted by
    the Taliban in the first place. This ground challenges, in particular,
    the basis upon which the judge attached little or no weight to the two
    letters purportedly issued by the Karim Hayat Logistics Company. None
    of the points concerning the employment letters were actually put to
    the appellant by the judge or by the Presenting Officer. The appellant
    was therefore deprived of the opportunity of dealing with these
    concerns.  The judge, it was said, unreasonably assumed that both
    letters were sent to the appellant after he left the country and the
    judge, in any event, failed to ask whether this was the case.  The
    judge made an assumption as to why the letters were provided but did
    not actually ask the appellant when this could have been done. The
    judge was, in any event, wrong in concluding that the letters were from
    the same person.  The name on the first document was 'Abdul Wahid
    Aryobi', whereas the name on the second letter was' Abdul Alim Aryobi'.
    Both individuals held different positions within the company. The
    writer of the first letter was 'CEO' whereas the writer of the second
    letter was 'M. Director' (I assume to mean Managing Director).  To the
    extent that the judge thought they were written by the same person,
    account was taken of an irrelevant consideration. The judge erred in
    drawing an adverse inference from the fact that no more recent
    documents or information had been provided from the company as,
    according to the grounds, the company had closed down some time
    previously. Although the grounds make a factual assertion unsupported
    by evidence it does not appear that the appellant was ever asked about
    the continued existence of the company or why no further documents had
    been obtained.  The grounds continue to take issue with the judge's
    assessment of the evidence of the expert but for reasons that will
    become apparent I do not need to consider that aspect of the challenge.

18. The second limb of the grounds takes issue with the judge's findings in
    relation to the appellant's involvement in the election. The judge
    found that there had been a photographic forgery but failed to put this
    concern to the appellant. The judge had not indicated any special
    expertise in the field and the appellant strongly challenged the
    finding that the photograph had been doctored.  Other challenges within
    the second limb contended that the judge wrongly asked whether it was
    likely that Hamza knew the appellant's friend Ahmed whereas the judge
    should have asked whether it was reasonably likely that Hamza did not
    know Ahmed.

19. Permission was granted on all grounds.

20. At the outset of the 'error of law' hearing I expressed my initial
    concerns to Mr Walker  that the judge may not have taken into account
    arguably material differences between the letters and that the judge
    had not at any stage raised concerns that the photograph showing the
    appellant standing by the door of the car may have been doctored. Mr
    Walker acknowledged that many of the judge's findings were speculative
    and that some of these speculative findings had simply not been put to
    the appellant or his representative. Mr Walker, very fairly but also
    very properly, conceded that material mistakes had been made. He was
    right to do so. In those circumstances it was not necessary to hear any
    submissions at length from Mr Bazini.

Discussion

21. I am satisfied that the judge materially erred in law when assessing
    the appellant's credibility. When assessing the appellant's claimed
    fear of the Taliban the judge appears to draw an adverse inference
    because the appellant failed to explain why two letters purportedly
    issued by his former employer, Karim Hayat Logistics, were sent to him.
    The judge speculates, reasonably I should add, that the appellant may
    have wanted the letters for the purposes of claiming asylum, and the
    fact that he did not claim asylum whilst in a safe third country could
    legitimately be held against the appellant (which the judge does at
    paragraph 32 of the decision). But the letters may also have been for
    other purposes. At paragraph 26 the judge observed that the first
    letter coincided with the appellant's move within the company. In his
    grounds of appeal Mr Bazini suggests that the second letter may have
    been obtained for future employment opportunities. That of course is
    also speculative, albeit with a rational basis. The point is that the
    appellant was not given an opportunity to provide an explanation.
    Whilst the judge's inference was reasonable, it was not the only
    inference that could be drawn, and, in these circumstances, it was
    procedurally unfair to draw an adverse inference when the appellant was
    not asked to provide an explanation.

22. The judge also draws an adverse inference based on different signatures
    that the judge believed were supposed to have been written by the same
    person. This serious allegation was not put to the appellant and the
    failure to do so constitutes a procedural impropriety. It is apparent
    from paragraph 17 of this decision that the names on the letters were
    not the same and the position held by the individuals who signed them
    were not the same. The judge failed to take into account these relevant
    considerations or took into account and gave weight to irrelevant
    matters. The judge additionally drew an adverse inference from the
    absence of more recent evidence from the company in circumstances where
    the appellant was simply not asked why there had been no more recent
    evidence. The appellant was not made aware of the judge's concerns and
    not given the opportunity to respond to these concerns.

23. In relation to the appellant's claimed fear from Hamza and the Jamaat-e-
    Islami, the political party to which Hamza belonged, I find that the
    judge drew an adverse inference relating to the attack on the
    appellant's car based on a belief that the photograph showing the
    appellant next to a car had been doctored. The judge found that this
    significantly undermined the appellant's credibility, which limited the
    weight that the judge was able to attach, not just to the photographic
    evidence but to "the documentary evidence on which the appellant
    relies". This serious allegation was never put to the appellant.  He
    was never made aware of the judge's concerns and never given the
    opportunity to comment on those concerns. This constitutes serious
    procedural unfairness. It also affected the judge's assessment of other
    documentary evidence including the letter purportedly written by the
    general in charge of the 'Central Zone Change and Continuity Team'
    under the leadership of Dr Mohammed Ashraf Ghani.  There was no
    specific finding in respect of this letter but, if genuine, it would
    support the appellant's claimed involvement as an election observer for
    Dr Ghani.

24. At paragraph 30 the judge finds it likely that Hamza would have known
    Ahmed, the appellant's other friends, and the people higher up who
    reported the matter to the police. The appellant did not suggest anyone
    else was targeted and the judge finds it very unlikely that the
    appellant would have been "singled out for vengeance" because he was
    not the only one involved in trying to stop the ballot rigging, he was
    not the most senior person involved, and he did not report the matter
    to the police himself. These observations were speculative,
    particularly in relation to whether Hamza knew the names of the other
    people acting as election observers. Moreover, the judge should have
    asked whether it was reasonably likely that Hamza would not know Ahmed
    rather than whether it was likely that Hamza knew Ahmed.  I find this
    constitutes a misdirection by the judge.

25. For the reasons given above I am in no doubt that this decision is
    unsafe and that it contains material legal errors requiring it to be
    set aside. Having heard brief submissions from Mr Walker and Mr Bazini,
    I am satisfied, given the absence of sustainable findings, that this
    matter needs to be remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal to be
    decided afresh by a judge other than Judge of the First-tier Tribunal
    Broe.



Notice of Decision

The making of the First-tier Tribunal's  decision  involved  the  making  of
errors on points of law and is set aside.

The case is remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal to  be  decided  afresh
(de novo) by a judge other than judge of the First-tier Tribunal Broe.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


D.Blum   20 November 2020

Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Blum

