
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal number: PA/12047/2019 (P)



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard Remotely at Manchester CJC     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 18 September 2020                 |On 22 September 2020                 |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PICKUP



                                   Between

                                     AJ

                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



For  the  appellant:      Mr  S   Galiver-Andrew,   instructed   by   Sindhu
Immigration Services

For the Respondent:    Mr A Tan, Senior Presenting Officer,



                          DECISION AND REASONS (P)

This  has  been  a  remote  hearing  which  has   been   consented   to by
the parties. The form of remote hearing was video by Skype (V). A face to
face hearing was not held because it was  not  practicable  and  all  issues
could be determined in a remote hearing. At the conclusion of the hearing  I
reserved my decisions  and  reasons,  which  I  now  give.  The  order  made
is described at the end of these reasons.

 1. The appellant, who is a Pakistani national with date of birth given  as
    7.7.71, has appealed with permission to the Upper Tribunal against  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated 28.1.20, dismissing  on
    all grounds his appeal against the decision of the Secretary of  State,
    dated 28.11.19, to refuse his claim for international  protection  made
    on 31.7.19 on the basis of his sexual orientation as  a  gay  man.  The
    judge accepted that the appellant was a gay man but concluded  that  he
    was not at risk of persecution on return to Pakistan because  he  would
    behave discretely, as he had done in the UK.

 2. Permission to appeal was granted by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  on  the
    basis that it was arguable that the judge erred  in  finding  that  the
    appellant would not live an openly gay life in Pakistan due to  a  fear
    of persecution. It  was  also  considered  arguable  that  the  judge's
    assessment overall was in error as throughout the decision and  reasons
    all the adverse findings are on the basis  they  are  implausible;  not
    incredible.

 3. Following directions issued on 26.5.20 and the appellant's response  of
    8.6.20, on 23.7.20 the Upper Tribunal directed that the  error  of  law
    issue should be determined at an oral hearing to be held remotely.

 4. I have carefully considered the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  in
    the light of the submissions, the grounds of application for permission
    to appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal,  and  the  skeleton  argument  and
    documents placed before the Tribunal.

 5. It will be useful to first  summarised  what  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    found.

 6. At [50] of the decision, despite finding his credibility damaged by the
    manner and timing of his  application,  the  judge  concluded  for  the
    reasons set out earlier in the decision that the  appellant  is  a  gay
    man. At [41] the judge accepted that he had  been  in  a  non-exclusive
    same sex relationship with Mr Coelho for around 2 years.

 7. However, at [44] the judge found the appellant's approach to his sexual
    orientation in the UK has been to largely conceal it,  even  though  he
    was aware that he  can  be  open  in  the  UK  where  LGBT  rights  are
    protected. It was accepted that he had struggled to come to terms  with
    his situation  and  was  affected  by  feelings  of  shame  and  stigma
    associated with attitudes to same sex relationships  in  Pakistan.  The
    judge stated,

         "Whilst the reasons for that stem from a difficult past, growing up
         in a country where he knew same sex  relationships  were  forbidden
         and a source of shame, he has conducted his  relationship  life  in
         the UK in a discrete manner even though he  no  longer  has  to.  I
         accept he is affected by that feeling of shame and  stigma  but  in
         practice that is the discreet way he has lived his life in  the  UK
         and given his age and history  I  find  that  that  approach  would
         continue if returned to Pakistan where he would not live openly  as
         a gay man. This would not  be  because  he  fears  persecution  but
         because of the social pressures meaning that this is the way he has
         always lived his rather dual life (including in his  own  community
         when living in Southall)."

 8. At [45] the judge noted that the appellant had given limited details of
    any private life beyond his current relationship  and  attending  Disco
    Rani once a month.

         "He is not actively involved with any groups  or  clubs  reflecting
         any other interests he has. The Appellant  does  not  give  in  his
         witness statement any other details of the life he has built up  in
         the UK amongst other friends, or in work or cultural  or  religious
         activities, though he said at his interview that he worked  in  the
         UK."

 9. At [52] the judge concluded that,

         "the reason the appellant would not live openly as  a  gay  man  in
         Pakistan is the social pressures he would face  and  pressure  from
         his  own  feelings  about  his  sexual  orientation  which  he  has
         struggled with. It is not a fear of persecution which is a material
         reason for living discretely. The appellant's  life  in  any  event
         would change as  a  result  of  moving  but  even  if  his  current
         circumstances were replicated in Pakistan he would  not  be  living
         life as an openly gay man, as he is not doing so in the  UK,  where
         there is no fear of persecution."

10. Addressing the grounds as drafted, the first ground  asserts  that  the
    judge  misapplied  HJ  (Iran).  It  is  submitted  that  the  'societal
    pressures' identified by the judge as to why the appellant has  behaved
    discretely in the UK is in fact a manifestation of fear of  persecution
    on return to Pakistan. It is  argued  that  any  anxiety  about  living
    openly as a gay man in front of the South  Asian  community  in  London
    needs to be considered in this regard, and that the  judge  effectively
    mischaracterises what it means to live openly as a gay man.

11. However, much of the lengthy grounds amounts  to  little  more  than  a
    disagreement with the decision and an attempt to  reargue  the  appeal.
    For example at C3, an aspect of the first ground, it is submitted  that
    the judge erred in concluding that the appellant does not  live  openly
    as a gay man in the UK.  Reference  is  made  to  the  appellant  being
    naturally shy, coming from a conservative society, living in a multiple
    occupancy house with people who do not know his sexual orientation  and
    with whom he was not close. It is argued that  the  appellant  asserted
    that he was not attempting to conceal anything and his behaviour  would
    not be regarded as unconventional from a heterosexual perspective. With
    respect, it is clear that all these issues were carefully considered by
    the judge. It appears to me that cogent  reasons  were  given  for  the
    findings made and conclusions reached that the appellant had and  would
    continue to behave discretely.

12. In reaching this conclusion, I have carefully  considered  the  various
    submissions made  to  me  at  the  remote  hearing.  Mr  Galiver-Andrew
    concentrated his submissions into what he described as two key  points.
    First, that the judge misdirected herself as to what it means for a gay
    man to live openly; second, that the judge failed to  take  account  of
    the underlying reasons for 'societal pressure' as a  precursor  to  the
    finding of living discretely, which reasons are because of  a  fear  of
    persecution. Mr Galiver-Andrew submitted  that  the  appellant  was  an
    introverted man who attended a LGBT club and had participated in Pride,
    and who adduced supporting evidence from friends he associates with  in
    the  gay  community.  He  rhetorically  asked,  'what  more  could  the
    appellant do to demonstrate that he lives openly?'

13. Reference was made to paragraph [29] of LC (Albanian)  v  SSHD  &  Anor
    [2017] EWCA Civ 351, in respect of which I am satisfied that the  judge
    correctly directed herself on at [11] of the decision. The point  being
    pursued by Mr Galiver-Andrew is that the test of whether an  individual
    will live discretely as a gay person is not whether  the  person  would
    avoid certain overt behaviour which might identify that person  as  gay
    but whether the individual would behave in such a way that he will not,
    in fact, be identified as gay. It was suggested  by  Mr  Galiver-Andrew
    that the judge was looking for such overt behaviour. However, the judge
    also summarised paragraph [52(iv)], stating,

         "'Living  openly'  is  not  restricted  to  where  there  is  overt
         behaviour which might identify the individual as gay,  it  involves
         consideration of whether the individual will be behaving in such  a
         way that  there  is  a  real  risk  that  the  individual  will  be
         identified  as  gay.  If  the  individual  would  keep  his  sexual
         orientation concealed wherever he lived, it is not  right  to  stay
         that in order to conceal it he would be modifying his behaviour."

14. In the light of that self-direction and the careful way  in  which  the
    judge  considered  the  evidence,  I  do  not  accept  that  the  judge
    misdirected herself in law.

15. It was also submitted to me that what was missing from the decision was
    an analysis of where the appellant's discrete behaviour in the UK comes
    from. It was urged on me that he emanates from a  society  in  Pakistan
    where LGBTs are persecuted and homophobic attitudes are instilled  from
    childhood, and that his uncertain and precarious immigration status was
    always going to affect his behaviour  in  the  UK.  Mr  Galilver-Andrew
    submitted that there was in fact nothing  discrete  about  the  way  in
    which the appellant conducted himself in the UK, just that he  was  not
    overt about it. Put another way, he did not need  to  be  overt  to  be
    living openly.

16. However, as Mr Tan submitted,  it is clear from the decision  that  the
    judge had taken  account  of  the  appellant's  difficult  history  and
    cultural background, particularly referenced at [38] and  [44]  of  the
    decision, and the potential causal  connection  between  that  and  his
    behaviour in the UK. I accept Mr Tan's submission that  in  essence  Mr
    Galiver-Andrew was attempting to reargue the case.  In  reality,  there
    was very limited evidence to support the claim  of  living  openly  and
    that it was entirely open to the judge on the evidence to conclude that
    he was not living openly and would not do so, for the reasons given  in
    the decision. His relationship with Mr Coelho was effectively a closed,
    secret relationship. His limited activities outside  this  relationship
    did not define him as gay, as non LGBT persons can and often do  attend
    such, including Pride. I am satisfied that it was open to the judge  to
    conclude, applying the law to the facts found, that the  appellant  was
    living discretely in the UK and would continue to do so in Pakistan not
    from a fear of persecution but because that is the way  he  chooses  to
    live his life with regard to his sexual orientation.

17. The second ground asserts procedural unfairness in making  findings  of
    fact that were not put to the  appellant  in  evidence.  This  was  not
    pursued in Mr Galiver-Andrew's oral submissions. However, reference  is
    made the judge's rejection at [33]  of  the  decision  of  the  alleged
    incident where the appellant claimed to have been caught with Imran  by
    his brother Khalid, as being implausible and the conclusion reached  at
    [35] that he did not leave Pakistan after this incident,  and  was  not
    estranged from his family, as claimed. However, I am satisfied that  it
    was entirely open to  the  judge  to  accept  or  reject  the  account,
    provided cogent reasons were given, and that there was no obligation on
    the judge to put findings on the evidence to the appellant for comment.



18. It is also argued that in rejecting the plausibility  of  this  account
    the judge fell into the 'plausibility trap'. However, a reading of  the
    decision reveals that it was not the implausibility alone which led the
    judge to find the account  not  credible.  The  judge  also  noted  the
    inconsistency between the claimed circumstances of his  departure  from
    Pakistan with the delay in claiming asylum once in the  UK,  which  did
    not take place for some 9 years and only after  being  arrested  as  an
    overstayer, and considered the matter in the light of the findings that
    he had successfully concealed his sexual orientation from his family in
    Pakistan and that he had not lived openly as a gay man in the UK. These
    were cogent reasons open to the judge on the evidence, which appears to
    have been carefully assessed in the round.  I  am  satisfied  that  the
    findings  did  not  raise  any  new  issue  and  did  not  require  the
    appellant's comment or response. In the circumstances, no error of  law
    arises in respect of this ground.

19. The third ground asserts that "there are a number  of  aspects  of  the
    Judges findings which do not appear to flow from the findings of fact,"
    and which are relevant to the risk on return. As  drafted,  it  is  not
    clear what is meant. Neither  do  the  arguments  under  the  two  sub-
    headings of E1 and E2 demonstrate any error of law.

20. It is first  argued  under  this  ground  that  the  finding  that  the
    appellant was completely successful in concealing  his  sexuality  over
    multiple years is not sustainable. At [31] of the  decision  the  judge
    found that the appellant had two relationships in  Pakistan  before  he
    came  to  the  UK.  The  appellant  claimed  that  they   were   secret
    relationships but also  that  his  family  had  suspicions  about  him.
    However, the judge rejected the  claim  to  have  been  caught  by  his
    brother in a relationship with Imran and concluded that  the  narrative
    of his family being suspicious had been embellished. The judge did  not
    accept that there were any particular  family  concerns  and  concluded
    that the  appellant  had  been  successful  in  concealing  his  sexual
    identity from his family.

21. In this regard, E1 of the grounds suggests that to the  lower  standard
    of proof it is not implausible that the family  would  have  had  "some
    inkling" of his sexual  orientation,  even  if  the  account  has  been
    embellished. It is also argued that it was entirely plausible that  his
    eventual marriage was forced upon him by gossip about his sexuality. It
    is submitted that the judge has either applied too high a  standard  of
    proof, or not properly considered plausibility, or failed to assess the
    evidence in the round. It is also  submitted  at  E2  that  the  second
    aspect did not necessarily follow from the first. Again, it  is  argued
    that the appellant's account was plausible. Frankly, these  submissions
    are mere disagreements and  speculation,  an  attempt  to  reargue  the
    appeal. They do not identify any error of  law  in  the  decision.  The
    findings were open to the judge and justified by cogent reasoning.

22. Although reminded of them by Mr Tan, Mr Galiver-Andrew did not  address
    his oral submissions to the final two  grounds  which  are  in  essence
    further disagreements with the decision, disclosing no error of law.

23. In the circumstances and for the reasons  set  out  above,  I  find  no
    material error of law in the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  so
    that it must be set aside.

Decision

    The appeal of the appellant to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands and the  appeal  remains
    dismissed on all grounds.

    I make no order for costs.



Signed: DMW Pickup

Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

Date:       18 September 2020





Anonymity Direction

I am satisfied, having had  regard  to  the  guidance  in  the  Presidential
Guidance Note No 1 of 2013: Anonymity Orders, that it would  be  appropriate
to make an order in accordance with  Rules  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 in the following terms:

    "Unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellant
    is granted anonymity. No report of these proceedings shall directly  or
    indirectly identify him or any member of  his  family.  This  direction
    applies to, amongst others, both  the  appellant  and  the  respondent.
    Failure to comply with this direction could lead to contempt  of  court
    proceedings."



Signed: DMW Pickup

Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

Date:       18 September 2020





