

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)
                                                Appeal Number: PA/12649/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Magistrates Court |Decision & Reasons promulgated       |
|on 27 June 2016                       |on 11 July 2017                      |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                     MS
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr Nadeem instructed by Duncan Lewis (Birmingham)
Solicitors.
For the Respondent: Mrs Aboni Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS


     1. This is an appeal against a decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
        Butler ('the Judge') promulgated on 6 January  2017  in  which  the
        Judge dismissed the appellant's protection appeal on all grounds.





Background


     2. The appellant, an Iranian national said to have been born  on  [  ]
        1979, flew into the United Kingdom on 24 April 2006 using  a  false
        passport and claimed asylum on arrival. The appellant's  son,  born
        in 2013, is a dependent on her application.
     3. The appellant's claim for asylum was based upon  an  alleged  well-
        founded fear of persecution as a Christian in Iran.
     4. Having set out the core account, evidence and submissions made, the
        Judge sets out findings of  fact  between  [33]  and  [49]  of  the
        decision under challenge that may be summarised  in  the  following
        terms:


   i. As agreed between the parties, the issue for the  First-tier  Tribunal
      was  the  genuineness  of  the  appellants   claimed   conversion   to
      Christianity [35].
  ii. The appellant's account of events occurring before she left  Iran  and
      during her journey to the UK was not found to be credible. The account
      is entirely uncorroborated, there is no evidence to support the  claim
      the appellant is wanted by the authorities.  The  appellant  confirmed
      she had been in touch with her husband about four weeks prior  to  the
      hearing and it was found surprising there was  no  evidence  from  her
      husband to corroborate the appellant's account and no  arrest  warrant
      had been produced [36].
 iii. There was no evidence in the form of a statement from the  appellant's
      friend who is said to have first introduced  her  to  Christianity  in
      Iran [37].
  iv. The appellant's account of her escape from the house  church  was  not
      found credible. It was found incredible that the police would not have
      watched both  the  front  and  rear  exit  and  it  was  found  rather
      convenient that the police were apparently able to trace the appellant
      because she left her handbag behind. The Judge found  that  since  the
      appellant had time to retrieve and put on her Islamic dress she  would
      have had time to collect her handbag [38].
   v. In oral evidence, the appellant claimed a laminated copy of an Islamic
      prayer was put in her bag by an unknown member of her family  and  she
      did not open it on her journey to the UK.  The Judge did  not  believe
      the appellant would travel with a two-year-old carrying a  small  case
      throughout a road journey to Turkey, three to four days in a  village,
      three days in a hotel in Istanbul and then two flights to get  to  the
      UK without opening her carry-on case. It was also said her response in
      her oral evidence was inconsistent with replies given  in  the  asylum
      interview [39].
  vi. It is not credible the appellant's  sister  who  knew  all  about  the
      alleged conversion would have been  a  party  to  placing  an  Islamic
      prayer in her luggage. The appellant's  explanation  was  said  to  be
      inconsistent with earlier answers given regarding who packed her  case
      [40].
 vii. The appellant's account of the conversion to Christianity, escape from
      the house church and subsequent preparation for the  journey  was  not
      believed [41].
viii. The lack of credibility impacts upon the appellant's  account  of  her
      sur plas activities and the genuineness of her baptism as a true  sign
      of her Christianity [42].
  ix. The Judge considered testimonials  from  members  of  the  appellant's
      church and a letter from Pastor Hooper who baptised the  appellant  on
      29 May 2016, 31 days after she first attended his church. [42].
   x. The Judge noted a letter from Mr Derek Church  stating  the  appellant
      was "formally  a  devout  Muslim"  which  was  inconsistent  with  the
      appellant's own evidence [43].
  xi. The evidence of Pastor Jones was considered but it found he  had  been
      'taken in' by the appellant's account [44].
 xii. The appellant's account of her conversion was a  fabrication  designed
      to  bolster  her  asylum  claim  and  that  the  appellant's  lack  of
      credibility led to  a  finding  her  sur  place  activities  are  also
      designed to bolster her claim [45].
xiii. The appellant would not be at risk on return as it  was  not  accepted
      she has come to the adverse  attention  of  the  authorities.  Proving
      identity in Iran would not be a problem as the appellant confirmed she
      had been fingerprinted for passport purposes in Iran [46].
 xiv. The Judge considered section 55 in relation to  the  appellant's  son.
      The  appellant  has  not  separated  from  her  husband,  other   than
      geographically, the appellants claim that her husband  had  fled  Iran
      was found to lack credibility, and the child's best interests  are  to
      be bought up by both parents in his own culture. The  child  is  three
      years of age and has only been in the UK for a short period  of  time.
      The child is not yet of school-age and has not entered the significant
      formative years and is heavily dependent upon his  mother.  The  Judge
      concluded it was in the child's best interests to be removed  to  Iran
      with his mother where her husband and other family members can support
      them [49].


     5. The appellant sought permission to appeal which was  granted  by  a
        Designated Judge of the First-tier Tribunal on  6  September  2017.
        The grant is opposed by the Secretary of State  on  the  basis  the
        findings made were reasonably open to the  Judge  on  the  evidence
        made available.



Error of law finding


     6. The first error the allegedly made, according to Mr Nadeem,  is  in
        the Judge looking for corroboration of the appellant's account.  It
        was submitted that  in  addition  to  the  principal  that  seeking
        corroboration amounted to an error of  law,  the  Judge  failed  to
        consider the evidence that the appellants friend had been  arrested
        and her husband's evidence  that  he  had  fled  the  family  home,
        meaning the type of evidence the Judge was  seeking  may  not  have
        been reasonably available. This is  a  specific  reference  to  the
        arrest warrant which it had been stated had been left  at  home  in
        Iran. The alleged error is a failure by the Judge  to  engage  with
        the evidence rather than reject such evidence by reference the lack
        of corroboration.
     7. The Judge does not reject the evidence solely because that evidence
        is not corroborated. It is accepted that had the Judge taken such a
        stark position it would have been found that the determination  was
        infected by arguable legal error.  The  Judge  in  [36]  noted  the
        account is entirely uncorroborated which is factually correct.  The
        appellant had told the Judge that she was wanted by the authorities
        but it was found that she had produced no evidence  of  this  which
        is, again, factually correct. It is not a finding by the Judge that
        unless corroborative evidence was provided the account would not be
        accepted or considered.  In fact, the Judge  went  on  and  records
        that at the hearing the appellant herself confirmed she had been in
        touch with her husband about four weeks previously and that it  was
        surprising there was no evidence from her  husband  to  corroborate
        her account and that no arrest warrant had been produced.
     8. If the appellant's husband was not in the  former  family  home  in
        Iran  where  the  arrest  warrant  had  been   delivered,   it   is
        understandable that he would have been unable to forward a copy  of
        this document to the appellant. What the  grounds  fail  to  engage
        with is the comment by the Judge that it was surprising  there  was
        no evidence from the appellant's husband. It  is  not  claimed  the
        appellant's husband was unaware of  her  experiences  in  Iran  and
        indeed there was clearly ongoing communication between them. It  is
        not  suggested,  or  made  out  on  a  credible  basis,  that   the
        appellant's husband could not have produced any material to  assist
        the appellant by way of a witness statement or anything  else  that
        may be reasonably available  to  him,  but  no  such  evidence  was
        forthcoming. This observation by the Judge was one reasonably  open
        on the basis of the available material.
     9. In relation to the comment at [37] that there was  no  evidence  in
        the form of a statement from the appellant's friend who  introduced
        the appellant to Christianity, this is again factually correct. The
        appellant in her witness statement  refers  to  three  arrests  but
        there was no evidence that those  people  who  had  been  arrested,
        purportedly as a result of their involvement with the house church,
        had been detained or could not be contacted as the country material
        indicates that such  arrests  or  any  related  punishment  do  not
        ordinarily result in long-term incarceration. The witness statement
        is dated 29 September 2016 the appeal  was  not  heard  until  some
        three months later with no evidence being provided to the Judge  to
        explain why no statement had been provided. In relation to a person
        who had been arrested such a lack of evidence must be treated as  a
        neutral factor in that there is no evidence from  this  person  but
        possibly a plausible explanation as to why this should  be  so.  At
        [37] the Judge does not make an adverse finding as a result of  the
        failure to provide corroborative evidence but comments  that  there
        is no such evidence.
    10. Mr Nazim submitted that the difficulty in cases of this  nature  is
        that it is hard to see what a person's genuine feelings and beliefs
        are and so it is necessary to explain/explore a person's beliefs in
        relation to the critical issue of whether they  genuinely  consider
        themselves to be a Christians i.e. a follower of the  teachings  of
        Jesus Christ.  I  accept  that  as  a  general  statement  this  is
        correct, but  proceedings  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  asked
        adversarial by nature and the appellant was represented both in the
        preparation for the appeal and  by  Counsel  at  the  hearing.  The
        appellant was therefore  given  ample  opportunity  to  adduce  the
        evidence she was seeking to rely upon to establish her claim. It is
        not made out that the evidence from the appellant should  be  given
        far more weight than that given by the Judge  solely  because  that
        was the source by which such evidence was derived.  The  Judge  was
        required to consider that evidence along with  all  other  material
        made available and then to decide what  weight  it  was  considered
        appropriate to give to that material.
    11. It must also be remembered that the Judge had  the  opportunity  of
        not only seeing but also hearing the manner in which the  appellant
        gave her evidence.
    12. Mr Nazim also challenged the Judge's findings in  relation  to  the
        genuineness of the appellant's baptism by  the  Oasis  Church.  The
        Grounds assert the Judge failed to take account of  the  fact  that
        Pastor Jones did not know the appellant when she was a  Muslim  and
        therefore  could  not  possibly  comment  upon  the  level  of  her
        devotion, even though the Judge refers to a statement in the letter
        from Derek Church that the appellant was a  former  devout  Muslim.
        The Judge noted the evidence given by Pastor Jones at [41] that  he
        takes seriously the task of ascertaining whether a person is  truly
        a Christian and that he can usually tell when somebody is  not,  to
        which the Judge did not give the degree of weight it is  stated  in
        the grounds of challenge he should have given.
    13. It is necessary to consider the Judge's findings in relation to the
        baptism in the round rather than attacking the Judge in relation to
        the findings made regarding the evidence of one witness. At [42]  -
        [45] the Judge finds:


         "42.     This lack of credibility also impacts on  the  Appellant's
             account of her sur plas activities and the genuineness of  her
             baptism as a true sign of her Christianity. I have  considered
             in  particular  the  various  testimonials  produced  by   the
             Appellant from members of her  church.  She  also  produced  a
             letter from Pastor Rob Hooper who baptised her on 29 May 2016,
             31 days after she first attended  his  church.  Pastor  Hooper
             makes clear in his letter of 24 November 2016 that he baptises
             people as soon as they become believers and all those baptised
             "will have attended a session on the doctrine and  purpose  of
             baptism which we hold once a month".  He  further  states  "at
             this meeting the biblical teaching is given  and  the  reasons
             for baptism clearly laid out". With respect to Pastor  Hooper,
             who did not attend to give evidence,  his  letter  shows  only
             that he had one session with the Appellant before he  baptised
             her. He also states that he is requested every week to  attend
             hearings on behalf of asylum seekers. Without wishing  in  any
             way to trivialise his work, it is hardly  surprising  that  he
             receives so many requests when it is  apparently  so  easy  to
             proceed to baptism in his church.


         43.  I also note in the  letter  from  Mr  Derek  Church  dated  22
             November 2016 that he states  the  Appellant  is  "formally  a
             devout Muslim" which  is  inconsistent  with  the  Appellant's
             evidence that she was not and from her school days had serious
             reservations about Islam.


         44.  I bear in mind the evidence of Pastor Jones. He clearly  takes
             very seriously the task of ascertaining whether  a  person  is
             truly a Christian and says he can usually tell when someone is
             not. However, I bear in mind the lack of  credibility  in  the
             Appellants evidence of her conversion in  Iran  and  then  the
             speed with which she was baptised upon entering the UK. She is
             clearly a very intelligent woman but I  do  not  share  Pastor
             Jones' view of her commitment to the  Christian  faith  and  I
             find he has been taken in by her account.


         45.  Accordingly, I find the Appellant's account of her  conversion
             to be a fabrication designed to bolster her asylum claim.  Her
             lack of credibility leads  me  to  find  that  her  sur  place
             activities are also designed to bolster her claim."


    14. It was not the job of any witness to determine the  credibility  of
        the appellant's account as that is the task of the Judge. A  number
        of churches nationwide experience requests by asylum seekers to  be
        baptised into the Christian faith and a number openly express their
        reticence  in  performing   baptisms   and   issuing   certificates
        confirming a person has been baptised until they are  certain  that
        that individually has a genuine desire to enter the Christian faith
        and is not using the claim to have been  baptised  as  a  means  to
        bolster a claim for asylum. A number of churches will  not  baptise
        individuals until they  have  demonstrated  a  genuine  desire  and
        commitment to enter the Christian faith, which is ascertained by  a
        period of attending church, regular attendance at  church  services
        or the church -related  activities  and  face-to-face  meetings  in
        Bible and baptism classes  where  an  individual's  commitment  and
        responses can be  properly  assessed.  A  number  of  churches  run
        specific foreign  language  only  services  to  assist  those  from
        countries such as Iran to partake in these activities. It  is  only
        when the results of such convince those within the  church  of  the
        genuineness of the request that an individual will be baptised.  It
        is also the case that many churches adopting this cautious approach
        will, as a matter of policy, not attend a hearing to give  evidence
        in support unless they are satisfied that the person is  a  genuine
        Christian.
    15. In this appeal not only did the person who  conducted  the  baptism
        and who is said to have had one  session  with  the  appellant  not
        attend the hearing, it was also a baptism conducted within  a  very
        short period of  time  after  the  appellant  first  attended  that
        church. Whilst it is accepted that an evangelical Christian  church
        is tasked with bringing as many individuals as possible within  the
        family of the Christian church, indeed an obligation  imposed  upon
        any Christian according to the teaching of the Bible, the  evidence
        before the Judge did not establish that the  Oasis  Church  had  in
        place sufficient checks and balances to ensure that they were  only
        baptising those who genuinely wished to follow the Christian faith.
        The letter from Mr Hooper dated 29 May 2016 states "we  follow  the
        traditional Christian practices of baptising a person  as  soon  as
        they become believers in Christ Jesus as  their  Lord  and  saviour
        since then I can confirm that her devotion to God is evident".  The
        difficulty, as identified by Mr Nadeem, is that  whether  a  person
        has become a genuine believer in Christ Jesus is something that  is
        within their soul and not something obvious  to  a  person  on  the
        outside. Notwithstanding this fact, the evidence made available  to
        the Judge when considered in the round from all sources,  does  not
        establish that the  conclusions  reached  by  the  Judge  were  not
        reasonably open  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  on  the  basis  the
        evidence that tribunal was asked to consider.
    16. As stated, even though the Oasis Church claim they  were  persuaded
        the appellant is a genuine Christian the credibility of that  claim
        was a matter for the Judge. It has not been shown the findings made
        were not reasonably open to the Judge or  were  arguably  perverse,
        irrational, or contrary to the evidence.
    17. The appellant also challenges  the  conclusion  at  [38]  that  the
        police would have watched both the back door  and  the  front  door
        which is said to ignore the appellants evidence that the back  door
        led into an alley through which she made her escape  and  that  she
        saw a car arriving as she fled. It is asserted in the  grounds  the
        appellant was not asked questions as to the  relevant  location  of
        the Islamic dress and her handbag and that the Islamic dress  would
        be helpful in assisting her to escape  whereas  the  handbag  would
        bear  very  little  significance  to  the  escape,  and  that   the
        explanation for leaving the handbag was not adequately considered.
    18. It is not disputed the appellant claims that when the police raided
        the house church she was attending she was able not only to put  on
        her Islamic dress but also leave the rear of the property. This  is
        a case in which the appellant claims to face a real risk on  return
        as a result of her Christian faith. In her evidence  the  appellant
        claimed that shortly after the service began on 10 April 2016 at  a
        friend's house the police arrived. If the police were aware that  a
        church service was being  held  and  wished  to  arrest  all  those
        attending, it is plausible they would want to ensure  that  anybody
        within the property was unable to escape. This is especially so  if
        the house had been under surveillance as found by the Judge.
    19. Not only was the appellant able to escape without  being  detained,
        but she also claimed that her identity was discovered  as  she  had
        left her handbag in the property. If the handbag contained evidence
        that would enable the police to identify her the assertion  in  the
        grounds that the appellant would have taken her Islamic dress as it
        would have helped her in assisting her  escape  and  therefore  not
        being detected, whereas the handbag would  not,  is  not  factually
        correct. If the handbag contained evidence that  would  enable  the
        appellant to be identified it is reasonable to expect her  to  have
        taken the bag with her when she left, especially if  the  appellant
        ordinarily carried a handbag with  her  containing  personal  items
        which may have included keys  to  her  property,  money,  or  other
        important items or documents. It has not  been  shown  the  Judge's
        findings with regard to this element are infected by arguable legal
        error as it has not been shown they  are  not  findings  reasonably
        open to the Judge on the evidence.
    20. In relation to [39] in which the Judge comments upon the  fact  the
        appellant had a laminated copy of an Islamic prayer in her bag, the
        grounds assert the Judge failed to give proper consideration to the
        appeal statement where the appellant claims she did  not  know  who
        packed the bag which it is stated she repeated in her oral evidence
        and interview. It is also noted the appellant explained that if she
        had opened the case she would also have found toys for  her  little
        boy which would have made the journey  considerably  more  peaceful
        for her.
    21. The Judge found in [39 - 40]:


         "39.     In her oral evidence, the  Appellant  said  the  laminated
             copy of the Islamic prayer was put in her carry on bag  by  an
             unknown member of her family and she did not open  it  on  her
             journey to the  UK.  I  do  not  believe  that  the  Appellant
             travelling with a two year old would have carried a small case
             with her throughout her road journey to Turkey, her stay there
             for three or four days in a village and three days in a  hotel
             in Istanbul and then to flights  to  get  to  the  UK  without
             opening  her  carry  on  case.  Further,  this   evidence   is
             inconsistent with her replies to questions 75 and  80  in  her
             asylum interview where  she  states  her  mother,  sister  and
             sister-in-law packed the case for her and then that she  could
             not remember whether she asked her brother to pack a case  for
             her.


         40.  It is further not credible that the  Appellant's  sister,  who
             knew all about her  alleged  conversion  (AIR  questions  76],
             would have been party to placing  an  Islamic  prayer  in  her
             luggage. When asked about the packing of the case in interview
             (AIR questions 78), the Appellant said that she did  not  know
             whether her sister knew about her plan to  leave  the  country
             because she only spoke to her brother once after the  raid  on
             the house church. This is inconsistent with the  statement  of
             29 September 2016 which refers to  4  telephone  conversations
             with her brother and one with her mother. Her  explanation  at
             question 81 as to the involvement of her mother in packing for
             the journey, namely, that her rushing to her mother's house to
             collect her son "must have raised questions in (her) head", is
             completely illogical."


    22. It is not made out that the finding of the  Judge  is  infected  by
        arguable legal error. It has not been shown the Judges  conclusions
        are outside the range of those reasonably available on the evidence
        when considered as a whole.
    23. The  appellant  fails  to  establish  that  the  Judge  applied  an
        inappropriate burden or standard of proof  and  the  Judge  clearly
        considered the evidence made available from all sources.
    24. The Judge has given adequate reasons for rejecting  the  claim  and
        the grounds are, in effect, a disagreement with those findings  and
        desire for greater weight to be attached to certain aspects of  the
        evidence and for a different outcome.
    25. I find the Judge considered the evidence with the  required  degree
        of anxious  scrutiny  and  set  out  findings  of  fact  which  are
        adequately reasoned in relation to  how  the  Judge  assessed  that
        evidence. I find it has not been  made  out  that  the  conclusions
        arrived at, even  though  the  appellant's  representative  clearly
        considers they are unreasonable, have  been  infected  by  arguable
        legal error material to the decision to dismiss the appeal. It  has
        not been shown the findings made do not fall within  the  range  of
        reasonably permissible findings that would have been  open  to  the
        Judge based on the evidence the First-tier Tribunal  was  asked  to
        consider.
    26. The appeal is dismissed.

Decision

    27. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
        Judge's decision. The determination shall stand.


   Anonymity.


    28. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)  of
        the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


        I make such order pursuant to rule 14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
        (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.







Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 7 July 2017












