
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12213/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13 February 2020                           |On 27 February 2020           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                     BT
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Hussain
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. By a decision promulgated on 25 November 2019, I found that the  First-
    tier Tribunal had erred in law such that its decision fell  to  be  set
    aside. My reasons for reaching that decision were as follows:

    1.   I shall refer  to  the  appellant  as  the  'respondent'  and  the
    respondent as the 'appellant', as they appeared respectively before the
    First-tier Tribunal. The appellant was born in 1985  and  is  a  female
    citizen of Cameroon. On 7 December  2016,  she  was  convicted  of  the
    offence of assisting unlawful immigration into an EU member  state  and
    was sentenced to 2 years in prison. As a consequence of her  conviction
    and imprisonment, she  became  subject  to  the  automatic  deportation
    provisions of the 2007 Act. By a decision dated 28 September 2018,  the
    Secretary of State refused her protection and human rights claims.  She
    appealed against that decision to the First-tier Tribunal which,  in  a
    decision promulgated on 16 June 2019, allowed the appeal on  Article  8
    ECHR grounds but dismissed the appeal on asylum grounds (upholding  the
    section 72 certificate) and on  Article  2  and  3  ECHR  grounds.  The
    respondent now appeals, with  permission,  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  in
    respect of the Article 8 decision. There is no cross-appeal in  respect
    of the decision on asylum, section 72 and articles 2/3.

    2.   There are two grounds of appeal.  First,  the  respondent  submits
    that the judge incorrectly recorded that the parties  had  agreed  that
    the appellant is in a genuine and subsisting relationship with N (2005)
    UKHL 31, who is also citizen of Cameroon and who has  indefinite  leave
    to remain in the  United  Kingdom.  The  respondent  submits  that  the
    decision letter  made  it  clear  that  he  did  not  accept  that  the
    relationship is genuine and subsisting and further that  no  concession
    in respect of the relationship was made by the  Presenting  Officer  on
    behalf of the Secretary of State at the hearing before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

    3.   I accept that the decision  letter  disputes  the  nature  of  the
    relationship but, even if I were to accept that no concession was  made
    at the hearing, I do not find that the judge has fallen into error such
    that her decision should be set aside on this ground. The  judge  heard
    evidence from the appellant and N and it is  plain  from  her  analysis
    that she accepted that  the  relationship  is  genuine.  Indeed,  I  am
    satisfied that, had the judge been required to make a finding  of  fact
    as to whether the relationship is genuine, she would have made  such  a
    finding. I note that the appeal was allowed  because  the  judge  found
    that  the  invidious  choice  which  N  would  have  to  make   between
    accompanying the appellant to Cameroon  or  being  separated  from  his
    British child in  the  United  Kingdom  amounted  to  an  unduly  harsh
    consequence of the appellant's deportation.  I consider that the  judge
    would not have reached that conclusion had she had any doubts as to the
    genuineness of the relationship.

    4.   The second ground of appeal is made on the alternative basis that,
    if the relationship is genuine  and  subsisting,  then  the  judge  had
    failed to give clear reasons  for  finding  that  the  consequences  of
    deportation for an would be unduly harsh. Both parties are agreed  that
    undue harshness is correct the test (see section 117C(5) (Exception  2)
    of the 2002 Act (as amended) and that the Article 8  appeal  will  fail
    if the test is not been met. If Exception 2 does  not  apply,  then  it
    follows  that  the  public  interest  concerned  with  the  appellant's
    deportation must prevail.

    5.   I have above characterised this case as being  concerned  with  an
    'invidious choice.' It is clear that the  judge  found  that  would  be
    unduly harsh to expect N to choose between his partner and his  British
    daughter with whom he does not  live  but  with  whom  he  has  regular
    contact. The judge found [61] that 'N faces effectively  the  severance
    of his current relationship as daughter or the severance with marriage;
    if the appellant is forced leave the UK. He expressed in  strong  terms
    his close connection with his daughter and how he felt he could not let
    her down by leaving the UK... I accept the strong bond  between  N  and
    his daughter would be significantly impacted.'

    6.   In my view, an 'invidious choice' such as N faces in  this  appeal
    is capable of amounting to an unduly harsh consequence  of  deportation
    but  the  reasons  for  so  finding  must  be  detailed   and   clearly
    articulated. The judge has concentrated on the relationship  between  N
    and his daughter, a relationship which will only be adversely  affected
    if N accompanies his wife to Cameroon. The alternative scenario is that
    N remains in the United Kingdom and his relationship with his  daughter
    remains unaffected but he is physically separated from  the  appellant.
    The important question is whether that act of deportation will have  an
    unduly harsh consequence for N. By going no  further  than  identifying
    the invidious choice facing N and concluding that N would remain in the
    United Kingdom, the judge has stopped short of  analysing  whether  the
    consequences for N being separated from the appellant would  be  unduly
    harsh; the judge appears to have taken for granted that they would  be;
    she has not provided adequate reasons. Moreover, if the judge  intended
    to find that the very fact that N is confronted by an invidious  choice
    is per se unduly harsh, then such a finding  does  not  emerge  clearly
    from her decision. In circumstances, I find that the  judge's  analysis
    is flawed. I set aside her decision.  The  appeal  will  be  determined
    following a resumed hearing in the Upper Tribunal. Only the  appeal  on
    Article 8 grounds remains to be determined; the other grounds will  not
    be revisited. Both parties may adduce fresh evidence provided copies of
    any documentary evidence, including witness statements, are sent to the
    other party and to the Upper Tribunal no later than 10  days  prior  to
    the resumed hearing.

    Notice of Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set  aside.  The  Article  8
    ECHR appeal will be remade in the Upper Tribunal  following  a  resumed
    hearing (Upper Tribunal Judge Lane; Bradford; 2 hours)

 2. At the resumed hearing on 13 February 2020, I was informed  by  counsel
    for the appellant that the circumstances of the appellant's family  had
    altered since the initial hearing. First, the appellant is now 16 weeks
    pregnant with her second child. Secondly, the appellant's  husband  has
    been naturalised as a British citizen; a consequence of  naturalisation
    is that he has lost his citizenship of Cameroon where joint nationality
    is not recognised.

 3. In the light of the changed circumstances of the  family,  Mr  Diwnycz,
    who appeared for the Secretary of State, helpfully informed me that  he
    did not invite me to uphold the decision of the respondent which is the
    subject of the appeal. I find that it would be  unduly  harsh  for  the
    appellant's husband to travel with her to Cameroon; he is no  longer  a
    citizen of that country and for him to be separated from  his  daughter
    in the United Kingdom with whom he enjoys a good relationship would  be
    extremely problematic for him. Moreover, I  find  it  would  be  unduly
    harsh for the appellant's husband  to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom
    separated from the appellant and the British child of  their  marriage.
    In the circumstances, the appellant's appeal is allowed on human rights
    grounds (Article 8 ECHR).

    Notice of Decision

    The upper tribunal has remade the decision. The appellant's  appeal  is
    allowed on human rights grounds (Article 8 ECHR).

Signed                              Date 13 February 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


























