

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12482/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham                            |Decision promulgated &Reasons|
|On 3 April 2018                                |On 27 April 2018             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON

                                   Between

                                     AK
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms E Fitzsimons instructed by Hoole & Co Solicitors

For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills - Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.



                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS


     1. The appellant appeals with permission against a decision of  First-
        tier Tribunal Judge Robertson promulgated on 7 August 2017 in which
        the Judge dismissed the appellant's  protection  and  human  rights
        claims.
     2.  The  Judge  notes  the  appellant  claims  to  be  a  national  of
        Afghanistan, which was disputed by  the  Secretary  of  State,  and
        clearly considered the evidence with the required degree of anxious
        scrutiny before setting out findings  of  fact  from  [45]  of  the
        decision under challenge, which can be summarised in the  following
        terms:


                    a. On the basis of the  background  evidence  there  was
                       Taliban activity in Kunar Province and that that  was
                       an American presence there as confirmed in the report
                       of Tim Foxley. Notwithstanding, the  details  of  the
                       appellants claim fall to be assessed on the basis  of
                       the evidence in the round to the  lower  standard  of
                       proof [46].
                    b. The appeal is complicated by two factors, firstly the
                       appellant's age at the time the  events  took  place.
                       The appellant was fingerprinted in Greece on 26 April
                       2012  and  then  in  Dunkirk  on  24  May  2012.  The
                       appellant claims to have  been  at  school  for  four
                       years from the age of 7 which meant he was 11 when he
                       left school.   Adding  to  this  the  two  years  the
                       appellant  claimed  to  have   done   nothing   after
                       finishing education it would make him 13 years of age
                       when the events that caused  him  to  flee  allegedly
                       took place.  The  appellant  was  a  child  when  the
                       claimed events took place but not a young  child  and
                       could be expected to provide some details of where he
                       lived when questioned. Throughout the  assessment  of
                       the claim the Judge bore in mind his age and level of
                       education [47]. The second  complicating  factor  was
                       said to be the appellants mental  health.  The  Judge
                       refers to a number of medical reports [48 I - V].
                    c.  Having  assessed  the  evidence  as  a   whole   the
                       appellants mental health condition does not appear to
                       have resulted in an inability to  provide  consistent
                       information with regard to events  that  led  him  to
                       flee his country of origin for the reasons set out at
                       [55 I - VIII]. At [56] the Judge records that it  was
                       submitted on the appellant's behalf that in  relation
                       to inconsistencies in his account the benefit of  the
                       doubt should be extended to him because of his mental
                       health condition although earlier  letters  regarding
                       the diagnosis of PTSD did not establish the appellant
                       was not able to concentrate or recall events or  that
                       he  suffered  from  such  severe  PTSD  that  he  had
                       difficulties with his  memory.  The  Judge  sets  out
                       details of  a  passage  from  the  Ardenleigh  Report
                       following an assault in January  2014  in  which  the
                       appellant reported a worsening of his PTSD  and  that
                       his primary PTSD "experience" then became related  to
                       this incident rather than the previous experiences in
                       Afghanistan and his journey to the UK.
                    d. The  Judge  notes  a  further  deterioration  in  the
                       appellant's  condition  as  a  result  of  his  being
                       recalled to prison after he had breached the terms of
                       his licence [58] and that although the appellant  had
                       displayed symptoms of psychiatric  illness  since  he
                       arrived in  the  UK  the  severity  of  the  symptoms
                       increased after he was assaulted in January 2014  and
                       his recall  to  prison;  but  at  no  time  had  that
                       resulted in him changing  the  core  details  of  his
                       account with regard to  his  application  for  asylum
                       [59].
                    e. The Judge notes the issue of credibility was not  for
                       the medical experts and that there was no reason  why
                       the journey alone could not  have  resulted  in  PTSD
                       which was subsequently exasperated by the  attack  on
                       the appellant in January 2014 [61].
                    f. The Judge  did  not  find  a  lack  of  knowledge  in
                       relation to some aspects of Afghanistan determinative
                       but did find the appellant's account undermined as  a
                       result of his inability to name his  own  tribe,  the
                       main tribe of his alleged village, or  the  names  of
                       families which were important within the village. The
                       Judge did not find it plausible  that  a  13-year-old
                       who had spent his whole  life  in  the  same  village
                       would not know the name of his  own  tribe  or  other
                       tribes within the village, which would suggest he was
                       not from the area he claims to  be  from.  The  Judge
                       noted that one of the appellants experts  Mr  Foxley,
                       who was asked to comment upon whether or not  it  was
                       significant the appellant could not  give  dates  for
                       New Year's Day or Independence Day, was not asked how
                       likely it was that someone who lived in  their  rural
                       village until the age of 13 would not know  the  name
                       of their tribe [63].
                    g. The Judge found the evidence of a Mr I Khan that  the
                       appellant was from Afghanistan lacked substance as he
                       could not say if there  were  different  dialects  of
                       Pushtu spoken in Afghanistan. The Judge placed little
                       weight on this evidence [64 - 65].
                    h. The Judge found that little weight could be  attached
                       to the evidence of a second witness Mr B Khan who was
                       unable to give cogent reasons as to why  he  believed
                       the appellant was from Afghanistan [67].
                    i. At [68] the Judge writes  "On  the  evidence  in  the
                       round, to the lower standard of proof, without giving
                       significant weight to the evidence of Mr I  Khan  and
                       Mr B Khan, whilst I find that the Appellant is likely
                       to be from Afghanistan I am unable to find  that  the
                       Appellant has established that he is from  the  rural
                       village Mahgwal, in Kunar Province because he was not
                       able to provide the name of his tribe  or  any  other
                       tribes in his village. In so deciding, I bear in mind
                       his WS2 at para 6-7 (AB1, p2-3),  but  find  that  he
                       would not need access to information  the  Respondent
                       had in order to identify tribes in his home  village.
                       It will be information that he had grown up  with.  I
                       also do not find it credible  that  he  would  forget
                       such information even with the diagnosis of PTSD".
                    j. The Judge considered the position in the  alternative
                       if the appellant  was  from  the  village  he  claims
                       (which the Judge expressly stated she did  not),  but
                       in any event found the core the  appellant's  account
                       that he was engaged to assist his brothers to spy  on
                       Americans lack credibility [69]. The  Judge  did  not
                       find the appellant had established that  he  and  his
                       brother were spying for the Americans  and  that  the
                       appellant's account of having done so  and  that  his
                       paternal uncle informed the Taliban because of a land
                       dispute which resulted in his son being killed, is  a
                       claim fabricated solely to establish asylum in United
                       Kingdom [70].
                    k. In relation to the appellant's health the Judge noted
                       considerable emphasis being placed upon  a  need  for
                       international protection because of his vulnerability
                       as the appellant  will  be  returned  to  Afghanistan
                       without family support. At [71] the Judge writes "...
                       However, there was no  evidence  of  the  information
                       provided to the Red Cross. Even if the paperwork  was
                       given to the Appellant's social worker, there  is  no
                       reason why enquiries could not have been made of  the
                       Red Cross to obtain copies of  information  provided.
                       As I do not accept that the Appellant came  from  the
                       area he stated  that  he  came  from,  it  cannot  be
                       accepted that he provided  the  Red  Cross  with  the
                       correct details. Furthermore, stated in  the  RL,  on
                       the basis of HK, the appellant's parents have spent a
                       considerable sum of money to send him to  the  UK.  I
                       find that it is not establish that the Appellant  has
                       had no contact with them since he came to the  UK  or
                       that he has no way of contacting them. Therefore,  if
                       he  were  to  return  to  Afghanistan,  he  will   be
                       returning to his family.
                    l. Having analysed the medical evidence  written  by  Dr
                       Stevens the  Judge  accepts  that  suicidal  ideation
                       exists  and  that  the  Appellant  has  self   harmed
                       although there was no evidence he  attempted  suicide
                       at the hospital and the Ardenleigh  Report  does  not
                       refer to any suicide attempts. The Judge finds it  is
                       unclear why Dr Stevens is of the  view  that  if  the
                       Appellant is returned to  Afghanistan  he  "...  will
                       die, probably by killing himself" [77].
                    m. The Judge  did  not  find  it  established  that  the
                       appellant is at risk  of  suicide  even  when  noting
                       previous self-harm.  It  was  found  the  appellant's
                       actions had not crossed the line so as to be  treated
                       as a serious attempt at suicide. The Judge  finds  it
                       is  not  established  the  Appellant  has   attempted
                       suicide in the past  and/or  that  it  is  reasonably
                       likely  that  he  would  do   so   if   returned   to
                       Afghanistan. Treatment in  the  UK  and  removal  was
                       discussed by the Judge by reference to  the  decision
                       in Balogun [81].
                    n. In relation to the assessment of risk in Afghanistan;
                       the Judge notes there was little evidence before  her
                       as to the provisions in Afghanistan for mental health
                       other than a few paragraphs in Mr  Fox's  report  the
                       Country of Origin Information Report  on  Afghanistan
                       at paragraphs 28.46 - 28.50. The Judge concluded that
                       the  evidence  before  her  did  not   confirm   that
                       treatment will not be available to the appellant  and
                       that whilst it is likely to be  different  from  that
                       received in the UK and more expensive, the  appellant
                       has family in Afghanistan who are wealthy  enough  to
                       pay for his travel to the UK and that  it  cannot  be
                       assumed that they  will  be  unwilling  to  help  him
                       access treatment on return [82].
                    o. In relation to Article 3 ECHR and the risk of suicide
                       and/or risk of deterioration in the appellants mental
                       health; the Judge  finds  the  appellant  is  not  at
                       imminent  risk  of  dying  on  return  and  that  the
                       evidence considered, in the round, did not  establish
                       an entitlement to  be  recognised  as  a  refugee  or
                       protection pursuant to articles 2 and 3 ECHR.
                    p. The Judge, when considering Article 15(c), found  the
                       appellant had not established there was  no  part  of
                       Afghanistan that is safe for him to return  to,  that
                       the Judge knew nothing of the appellant's  home  area
                       and that the appellant had not established that  with
                       the assistance of his family he would not be able  to
                       live safely in Afghanistan due to any  indiscriminate
                       violence [87].
                    q. The Judge concluded by considering article 8 ECHR  in
                       relation to which it was not found the appellant  had
                       established entitlement to remain  under  either  the
                       Immigration  Rules  or  outside  the  Rules  for  the
                       reasons set out at [89 I-IX] of  the  decision  under
                       challenge.


     3. The appellant sought  permission  to  appeal  which  was  initially
        refused by another judge of the First-tier Tribunal but granted  on
        a renewed application by  the  Upper  Tribunal  for  the  following
        reasons:


                  The decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  M  Robertson
                  ("the FtJ") is impressively detailed. However, the matters
                  advanced in the  grounds  advance  an  arguable  case  for
                  suggesting that she erred in  law  in  her  assessment  of
                  credibility, with reference to the medical and  background
                  evidence that was before her.


                  The contention in relation to risk to the appellant  as  a
                  result of his conviction,  in  the  light  of  his  mental
                  state,  is   also   a   matter   that   requires   further
                  consideration by the Upper Tribunal.


                  I also consider  that  there  is  arguable  merit  in  the
                  complaint about the FtJ's  consideration  of  the  medical
                  evidence in terms of the asserted risk of suicide  Article
                  3 generally. These issues  also  have  an  impact  on  the
                  assessment of humanitarian protection.


                  At the forthcoming hearing before the Upper Tribunal,  the
                  appellants representatives will be expected to  deal  with
                  the argument that aspects of the grounds amount only to  a
                  disagreement with the FtJ's analysis of the evidence.


                  I cannot see much to commend the complaint about the FtJ's
                  consideration of Article 8, given the assessment that  she
                  undertook, in that respect, but  I  do  not  restrict  the
                  grounds that may be argued, as presently pleaded.


Background


     4. The Judge records the appellants immigration history including  the
        fact that on 10 April 2015 the appellant was convicted of attempted
        rape of a female aged 16 years or over for which he  was  sentenced
        to 3 years imprisonment in a Youth Offenders Institution, and  made
        subject to a Sexual Offences Prevention  Order  for  an  indefinite
        period of time. The Judge notes at [5] the Crown  Court  sentencing
        remarks include the following comments:


             "You were 15 years old at the time of the offence of attempted
             rape. The offence was perpetrated against a young  sex  worker
             whom you forced to the ground  and  threatened  to  kill.  You
             forced a glove into your victim's mouth with such  force  that
             it broke a tooth. You also struck her to the forehead  with  a
             stone. Fortunately, the latter blow  does  not  seem  to  have
             involved extreme force. You then attempted to  penetrate  her,
             which activity was a (sic) particularly short duration due  to
             your early ejaculation, however, it is likely this would  have
             seemed  longer  to  your  victim.  Full  credit  for  plea  is
             appropriate in your case with a plea at the  first  reasonable
             opportunity.


             ...


             You have been diagnosed with  Post-Traumatic  Stress  Disorder
             which arose amidst the terrible atrocities and strife  in  the
             war-torn  country   from   which   you   have   escaped.   But
             psychiatrists  initially  reporting  on  you  considered  your
             mental disorder was not of the nature  or  degree  to  warrant
             hospital admission. There is no risk  assessment  from  either
             psychiatrist. Soon before you are due to be sentenced, further
             psychiatric evidence suggested you might be  treatable  within
             the Mental Health Act. You  were  then  confined  to  hospital
             under an interim hospital order. Sadly, it now transpires that
             no Mental Health Act disposal is available. The possibility of
             rehabilitation  and  treatment  now  has  to   give   way   to
             retribution and deterrence.


             ...


             The Specialist Risk  Assessment  from  the  Probation  Service
             shows medium concerns as to risk  in  future.   You  struggled
             with the custody regime when on remand in prison and there  is
             no doubt that custody will be particularly difficult  for  you
             and you will continue to struggle to cope.


             ...


             I place the offence itself within Category 2 of the definitive
             guidelines if perpetrated by an  adult  and  that  because  of
             violence and threats of violence. I found  that  the  violence
             would not have been of the extreme  nature  which  would  have
             placed it in Category 1 for an adult. The  level  of  violence
             was, however, serious. The location and timing of  the  events
             are properly to be treated as aggravating features, along with
             the vulnerability of your victim..."


     5. The appellant was released from custody on 15 September 2015 having
        been served with the decision to deport him from the United Kingdom
        on 9 September 2015. On 15 November  2015  the  applicant  made  an
        application for a further grant of Discretionary  Leave  which  was
        refused. The appellant was  referred  by  Social  Services  to  the
        National Referral Hub as a potential victim of  trafficking  on  24
        December 2015.  The decision  by  the  Competent  Authority  on  29
        December 2015 was that there was no reason  to  conclude  that  the
        appellant was a potential victim of trafficking.
     6. The  appellant  was  recalled  to  prison  on  11  March  2016  for
        inappropriate behaviour towards women which meant he was in  breach
        of his licence. This related to the appellant approaching a 15-year-
        old girl outside her school.  The Judge notes at [12] the appellant
        approached the girl. The girl became frightened  by  the  appellant
        who had provided her with cannabis  but  who  was  clearly  seeking
        sexual activity with her.  At [13] the Judge refers to the fact the
        appellant's  social  media  presence  was  the  subject  of  police
        investigation as it showed he was grooming several  girls;  meaning
        there  were  several  potential  victims  to  be  protected.   Such
        behaviour was said to be a breach of the terms  of  the  appellants
        licence.
     7. The appellant appealed the deportation decision on  protection  and
        human rights grounds. This was the  appeal  that  came  before  the
        Judge.



Error of law


     8. The first ground relied upon by Miss Fitzsimons asserts  the  Judge
        erred in her approach to the medical evidence. It  is  argued  that
        the Judge was wrong to place limited weight  on  the  diagnosis  of
        PTSD and that  the  Judge  was  wrong  to  reject  the  psychiatric
        evidence which provided the origin of the appellant's condition  as
        his traumatic experiences in  Afghanistan  as  well  as  subsequent
        journey to the United Kingdom.
     9. The Judge accepted the diagnosis of PTSD and clearly considered all
        the medical evidence with the required degree of anxious  scrutiny.
        The issue of credibility is not within the remit of the  author  of
        the medical reports but is a matter for the Judge  having  had  the
        opportunity to  consider  all  the  evidence;  including  that  not
        available to the medical practitioners. The  Judge  gives  adequate
        reasons for findings made and therefore the weight to be  given  to
        the evidence was a matter for the Judge.  So  far  as  the  grounds
        assert the Judge placed an incorrect weight  on  the  diagnosis  of
        PTSD no arguable legal error arises.
    10. It has not been  shown  the  findings  are  outside  the  range  of
        findings available to the Judge or a finding that  is  in  any  way
        irrational to conclude that there are a number  of  causes  of  the
        appellants PTSD. The Judge  sets  out  in  detail  the  appellant's
        history including that relating to assaults in the  United  Kingdom
        in 2014 and weighs those findings in the  balance  in  relation  to
        assessing the appellant's condition. No  arguable  legal  error  is
        made out in relation to the approach taken by the Judge or findings
        made.
    11. In any event, the  Judge  clearly  considers  the  availability  of
        medical treatment in Afghanistan on the basis that the appellant is
        suffering  from  PTSD  and  findings  made  in  relation   to   the
        appellant's mental health. The Judge finds  there  is  no  evidence
        that family will not be  able  to  support  him  or  that  adequate
        provision to treat mental health will not be available.  The  Judge
        clearly deals with the allegation the appellant faces a  real  risk
        of suicide. No arguable legal error is made out in relation to  the
        manner in which the  Judge  assesses  the  evidence.  Even  if  the
        appellants experiences in Afghanistan contributed to his PTSD  this
        does  not  undermine  the  Judge's  findings  in  relation  to  the
        credibility of the core of the claim. It also does not suggest that
        the degree of PTSD is  any  greater  than  that  disclosed  in  the
        medical reports considered by the Judge.
    12. As noted by Mr Mills, the medical  experts  do  not  say  only  the
        combination of the factors they  identify  explain  the  appellants
        PTSD. The  journey  described  by  the  Judge  at  [61]  details  a
        harrowing account capable of causing PTSD. This was  recognised  by
        the Appeal in HM.
    13. It has not  been  made  out  that  the  findings  set  out  in  the
        determination are outside the range of those  reasonably  available
        to the Judge on the evidence; including those  at  [61]  which  was
        specifically challenged before the Upper Tribunal.
    14. In relation to Ground  5,  failure  to  take  account  of  relevant
        considerations -  disclosure  of  the  appellant's  offending;  the
        assertion it was plausible that the  appellant's  conviction  could
        easily become known creating a real risk contrary to the  Taliban's
        moral code and exposing the appellant to risk of serious  harm  has
        no arguable merit. Firstly, it was not made  out  that  anybody  in
        Afghanistan,  particularly  the  Taliban,  will  be  aware  of  the
        appellant's conviction in the United Kingdom such that  they  would
        want to single him out or be interested in him sufficient to create
        a real risk on return. The only way an individual will be aware  of
        what happened to the appellant  and  his  offences  in  the  United
        Kingdom would be if he told them, but it was not made out  he  will
        be likely to do so sufficient to create a real risk on  return.  It
        was submitted before the Upper Tribunal that  the  sexual  offences
        may be construed as sex outside marriage but the conviction was not
        for actual rape or any form of  penetration  but  rather  attempted
        rape. As noted before the Upper Tribunal, whether the act for which
        the appellant  was  convicted  would  lead  to  any  real  risk  in
        Afghanistan would require detailed consideration of the approach to
        women in that country which includes acts of  domestic  and  sexual
        violence for which no effective remedies available for  most  women
        in that country against the perpetrators.
    15. It also cannot be ignored that the submissions  asserting  risk  to
        the appellant in his home area completely fail to engage  with  the
        finding by the Judge that the appellant had  not  proved,  even  to
        lower standard, where his home area was. The Judge was entitled  to
        find that the lack of  knowledge  of  fundamental  aspects  of  the
        appellant's home area, specifically relating to a lack of knowledge
        of his tribe, undermined the claim. The  fact  the  Judge  accepted
        both the Taliban and US forces had active presence in Kunar at  the
        relevant time does not necessarily establish that the appellant  is
        from this area. This information is available in the public domain.
        No arguable legal error material to the findings of the  Judge  has
        been made out.
    16. The Judge clearly took into account the appellants claimed  attempt
        to trace his family but as the appellant was found to  have  misled
        the Tribunal in relation to his claimed home area the  Judge  could
        not be satisfied that accurate information had been  given  to  the
        Red Cross. It was not disputed  that  evidence  was  given  by  the
        foster parents relating  to  attempts  to  contact  the  appellants
        parents but, as the Judge notes, copies of the information provided
        to the Red Cross had not been  made  available  to  the  First-tier
        Tribunal [71]. No arguable legal error material to the findings  in
        this respect is made out.
    17. Ground 4 is mere disagreement with a finding reasonably open to the
        Judge on the evidence. No arguable legal error is made out.
    18. The appellant asserts the Judge failed to engage with the  evidence
        on internal location, asserting there was evidence before the First-
        tier Tribunal that the  security  situation  in  Kabul  itself  was
        deteriorating. The appellant asserts the Judge failed to deal  with
        the evidence when assessing the  reasonableness  of  relocation  to
        Kabul. The Judge clearly considered the evidence with the  required
        degree of anxious scrutiny and found  that  the  appellant  has  an
        internal flight alternative to Kabul if  required.  The  difficulty
        for the Judge was that as the appellant has failed to establish his
        home area he had not established that  he  would  not  be  able  to
        reside safely in Afghanistan in that place [87]. This is a  finding
        reasonably open to the Judge on the evidence. If the appellant  can
        return to his home area there is no need for any finding to be made
        in relation to the issue of internal relocation.
    19. Although awaited, the latest  country  guidance  case  relating  to
        returns to Kabul had not been published but the date of the hearing
        before the Upper Tribunal.  This error of law decision stands  from
        the date of promulgation and in the meantime the Upper Tribunal has
        handed down the most  recent  country  guidance  case  relating  to
        Kabul, AS (Safety of Kabul) Afghanistan CG [2018] UKUT 00118 (IAC),
        in relation to which the header reads:


        Risk on return to Kabul from the Taliban


        (i)     A person who is of lower-level  interest  for  the  Taliban
        (i.e. not a senior government or security services official,  or  a
        spy) is not at real risk of persecution from the Taliban in Kabul.


        Internal relocation to Kabul

        (ii)   Having regard to the security and humanitarian situation  in
        Kabul as well as the difficulties faced by  the  population  living
        there (primarily the urban poor but also IDPs and other  returnees,
        which are not dissimilar to the  conditions  faced  throughout  may
        other  parts  of  Afghanistan);  it  will  not,   in   general   be
        unreasonable or unduly harsh for a single adult male in good health
        to relocate to  Kabul  even  if  he  does  not  have  any  specific
        connections or support network in Kabul.

        (iii)  However,  the  particular  circumstances  of  an  individual
        applicant must be taken into account in the context  of  conditions
        in the place of relocation, including a person's  age,  nature  and
        quality  of  support  network/connections  with  Kabul/Afghanistan,
        their physical and mental health, and their language, education and
        vocational skills when determining whether a  person  falls  within
        the general position set out above.


        (iv) A person with a support network  or  specific  connections  in
        Kabul is likely to be in a more advantageous  position  on  return,
        which may counter a particular vulnerability of  an  individual  on
        return.


        (v)   Although  Kabul  suffered  the  highest  number  of  civilian
        casualties (in the latest UNAMA figures from 2017) and  the  number
        of  security  incidents  is  increasing,  the  proportion  of   the
        population directly affected by the  security  situation  is  tiny.
        The current security situation in Kabul is not at such a  level  as
        to render internal relocation unreasonable or unduly harsh.


        Previous Country Guidance


        (vi) The country guidance in  AK  (Article  15(c))  Afghanistan  CG
        [2012]  UKUT  163  (IAC)  in  relation  to  Article  15(c)  of  the
        Qualification Directive remains unaffected by this decision.


        (vii)            The  country  guidance  in  AK   (Article   15(c))
        Afghanistan  CG  [2012]  UKUT  163  (IAC)  in   relation   to   the
        (un)reasonableness of  internal  relocation  to  Kabul  (and  other
        potential places of internal relocation) for certain categories  of
        women remains unaffected by this decision.


        (viii)         The country guidance  in  AA  (unattended  children)
        Afghanistan CG [2012] UKUT 00016 (IAC) also remains  unaffected  by
        this decision.

    20. It is not necessary to reconvene the hearing as a  result  of  this
        decision. The primary finding remains that the Judge was  uncertain
        as to the appellant's home area as a result of discrepancies in his
        evidence,  for  the  reasons  given.  The  finding  of   a   viable
        alternative internal flight option to Kabul  remains  available  to
        the appellant. The Judge clearly considered the  appellants  mental
        health issues and behaviour but found he had family  available  who
        will be willing to assist him.
    21. The challenge to the Judge's assessment of article 3 ECHR  and  the
        medical  evidence  has  no  arguable  merit.  The   Judge   clearly
        considered the evidence 'in the round' and the assertion the  Judge
        failed to have regard to 2016 report published by Samuel  Hall  has
        no arguable merit. The Judge  sets  out  the  correct  legal  self-
        direction in relation to the test and assess the evidence with  the
        required degree of anxious scrutiny, as  noted  above.  It  is  not
        established that the conclusion article 3 will not be breached as a
        result of country conditions or the  appellants  mental  health  is
        outside the range of findings reasonably available to the Judge  on
        the evidence. This is not a case similar to that identified  in  YZ
        (Sri Lanka), the case  in  which  it  was  held  that  it  was  not
        reasonable for the two appellants to seek to  avail  themselves  of
        medical treatment from the authorities in Sri Lanka as a result  of
        the fact they had been tortured in their home state  by  organs  of
        the State and therefore had a credible fear  of  approaching  those
        they perceived to be part of the same organisation  to  secure  the
        help they needed. It was accepted  that  lack  of  treatment  would
        result in a severe deterioration in their mental  state  sufficient
        to engage article 3.
    22. No arguable error is made out in relation to the  Judge's  approach
        to article 8 either within or outside the Immigration Rules.
    23. Even the summary of the findings made by the Judge  set  out  above
        shows that this is a matter in which the Judge took great  care  to
        ensure that the appellants  position  was  clearly  understood  and
        proper  and  adequate  findings  made.  Whilst  the  appellant  may
        disagree with a number  of  the  findings  made  and  seek  a  more
        favourable outcome, the appellant has failed to establish  arguable
        legal error material to the decision to dismiss the appeal for  the
        reasons given by the Judge.
    24. When granting permission to appeal the Upper Tribunal  specifically
        advised the appellant's representative that they will  be  expected
        to deal with the argument that aspects of the grounds  amount  only
        to a disagreement  with  the  Judge's  analysis  of  the  evidence.
        Despite Miss Fitzsimons best efforts, it is clear that the majority
        of the grounds put forward are no more than a disagreement.  Others
        put forward on the basis of  an  argument  the  Judge  should  have
        looked at the evidence  in  a  different  way  are  noted,  but  no
        arguable legal error is made out.   The  appellant  has  failed  to
        establish anything, in relation to which a finding could be made in
        his favour, that would have made any difference to the outcome.
    25. The appellant fails to establish the decision is outside the  range
        of those available to the Judge or anything arguably perverse about
        the Judge's approach to the evidence or findings made. I  therefore
        find there is no arguable legal error made out.  The  determination
        shall stand.


Decision

    26. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  Immigration  Judge's
        decision. The determination shall stand.




   Anonymity.


    27. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)  of
        the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


        I make such order pursuant to rule 14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
        (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.




Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 26 April 2018












