
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12329/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Centre                               |                                     |
|On 12th April 2019                   |On 17th April 2019                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER


                                   Between

                               RAQIBUR RAHMAN
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No appearance by 12 noon by either the appellant or
                    by his instructed solicitors; no explanation for the
                    lack of appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      1. The appellant, a Bangladeshi citizen, arrived in  the  UK  in  2011
         with entry clearance as a Tier 4 student; he had  leave  to  remain
         until 28th November 2014. His visa was curtailed but not served  on
         him because  his  whereabouts  were  unknown.  He  was  encountered
         working illegally, made an  application  for  leave  to  remain  on
         family and private life grounds which was refused in May  2015.  He
         failed to attend reporting  appointments,  and  was  listed  as  an
         absconder. In March 2018 he was encountered again working illegally
         and arrested. He claimed asylum on 5th April 2018. His asylum claim
         was refused on 28th September 2018 and his appeal came before First-
         tier Tribunal Judge Gladstone who having heard the  appeal  on  2nd
         November 2018 dismissed  the  appeal  for  reasons  set  out  in  a
         decision promulgated on 13 December 2018.

      2. The appellant sought permission to appeal the decision of the judge
         refusing the international protection claim; permission was refused
         and the application was not renewed.

      3. Permission to appeal the First-tier Tribunal decision, was  granted
         on the grounds that it was arguable the judge had  failed  to  give
         any or any adequate consideration to Article 8.The  grounds  submit
         that the judge made no finding  on  whether  there  would  be  very
         significant  obstacles  to  the  appellant's   reintegration   into
         Bangladesh, that the First-tier  Tribunal  had  recognised  in  the
         decision that consideration of paragraph 276ADE(1) was in issue and
         yet had failed to address this.

      4. The grounds of appeal to the First-tier  Tribunal  make  a  general
         claim that removal would be a breach of Article 8. The  appellant's
         representative before the First-tier Tribunal  confirmed  that  the
         appellant relied upon Article 8 family life - see [13] decision. In
         [150] of the decision, the judge reiterates  that  the  appellant's
         representative "was clear that the appellant relied on  the  family
         life aspect only". The judge notes  there  was  no  evidence  of  a
         relevant child and that the representative only referred the  judge
         to the appellant's  witness  statement  with  no  other  supporting
         evidence. The judge records that there was no  evidence  of  extant
         family life and the appellant gave no evidence in relation thereto.
         The judge's decision regarding family life is unassailable.

      5. In so far as private  life  is  concerned  it  is  plain  that  the
         appellant did not, at the  hearing,  rely  upon  any  private  life
         aspect of Article 8.  Nevertheless  the  judge,  for  completeness,
         adopted, in the decision, the respondent's reasons.

      6. It is inconceivable that the judge can be considered to have fallen
         into legal error in failing to consider that which was specifically
         not relied upon.

      7. There is no error of law.

    Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

    I do not set  aside  the  decision,  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal dismissing the appeal on all grounds stands.


     Date 12th April 2019
[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
