
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12657/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 29 June 2017                          |On 12 July 2017                   |
|                                         |                                  |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN

                                   Between

                                    [i z]


                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr H Sarwar of Counsel instructed by DV Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Staunton, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

1.   The appellant appealed against the respondent's decision  to  refuse  a
    protection claim.  First-tier Tribunal Judge Phull dismissed her appeal
    in a decision promulgated on 25 January 2017.  The judge  rejected  the
    credibility of the appellant's account and concluded that she would not
    be at risk if returned to Zimbabwe.

Decision and Reasons

2.   The appellant seeks to appeal the First-tier Tribunal decision  on  two
    grounds.  Firstly, that the judge failed to assess the case properly in
    accordance with the  principles  outlined  in  paragraph  339L  of  the
    Immigration Rules, which transposed  Article  4  of  the  Qualification
    Directive.  Secondly, the judge failed to  give  adequate  reasons  for
    apparently rejecting the evidence of the second witness, [M].

3.   In relation to the first  ground  of  appeal  it  is  clear  the  judge
    referred to paragraph 339L of the Immigration Rules at paragraph 12  of
    the decision insofar as it  assists  a  judge  to  make  a  credibility
    assessment.  However, having made that reference  there  is  little  to
    show that the judge then went on  to  conduct  her  assessment  of  the
    appellant's credibility in accordance with the principles  set  out  in
    paragraph 339L. It was of course open to the judge to take into account
    any apparent inconsistencies in  the  appellant's  account  insofar  as
    paragraph 339L requires an  applicant  to  make  a  genuine  effort  to
    substantiate an asylum claim.  It was also open to the  judge  to  take
    into account any circumstances in  which  she  thought  evidence  could
    reasonably have been produced in support of the claim.

4.   In paragraphs 15 to 18 of the decision the  judge  makes  a  series  of
    findings relating to the factual basis of the claim.  In each paragraph
    she notes that no evidence had been produced to support that aspect  of
    the claim. It seems that that lack of evidence became the  main  reason
    for rejecting the appellant's account.  Whilst it was open to the judge
    to note that further evidence could have been produced  in  support  of
    the claim, what is lacking from  the  decision  is  any  assessment  of
    whether what was produced was sufficient to meet the  low  standard  of
    proof.  There is no assessment of whether the appellant's  account  was
    generally consistent, either internally or with the background evidence
    relating to the circumstances in Zimbabwe.  I also note that  there  is
    some confusion in the application of the standard and burden  of  proof
    in paragraphs 14 and 17.  In the last  sentence  of  paragraph  14  the
    judge stated:

         "I therefore find to a reasonable degree  of  likelihood  that  the
         appellant does not have a significant MDC profile because there  is
         nothing in her evidence to suggest that as a member of the MDC  she
         had problems personally or conducting her business in Zimbabwe."

5.   In paragraph 17 of the decision the judge  considered  the  appellant's
    evidence relating to the reports that she made to  the  police  of  her
    uncle's death in 2009.  The appellant also  claimed  that  subsequently
    she received threatening telephone calls, which  she  reported  to  the
    police.  The judge concluded:

         "I find  that  although  the  appellant  claims  to  have  received
         threatening telephone calls and says that she reported  the  matter
         to the police many times, she has not filed any evidence  of  these
         complaints and I  find  this  is  because  there  is  a  reasonable
         likelihood these incidents have not occurred as claimed."

6.   There is a fine line between a judge being able to  take  into  account
    an appellant's failure to produce evidence that could  reasonably  have
    been produced and applying  too  high  a  standard  of  proof.  If  the
    decision is read as a whole, in my assessment,  the  judge  required  a
    higher standard of evidence than is required  to  make  out  an  asylum
    claim. The two paragraphs I have highlighted  also  indicate  that  the
    judge may have muddled the application of the standard of proof.  It is
    not for the judge to decide to a reasonable degree of  likelihood  that
    an appellant does not have a significant MDC profile or that  incidents
    did not occur to the standard of a  reasonable  degree  of  likelihood.
    What is required is a holistic assessment of all the evidence to decide
    whether the evidence before the judge is sufficient  to  meet  the  low
    standard of proof.  For these reasons, I accept that there is an  error
    of law in the judge's decision relating to the first ground.

7.   I can deal with the  second  ground  fairly  briefly.  [M]  provided  a
    witness statement  in  support  of  the  appellant's  case.   She  also
    attended the hearing to give evidence.  It is said that she is  related
    to the appellant. She is the daughter of the appellant's uncle.  It was
    not disputed that [M] has been recognised as a refugee. A copy  of  her
    interview records or initial witness statements made in support of  her
    original asylum claim would have shed light on the reasons why she  was
    found to be a refugee and may have assisted the appellant's  case.   It
    was open to the judge  to  note  that  this  was  evidence  that  could
    reasonably have been produced.  However,  what  seems  clear  from  the
    finding in paragraph 16 of the judge's decision is  that  there  is  no
    analysis of [M]'s evidence.  I am told  by  counsel  who  attended  the
    hearing that [M] was  called  to  give  evidence  but  was  not  cross-
    examined.  This would appear to be borne out by the judge's  record  of
    proceedings on file.

8.   In her witness  statement  [M]  confirmed  that  she  was  aware  that,
    together with her mother, the appellant witnessed the  assault  on  her
    father four days before his death.  She also said that  she  was  aware
    that the appellant was nearby at the time when her  father  died.   She
    was also aware that the appellant had given information to  the  police
    and subsequently received threats.

9.   Given that [M]'s evidence was unchallenged  it  was  incumbent  on  the
    judge to make findings relating to her evidence.   The  only  place  in
    which the judge deals with her evidence  is  at  paragraph  16  of  the
    decision. It not clear whether the judge accepted her evidence or  not.
    If she accepted her evidence it is unclear what weight  she  placed  on
    it.  If she did not accept her  evidence,  there  is  no  reasoning  to
    explain why.  For these reasons, I find that the second ground is  also
    made out.  Both parties agree that as a consequence the decision should
    be set aside and the appropriate course  of  action  is  to  remit  the
    appeal for a fresh hearing before the First-tier Tribunal.

10.  For the reasons given above I conclude  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    decision involved the making of an error on a point of law.




DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal's decision involved the making  of  an  error  on  a
point of law

The decision is set aside

The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing


Signed   [pic]                  Date   11 July 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan
