
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12962/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 31 January 2019                   |On 26 February 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between

                                     I H
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Swain, Counsel instructed by City Heights
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Bangladesh born on 15 October 1987.   He
    arrived in the UK on 6 April 2010 as a Tier  4  Student.   He  made  an
    application to extend this  leave  which  was  refused  and  an  appeal
    against this decision was dismissed.  He was served with papers  as  an
    overstayer on 23 February 2017  and  claimed  asylum  that  day.   This
    application was refused in a decision dated 24  November  2017  against
    which he appealed.  The basis of this claim is that he is a gay man and
    he feared persecution on the  grounds  of  his  sexual  orientation  if
    returned to Bangladesh.

 2. The Appellant's appeal hearing came  before  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Hussain on 25 September 2018 when the Appellant and  a  number
    of witnesses gave evidence.  In a decision and reasons  promulgated  on
    15 November 2018, the judge accepted the Appellant's sexual orientation
    but found that he would not be at risk of persecution  if  returned  to
    Bangladesh.

 3. Permission to appeal was sought in time on the  basis  that  the  judge
    erred materially in law: (i) in failing to take proper account  of  the
    background evidence, particularly that contained  in  the  Home  Office
    Country Policy Information Note (CPIN) "Bangladesh  Sexual  Orientation
    and Gender Identity November 2017" which makes clear that if one is  an
    LGBT advocate or activist that could give rise to  a  risk  on  return.
    The judge failed to take into account the fact that the Appellant is an
    active member of Imaan, a UK based LGBT support group for Muslims, that
    he regularly participates in London Pride and was at the forefront of a
    nationwide publicity campaign promoting Imaan's involvement with London
    Pride.  It was argued in the alternative that  Dhaka  was  not  in  any
    event safe for openly gay men and the judge failed to properly  address
    this; (ii) the judge failed to take proper account of medical  evidence
    in the form of a psychological report of Dr Sreenan dated 1 August 2018
    as to the Appellant's suicidal ideation, the fact he suffered from PTSD
    with symptoms consistent with attacks on him in February 2010.

 4. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Doyle  in
    a decision dated 11 December 2018.

    Hearing

 5. At the hearing before the Upper Tribunal,  Mr  Bramble  at  the  outset
    accepted that the judge had made material errors of law for the reasons
    set out in the first ground of  appeal.   He  accepted  that  the  Home
    Office CPIN does refer to potential risks  to  LGBT  activists  and  it
    might be that the Appellant falls within that category, yet  the  judge
    had failed to take this into consideration.

 6. Mr Swain submitted that rather than remit  the  appeal  for  a  further
    hearing that the decision could be remade in light  of  the  background
    evidence.  Mr Bramble had  no  objection  to  that  course  of  action.
    Consequently, I found material errors of law in the decision of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Hussain for the reasons set out in the first ground
    of appeal and I now proceed to remake the decision.

 7. I heard submissions from Mr Bramble who was  content  to  rely  on  the
    refusal decision by the Respondent and the evidence in the main  bundle
    submitted by the Appellant.  Mr Swain sought to rely  on  his  skeleton
    argument, which at page 5 sets out the  background  evidence  which  is
    pertinent to the issue of the risks to openly gay  men  in  Bangladesh.
    He also sought to rely on the supporting letter from Imaan at page  115
    and the evidence in the Appellant's additional bundle in the run up  to
    London Pride 2018.  In relation to the  evidence,  Mr  Swain  submitted
    that openly gay men in Bangladesh are at risk and it  was  accepted  by
    the judge that the Appellant is an openly gay man: C 28.

 8. Mr Swain submitted that, contrary to  the  contention  in  the  refusal
    decision, Dhaka does not represent a safe haven for gay men:  C  14  of
    his grounds of appeal.  In the alternative, Mr Swain submitted that the
    Appellant was a poster boy for the LGBT community less than a year ago:
    C 30 to 33 of the Appellant's bundle and 2.3.8  of  the  CPIN.   Whilst
    there is no evidence that the Bangladesh authorities monitor activities
    in the UK by LGBT activities and advocates, notably the  Appellant  has
    been subjected to online abuse, he is living openly as a gay man and is
    publicly active, see e.g. the poster campaign.  He would not be able to
    live openly in Bangladesh because of the constraints on openly gay  men
    there.

 9. He submitted in light of HJ (Iran) [2010] UKSC 31, that the reason  the
    Appellant would live discretely would be simply because of  a  fear  of
    persecution.  Whilst the Appellant claimed to have been ostracised  and
    disowned by his family, which had  been  rejected  by  the  judge,  the
    finding that he has been beaten has not been challenged  and  therefore
    stands.

    Findings and Reasons

10. The  preserved,  unchallenged,  findings  of  fact  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal are that the Appellant is a gay man, albeit without a  history
    of persecution or being disowned by his family.  The  judge  apparently
    accepted that the Appellant had been involved with  Imaan  in  the  UK,
    noting that evidence at [20]  albeit  he  did  not  make  any  specific
    findings in respect of it.

11. I will now set out the evidence upon  which  the  Appellant  relies  in
    support of his claim.  As stated above there is evidence  that  he  has
    been an active member of Imaan at page 115 of the  Appellant's  bundle.
    That is dated 29 June 2017 and states inter alia:

         "He is open about his homosexuality, which means his  situation  in
         Bangladesh would be a dangerous one  considering  their  sexuality.
         If he is  forced  to  return,  he  would  be  in  danger  of  being
         imprisoned and face very real threats of death and violence.  These
         threats and dangers exist in  most,  if  not  all,  Muslim-majority
         countries."

12. There are also receipts for attendance at gay clubs, some documents  in
    relation to attending Lancaster Pride, some documents  in  relation  to
    volunteering at London Pride and a number of photographs at  pages  133
    to 150 of the Appellant with friends in clubs and social settings.

13. In addition to the evidence contained  in  the  Appellant's  additional
    bundle there are photographs of the Appellant  in  front  of  a  poster
    entitled Pride in London sponsored by Barclays. The poster specifically
    relates to Imaan which has five individuals in it, a mixture of men and
    women including the Appellant. Under the photograph the  poster  states
    "Going to Pride so that no LGBT plus Muslim feels excluded  from  their
    faith or their community".  There are variations of this poster also at
    page 31 and a photograph of the photoshoot at 32 and  further  examples
    of the poster and a copy printout from Facebook at page 34.

14. In respect of the background evidence as to the situation in Bangladesh
    both parties were content to rely on the Respondent's CPIN,  see  above
    November 2017, which is specifically concerned with sexual  orientation
    and gender identity in Bangladesh.  This report states at 2.3.5 that:

         "Section 377 of  the  Penal  Code  does  not  explicitly  refer  to
         homosexuality, but to  carnal  intercourse  against  the  order  of
         nature which includes sex between men and  is  punishable  by  life
         imprisonment or a shorter period.  Sources report there  have  only
         ever been two reported arrests under Section  377  (and  both  were
         later charged under other provisions of the Penal  Code)  and  that
         there have been no cases of punishment under Section 377."

    At 2.3.7-2.3.9:

         "2.3.7. Section 377 and certain other  legal  provisions  ...  have
         reportedly sometimes been used by police as a  pretext  to  arrest,
         harass, intimidate and extort LGBT persons, primarily gay  men  and
         hijra.  There  have  also  been  reports  of  physical  and  sexual
         assaults by police against LGBT persons."

         2.3.8 While same-sex sexual activity between men  is  illegal,  the
         state rarely arrests and prosecutes gay and bisexual men.   However
         other laws are sometimes used  as  a  pretext  to  arrest,  harass,
         intimidate and ill-treat gay (and bi-) men and hijra,  particularly
         those who are sex workers.  Sources do not indicate that the  state
         harasses or arrests and prosecutes lesbian or bisexual women, trans
         persons who are not hijra, or LGBT activists or advocates.

         2.3.9. In general, the available evidence does not  establish  that
         LGBT persons are systematically targeted and subject  to  treatment
         amounting to persecution or serious harm by  the  state.   However,
         each case must be considered on its merits with  the  onus  on  the
         person to demonstrate that they would be at risk."

    The policy summary provides:

         "3.1.3 Reports indicate that LGBT persons are reluctant to be  open
         about their sexual identity due to  social  stigma,  pressures  and
         norms, and to avoid a level of discrimination and violence by  non-
         state actors, including  family  members  and  Islamic  extremists,
         arising from this. Similarly, the LGBT 'community'  is  closed  and
         private...

         3.1.5 In general, an LGBT person who does not conceal their  sexual
         orientation or gender identity may be at risk of  treatment,  which
         by its nature and repetition  amounts  to  persecution  or  serious
         harm. The nature and degree of  treatment  may  vary  according  to
         geography and  socio-economic  status.  Gay  rights  activists  and
         bloggers may be at greater risk due to  their  profile.  Each  case
         must be considered on its facts and merits.

         3.1.6 In general, the state appears able  but  unwilling  to  offer
         effective protection. However, each will need to be  considered  on
         its facts.

          3.1.7 Internal relocation  may  be  reasonable  depending  on  the
         person's individual circumstances, for  example:  where  they  have
         chosen to live discreetly due to  social  or  religious  pressures.
         However, internal relocation will not be an option if it depends on
         the  person  concealing  their  sexual  orientation  and/or  gender
         identity in the proposed new location for fear of persecution."

    Findings and reasons

15.  I proceed on the basis that the Appellant is a gay man,  who  is  "out"
    in the UK and who has some profile as a gay activist, having taken part
    in an LGBT poster  campaign  organised  by  Imaan  in  respect  of  gay
    Muslims. He has resided in the UK since April 2010 and I find  that  he
    has lived openly as a gay man during this time.  There  is  no  country
    guidance in respect of gay men and Bangladesh so I proceed to apply the
    guidance set out in HJ (Iran) [2010]  UKSC  31.  Notably,  Lord  Rodger
    placed  substantial  weight  on  the  judgment  and  reasoning  of  the
    Australian High Court in a gay Bangladeshi case viz Appellant S395/2002
    v Minister for Immigration (2003) 216 CLR 473, concluding at [69]:

         "69. The  decision  of  the  High  Court  is  accordingly  powerful
         authority, which I would respectfully follow, for  the  proposition
         that, if a person has a well-founded  fear  that  he  would  suffer
         persecution on being returned to his country of nationality  if  he
         were to live openly as a gay man, then he is to be  regarded  as  a
         refugee for purposes of the Convention, even though, because of the
         fear of persecution, he would in fact live discreetly and so  avoid
         suffering any actual harm. The High Court  has  followed  the  same
         line of reasoning in subsequent cases."

16.  The test is set out at [82] and provides,  on  the  basis  that  it  is
    accepted that the Appellant is gay:

         "If so, the tribunal must then ask itself whether it  is  satisfied
         on the available evidence that gay people who lived openly would be
         liable to persecution in the applicant's country of nationality. If
         so, the tribunal  must  go  on  to  consider  what  the  individual
         applicant would do if he were returned  to  that  country.  If  the
         applicant would in fact live openly and thereby  be  exposed  to  a
         real risk of persecution,  then  he  has  a  well-founded  fear  of
         persecution  -  even  if  he  could  avoid  the  risk   by   living
         "discreetly". If, on the other hand, the  tribunal  concludes  that
         the  applicant  would  in  fact  live  discreetly  and   so   avoid
         persecution, it must go on to ask itself why he would do so. If the
         tribunal  concludes  that  the  applicant  would  choose  to   live
         discreetly simply because that was how he  himself  would  wish  to
         live, or because of social pressures, e g, not wanting to  distress
         his parents or embarrass his friends, then his  application  should
         be rejected. Social  pressures  of  that  kind  do  not  amount  to
         persecution and the Convention does not  offer  protection  against
         them. Such  a  person  has  no  well-founded  fear  of  persecution
         because, for reasons that have nothing  to  do  with  any  fear  of
         persecution, he himself chooses to adopt a way of life which  means
         that he is not in fact liable to be persecuted because he  is  gay.
         If, on the other hand,  the  tribunal  concludes  that  a  material
         reason for the applicant living discreetly on his return would be a
         fear of the persecution which would  follow  if  he  were  to  live
         openly  as  a  gay  man,  then,  other  things  being  equal,   his
         application should be accepted. Such a person  has  a  well-founded
         fear of persecution. To reject his application on the  ground  that
         he could avoid the persecution by living  discreetly  would  be  to
         defeat the very right which the Convention exists to protect -  his
         right to live freely and openly  as  a  gay  man  without  fear  of
         persecution. By admitting him to asylum and allowing  him  to  live
         freely and openly as a gay man without  fear  of  persecution,  the
         receiving state  gives  effect  to  that  right  by  affording  the
         applicant a surrogate for the protection from persecution which his
         country of nationality should have afforded him."

17.  In  light  of  the  background  evidence,  which  is  essentially  that
    contained in the Respondent's CPIN November 2017, I find  that  section
    377 of the Penal Code criminalises same sex relations. I  further  find
    that, in practice, it is rarely utilised either to arrest or  prosecute
    gay men, but it is "used by police as  a  pretext  to  arrest,  harass,
    intimidate and extort LGBT persons, primarily gay  men."  I  have  also
    taken into consideration  the  background  evidence  submitted  to  the
    Respondent and contained in his bundle, including: an article from Mail
    Online dated 19.5.17 which refers  to  the  raid  of  a  party  by  the
    Bangladeshi police and the arrest of 27 young men in a  rare  crackdown
    and that while they were arrested for homosexuality,  they  were  later
    charged with drug offences instead. The article also refers to the fact
    that in the previous year two prominent  LGBT  activists  including  an
    editor of the country's only magazine for gay  people  were  hacked  to
    death  by  Islamist  extremists  linked  to  Al-Qaeda  and  that  "many
    prominent homosexual  activists  have  since  fled  the  country  after
    several of them received death threats" [M1-2]; further articles  about
    the murder of the two LGBT activists, Xulhaz Mannan and his friend  and
    an interview with a gay activist from  Bangladesh  who  fled  to  claim
    asylum in Germany [M24-25].

18.  I find that to return the Appellant to Bangladesh would expose  him  to
    a serious risk of persecution. In this respect I do not only  refer  to
    the risk of physical attack or arrest  and  prosecution,  but  also  an
    accumulation of various discriminatory measures and the impact  on  the
    Appellant's mental health, in light of the  medical  evidence  that  he
    meets  the  diagnostic  criteria  for  generalised  anxiety   disorder,
    reactive depression and some post traumatic  stress  disorder.  It  was
    also the Appellant's evidence that he attempted suicide in 2016 and  in
    May/June  2017.  I  find  that  these   matters   properly   fall   for
    consideration under Article 9 of the QD.

19.  I find in light of the Appellant's profile in  the  UK,  in  particular
    the fact that he has partaken in a public poster campaign for Imaan  to
    encourage gay Muslims to attend  Pride  demonstrations,  the  Appellant
    would wish to continue to live openly as a gay man  in  Bangladesh  but
    that the likely reality is that he  would  be  forced  to  conceal  his
    sexual orientation in order to  avoid  persecution.  In  light  of  the
    background evidence, set out in CPIN summarised at [14] above, I do not
    find that the Appellant would be able to  access  effective  protection
    from the Bangladeshi authorities and it would be unduly harsh to expect
    him to internally relocate, given that he would be obliged  to  conceal
    his sexual orientation throughout the country.

    Decision

20.  In light of the judgment in HJ (Iran) the appeal falls  to  be  allowed
    on the basis that the Appellant has a well-founded fear of  persecution
    in Bangladesh on the basis that he is a member of a  particular  social
    group viz gay men.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Rebecca Chapman   Date 20 February 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman


