
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12978/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow Upper Tribunal      |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 30 May 2019                       |On 11 June 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J G MACDONALD


                                   Between

                                  Lanh [D]
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Devlin, Counsel instructed by Chung Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A Govan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a national of Vietnam whose appeal  was  dismissed  by
    First-Tier Tribunal Judge Handley  in  a  decision  promulgated  on  12
    February 2019. Grounds of application were  lodged  and  permission  to
    appeal granted by First-Tier Tribunal Judge Smith in a  decision  dated
    14 March 2019.  Thus, the matter came before me on the above date.

 2. Mr Devlin, Counsel for the appellant, relied on his grounds.  The first
    ground was that the Judge erred in law in concluding that the appellant
    had not properly addressed  concern  at  the  absence  of  evidence  to
    support the allegation that a demonstration had taken place.  In  fact,
    there was evidence from several sources before the Tribunal, all as set
    out in the grounds.

 3. Secondly it was said that the Judge erred in law at paragraph 37 of his
    decision because his conclusion that the appellant had made no  mention
    at his screening interview of being assaulted cast a significant  doubt
    on his credibility.  It would be rational to hold this against him only
    if he had been silent about it in his full asylum interview but he  was
    not.  A person at screening interview was bound to simply  outline  the
    nature of their fear and it did not preclude them from adding to  these
    later at the full interview.   Furthermore,  the  Judge  erred  in  law
    because his conclusion that no or little weight should be given to  the
    two documents described  as  "Summons  Request"  was  open  to  him  to
    conclude  the  authorities  were  no  longer  interested  in  him   was
    irrational.  There was no evidence before the  Judge  to  justify  this
    conclusion. I was asked to set the decision aside and remit it  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing.

 4. For the Home Office Mr Govan agreed  there  was  a  concern  about  the
    correctness  of  the  Judge  finding  "significant   doubts"   on   the
    reliability of his  evidence  as  set  out  in  paragraph  37  but  the
    remaining findings were  satisfactory.   I  was  asked  to  uphold  the
    decision.

 5. I reserved my decision.

Conclusions

 6. The Judge was critical of what the  appellant  said  in  his  screening
    interview, noting that the demonstrations and the actions of the police
    and his claimed fear of  the  authorities  were  at  the  core  of  the
    appellant's account and the appellant should have made mention of  this
    at the screening interview.  The  Judge  does  not  set  out  what  the
    appellant said at the screening interview but presumably the  Judge  is
    referring to paragraph 4.1 where he was asked to  briefly  explain  all
    the reasons why he cannot  return  to  his  home  country.   The  words
    "briefly"  and  "all"  are  in  bold  letters   and   are   underlined.
    Accordingly, the appellant is being told to be  brief  in  his  answers
    and, given that restriction, it seems to me a Judge should be  slow  to
    conclude that because something is not mentioned this casts significant
    doubts on the reliability of his evidence. A screening interview is not
    done to establish in detail the reasons a person gives to support their
    claim for asylum.

 7. In any  event  what  is  recorded  is  that  the  appellant  fears  the
    government; given that he is supposed to answer  questions  briefly  it
    seems to me unfair to conclude that his account is  not  reliable.   It
    seems to me that, on any view, the Judge went  too  far  in  concluding
    that there were "significant" doubts on the reliability of his evidence
    because  of  what  he  did  not  say  in   his   screening   interview.
    Unfortunately, this finding was a major plank of the  Judge's  decision
    in concluding that the appellant was not credible and this finding,  on
    its own, points in the direction that the decision may not be safe.

 8. In terms of the first ground of appeal it is not  disputed  that  there
    was objective evidence from a number of sources  that  a  demonstration
    had occurred and arrests had been made.  The Judge comments on this  in
    paragraph 36 of his decision when he says that the respondent noted the
    appellant had provided no evidence to support his claim that the  event
    had taken place.  The Judge says that the appellant was aware of  these
    concerns but has not "properly addressed them".  Given that  there  was
    objective evidence from a number of sources the appellant makes out his
    ground of appeal that the  Judge  erred  in  law  in  not  taking  this
    relevant evidence into account.

 9. These findings are sufficient for me to conclude that the  decision  of
    the Judge is not safe.  The appellant has established errors in law  as
    set out above. As stated above Mr Devlin asked  me  to  set  aside  the
    decision and order a de novo hearing  which  seems  to  me  to  be  the
    appropriate outcome in this appeal.

10. The decision of the First-Tier Tribunal is therefore set aside  in  its
    entirety.  No findings of the First-Tier Tribunal are to stand.   Under
    Section 12(2)(b)(i) of the 2007 Act and of Practice Statement  7.2  the
    nature and extent of  the  judicial  fact  finding  necessary  for  the
    decision to be remade is such that it is appropriate to remit the  case
    to the First-Tier Tribunal.

Decision

11. The making of the decision of the First-Tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

12. I set aside the decision.

13. I remit the appeal to the First-Tier Tribunal.


Signed   JG Macdonald                            Date   4th June 2019

J G Macdonald
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge




