
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12067/2017






                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 16 October 2018                               |On 23 October 2018               |
|                                                 |                                 |


                                   Before
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FINCH

                                   Between
                                    [Z S]

                                                               Appellant
                                     and
               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                     Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellants:     Ms R. Head of counsel instructed by AMB Advocates
                  and Accountants Ltd
For the Respondent:      Mr. N. Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS






BACKGROUND TO THE APPEAL

1.   The Appellant is a national of Afghanistan, who arrived in  the  United
    Kingdom on 16 February 2006 and applied for asylum on 20 February 2006.
    His application was refused and he became appeal rights exhausted on 21
    July 2006. He was removed to Afghanistan on 18 December 2011.  He  then
    left Afghanistan on 15 October 2015 and travelled to  France  where  he
    claimed asylum on 19 January 2016.  On  15  February  2016  the  United
    Kingdom accepted a "take back request" made by France and the Appellant
    re-entered the United Kingdom on 24 June 2016  where  he  made  further
    submissions.

2..  The Appellant's claim for  international  protection  was  reconsidered
    but refused on 2 November 2017. He appealed against this  decision  but
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Waygood dismissed his appeal  in  a  decision
    promulgated on  30  May  2018.  The  Appellant  appealed  against  this
    decision and on 10 July 2018 First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Grant  granted
    him permission to appeal on the grounds that First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Waygood may have erred in law in his assessment of risk on  return  and
    the possibility of internal relocation when set in the context  of  the
    expert evidence placed before the Tribunal.





ERROR OF LAW HEARING

3.   Counsel for the Appellant and the Home Office Presenting  Officer  both
    made oral submissions and I have referred to these  submissions,  where
    relevant, in my findings below.   They made submissions on the issue of
    whether it would be unduly harsh to return the Appellant to Kabul but I
    indicated that I would only consider those submissions, if I  did   not
    find that First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Waygood  had  erred  in  law  in
    relation to the manner in which he  applied  the  most  recent  country
    guidance.

ERROR OF LAW DECISION

4.   In paragraph 174 of AS (Safety of Kabul)  Afghanistan  CG  [2018]  UKUT
    00118 (IAC) the Upper Tribunal found that:

     "The risk of a specific individual being successfully targeted  depends
    upon their identification as a target (for  example,  due  to  past  or
    present actions/circumstances) and the ability of the Taliban to locate
    and then carry out an attack on that person, as well as their  will  or
    priorities in doing so. The evidence was broadly in agreement as to the
    order of importance of targets for the Taliban in Afghanistan being (i)
    senior serving government officials and  the  security  services,  (ii)
    spies, and the lower level, (iii) other  collaborators  (including  the
    wider security forces, government authorities, foreign  embassies,  the
    UN, NGOs and anyone passing on information to the government about  the
    Taliban) and deserters.

5.   This showed  that  Upper  Tribunal  put  spies,  and  not  only  senior
    government officials and the security services, at the higher end of  a
    long list individuals who may be targeted by the Taliban. In my view it
    is also significant that the Tribunal accepted that an  individual  may
    be targeted for past, as well as  current,  actions.  When  considering
    whether  the  Appellant  could  safely  relocate  to  Kabul  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Waygood failed to take  these  aspects  of  the  country
    guidance into account.

6.   The head note of AS also states that:

     "A person who is of lower-level interest for the Taliban  (i.e.  not  a
    senior government or security services official, or a spy)  is  not  at
    real risk of persecution from the Taliban in Kabul".

7.   The converse  of  this  finding  must  be  that  senior  government  or
    security services officials and spies are at real risk  of  persecution
    from the Taliban in Kabul.

8.   The appeal was markedly different from many  asylum  appeals  as  there
    was a significant amount of evidence which corroborated the Appellant's
    account of past persecution. First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Waygood  gave
    detailed consideration to this evidence and at  paragraph  128  of  his
    decision he accepted "the evidence of Dr. Giustozzi that the  documents
    provided by the Appellant were genuine through the work that  has  been
    conducted by his close colleague on the ground in Afghanistan to verify
    them".  These documents included a driving licence stating that it  was
    valid for driving cars  and  lorries.  The  driving  licence  had  been
    submitted to confirm the Appellant's identity and, in paragraph  99  of
    his decision, the First-tier Tribunal Judge accepted that  the  licence
    gave the Appellant's name and those of his father and grandfather.

9.   There was also a letter from  the  Baghlan  Provincial  Council,  which
    confirmed that the Appellant had worked as a translator from  and  into
    English for the Council. This had been authenticated by the researcher,
    Mr. Mangal, when visiting the head of the Provincial Council on  behalf
    of Dr. Giustozzi. The Head of the Council also stated that he was aware
    that the Appellant had been threatened  by  the  Taliban  a  number  of
    times, both in writing and verbally.

10.  The Appellant had adduced photographs and  documents  relating  to  his
    car, which was a Toyota Corolla. There was also a police report,  dated
    2 February 2015, which confirmed that a Toyota  Corolla  car  had  been
    destroyed by a magnetic mine.  One  piece  of  the  available  evidence
    obscured the last letter of the car's number plate but when Mr.  Mangal
    visited the relevant authorities to confirm this attack, they  accepted
    that the magnetic bomb had been placed on the Appellant's car. This was
    also confirmed by the Baghlan Provincial Council. Mr. Mangal  had  also
    visited Baghlan Provincial Hospital to authenticate its report that the
    Appellant had been treated for injuries  to  his  left  foot  and  hand
    sustained during a suicide attack on 20 May 2013. The hospital  records
    also confirmed that the Appellant had been working for  the  Provincial
    Council at the time of the attack. There was also a medical  report  by
    Dr. Izquierdo-Martin, which stated that scars on the  Appellant's  body
    were highly consistent with being  injured  by  shrapnel  from  a  bomb
    explosion in 2013 and in  paragraph  123  of  his  decision  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Waygood accepted on the lower standard of proof that the
    Appellant had been  injured  in  a  suicide  attack  in  May  2013.  In
    paragraph 128 of his decision he also accepted that the  Appellant  had
    also been injured on 9 March 2013 when a bomb was placed under his car.



11.  In paragraph 128 of his  decision  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Waygood
    also stated that "overall I accept  to  the  lower  standard  that  the
    Appellant was the subject of an attempt on his life in March  2013  and
    that he was injured in May 2013".

12.  Most significantly, Mr. Mangal had also spoken with Mowlavi  Khudi  Dad
    Gujar, the Taliban's Head of Intelligence for  Baghlan,  who  confirmed
    that the "night letter" sent to the Appellant was genuine and that  the
    Taliban considered that the Appellant was spying  for  foreigners.  The
    "night letter" itself stated that reports had been  received  from  the
    intelligence of the Baghlan Mujahideens Council that the Appellant  had
    been working as a translator for the Christian infidels and  also  that
    he was spying on behalf of  the  Baghlan  Provincial  Council  and  the
    Christian infidels. It went on to refer to him having been sentence  to
    death.

13.  The evidence produced by the Appellant was noteworthy because not  only
    were the documents authenticated by Mr. Mowlam and Dr. Guistozzi, their
    movements were also confirmed by other evidence and the manner in which
    the documents travelled from Afghanistan to  the  United  Kingdom  were
    also documented. This led to First-tier Tribunal Judge Waygood  stating
    at paragraph 117 of his decision that he accepted the validity  of  the
    verification exercise that has been carried out in  relation  to  these
    documents and that to the lower standard of proof [they] are  shown  to
    be genuine".

14.  In my view the  authentication  process  was  also  significant  for  a
    further reason. The two violent attacks on the Appellant took place  in
    2013. The  Home  Office  Presenting  Officer  submitted  that,  as  the
    Appellant did not leave Afghanistan until October 2015 and continued to
    work for Baghlan Provincial Council until 2015, this indicated that  he
    ceased to be at risk from the Taliban in 2013.  However,  the  evidence
    given by the Appellant, as  recorded  in  paragraph  47  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Waygood's decision, was that  he  continued  to  receive
    threatening phone calls from the Taliban after the  suicide  attack  in
    May 2013. In addition, when Mr. Mangal contact with the Taliban's  Head
    of Intelligence for Baghlan Province on the seventh or  eighth  of  May
    2017, he confirmed that he was told that the  letter  was  genuine  and
    that the intelligence chiefs of 34 provinces had  been  informed  about
    the  inclusion  of  the  Appellant  on  the  Taliban's  blacklist.   In
    addition, the mere fact that "foreigners" were asking them  to  confirm
    threats made to the Appellant is also  likely  to  have  increased  the
    impression that he had spied for foreigners and increased the  interest
    likely to be paid to him by the Taliban.

15.  Furthermore, the Appellant's  own  evidence,  as  noted  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Waygood in paragraph 58 of his decision, was that  after
    the two incidents the Appellant avoided being out in public as much  as
    possible and he had protected himself with the help of  the  Provincial
    Council. At that point, the Afghan Government was in control of Baghlan
    Province and the Appellant could reasonably expect to obtain protection
    from the Council and, in  paragraph  47  of  his  decision,  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Waygood recorded after the suicide bombing in May  2013,
    that the Appellant had been  assured  by  the  in-coming  head  of  the
    Provincial Council that he would receive his support.

16.  As counsel for the Appellant also noted it  was  also  the  Appellant's
    evidence that it was when the Taliban captured  Kunduz  Province  which
    was next to Baghlan Province that the Appellant decided that  he  could
    no longer risk remaining in Afghanistan.

17.  Despite all of this evidence First-tier Tribunal Judge Waygood went  on
    to find in paragraph 136 that the Appellant had failed  to  demonstrate
    that he was a person of such a high profile as to be at risk in  Kabul.
    In reaching this finding the First-tier Tribunal Judge failed  to  take
    into account that the headnote of AK makes it clear  that  someone  who
    has been identified as  a  spy  also  falls  within  a  category  which
    attracts international protection, even if in general  it  is  safe  to
    return to return individuals to Kabul.

18.  He also failed into account  the  fact  that  there  was  authenticated
    evidence from Baghlan  Provincial  Council  which  indicated  that  the
    Appellant had been targeted by the Taliban by  letter  and  orally.  In
    addition, there was authenticated  evidence  from  the  police  that  a
    magnetic mine had been placed under his car.  There  was  also  medical
    evidence from Afghanistan and from  the  United  Kingdom  that  he  had
    suffered serious injuries as a result of shrapnel caused by  a  suicide
    bomber.

19.  As a  consequence,  it  is  arguable  that  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Waygood erred in law is so far as he failed to give  sufficient  weight
    to the evidence which indicated that  the  Taliban  believed  that  the
    Appellant had been spying on them and that this was still  their  view.
    He had also failed to  apply  the  country  guidance  contained  in  AS
    (Kabul) which was that those who had spired against the Taliban were at
    serious risk in Kabul.

20.  Having found that his ground  of  appeal  was  made  out,  it  was  not
    necessary for me to consider the Appellant's second  ground  of  claim,
    which  was  that  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Waygood's  findings   in
    paragraph 148 of his decision in relation to whether it would be unduly
    harsh to expect the Appellant to relocate to Kabul was unsustainable




Decision

(1)  The appeal is allowed.

(2)  The positive findings made by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Waygood  in
    relation to the evidence adduced by the Appellant  made  in  paragraphs
    103  to 104, 106 - 123, 128 and 134  of his decision are  retained  but
    his findings in paragraphs 129 and 148 - 152 are set aside.

(3)  The appeal is retained in the Upper Tribunal in order to be  remade  in
    accordance with AK.


THE RE-MADE SUBSTANTIAL DECISION

1.   There is no dispute that  the  Appellant  is  an  Afghan  national  who
    previously lived in Baghlan Province.

2.   I also adopt the findings of fact made  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Waygood, and referred to above in my error of law decision, that:

    1.   There is substantial evidence to confirm  that  between  2012  and
         2015 the Appellant was working as a translator into English for the
         Baghlan Provincial Council.


    2.   There is also substantial evidence to corroborate  the  fact  that
         the Taliban believe that, whilst the Appellant was working for  the
         Baghlan Provincial Council, he also spied on them on behalf of  the
         Council and for foreigners/infidels and  that,  as  a  consequence,
         they sentenced him to death and put him on their blacklist.


    3.   There is evidence to corroborate the fact that  in  March  2013  a
         magnetic  bomb  was  placed  on  the  Appellant's  his  car,  which
         destroyed it, and that in May 2013 the Appellant  was  hospitalised
         after being one of a number of people injured in a suicide  attack,
         which killed the man who was then the Chief  Provincial  Councillor
         in Baghlan Province.

3.   For the reasons given above in my error of law decision, I find that:

    1.   The Appellant remained working for the Baghlan Provincial  Council
         between 2013 and 2015  because  he  was  taking  his  own  security
         measures and had also been assured of support from the Council.


    2.   At this time, the Afghan  government  was  in  charge  in  Baghlan
         Province and that it was only when  the  neighbouring  province  of
         Kunduz fell to the Taliban that the Appellant believed that it  was
         no longer safe to remain in Afghanistan.

4.   It is not disputed that  the  Taliban  are  non-state  agents  for  the
    purposes  of  the  Refugee  Convention  and  that  the  basis  of   the
    Appellant's fear of them falls is  for  a  Refugee  Convention  reason,
    namely that of imputed political opinion. The  evidence  confirms  that
    the threats made to the Appellant arose  from  the  fact  that  he  was
    working for the Baghlan Provincial Council and  that  the  Taliban  was
    believed that he was spying for the Council and for "infidels".

5.   In paragraph 134 of his decision, which I  adopt,  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge  Waygood  concluded  that  "there  would  be  no  sufficiency  of
    protection per se for the Appellant in Afghanistan". He based  this  on
    paragraph 13 of AS (Safety of Kabul)  where  it  was  noted  that  "the
    Respondent does not rely on there being a sufficiency of protection for
    the Appellant from the Taliban in  Afghanistan,  or  in  particular  in
    areas where he is accepted to be at risk. The  Respondent  acknowledges
    that however willing the Afghan authorities are, they would usually  be
    unable to offer effective protection".

6.   In paragraph 174 of AS (Safety of Kabul) the Upper Tribunal found  that
    spies fell within the second category of those targeted by the  Taliban
    and that in the head note of that case  the  Upper  Tribunal  concluded
    that a spy would be at real risk of persecution in Afghanistan.

7.   This conclusion was confirmed by Dr. Giustozz in in his expert  report,
    dated 9 May 2017. In particular,  he  stated  in  paragraph  8  of  his
    report, that "in terms of the Taliban's  capacity  within  Afghanistan,
    the Taliban have the means to track down individuals". In paragraph 11,
    he also stated that "the Taliban's intelligence operations  have  grown
    increasingly sophisticated and their ability to track down  individuals
    is very sophisticated". At paragraph 17 he added that "...there are two
    parallel Taliban structures in Kabul, with different tasks. The Haqqani
    network focuses on complex attacks against  foreign  installations  and
    government offices, whilst the other groups of Taliban present in Kabul
    (primarily Quetta  Shua)  focus  on  targeted  killing  of  individuals
    cooperating with Afghan government and foreigners".

8.   Dr. Guistozzi did accept that the Appellant could reduce  the  risk  to
    his safety by relocating in Central Kabul but there was no evidence  to
    suggest that this would be an option for the Appellant. He would  be  a
    returnee with no property or employment. Furthermore, returning to  his
    previous employment as an interpreter would increase his risk  and  the
    perception on the part of the Taliban that he continues to  be  a  spy.
    There was also no evidence that his sister and brother-in-law lived  in
    Central Kabul or had  the  means  to  rent  property  and  support  the
    Appellant to live in Central Kabul.

9.   In the case of AS there was no evidence to suggest that  the  appellant
    had been placed on a blacklist by the Taliban. In contrast,  there  was
    corroborated evidence that the Appellant in this case had  been  placed
    on the blacklist.  The enquiries undertaken by  Mr.  Mangal  have  also
    drawn attention to the fact that the Appellant  is  gathering  evidence
    about his  experiences  in  Baghlan  Province  and  has  the  necessary
    resources to do so. In my view, this will have increased the risk  that
    he is seen to be still connected with "foreigners" and may continue  to
    operate as a spy.

10.  I have reminded myself that the Appellant falls within  a  category  of
    persons who are at serious risk of persecution if return  to  Kabul  as
    found in the most recent country guidance case. I  have  also  reminded
    myself that, when considering the Appellant's  fear  that  the  Taliban
    would locate and target him in Kabul, I must apply  the  requisite  low
    standard of proof. Having applied this standard  of  proof,  and  taken
    into account the substantial amount of corroborated  evidence  in  this
    appeal, I find that there is a serious possibility that  the  Appellant
    would be located and harmed by the Taliban in Kabul.  Therefore,  there
    is not a viable internal relocation open to the Appellant.

Decision

(1)  The Appellant's appeal is allowed.

Nadine Finch

Signed                                  Date 18 October 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Finch



