










Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/12997/2018



                             THE IMMIGRATION ACT



|Heard at Civil Justice Centre          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|Manchester                             |                                      |
|On 18th March 2019                     |On 21st March 2019                    |
|                                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCCLURE



                                   Between

                                 Pishko [F]

                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Butler of Counsel instructed by Fountain
Solicitors

For the Respondent :   Mr Tan   Senior Home Officer Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge O'Neill promulgated on the 17th  December  2018  whereby
    the judge dismissed the appellant's appeal against the decision of  the
    respondent  to  refuse  the  appellant's  claims   based   on   asylum,
    humanitarian protection and Articles 2 and 3 of the ECHR.

 2. I have considered whether or not it is appropriate to make an anonymity
    direction. Having considered all the circumstances I do not consider it
    necessary to do so.

 3. Leave to appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  was  granted  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Gibb on 29th January 2019. Thus the case appeared before
    me to determine whether or not there was a material error of law in the
    decision.

 4. Ms Butler on behalf of the appellant submitted that in principle  there
    were a number of issues which had been found  to  the  benefit  of  the
    appellant. It was accepted that Kirkuk was a contested area and as such
    was not a safe place to return the appellant to.

 5. Thereafter it was an issue as to whether or  not  the  appellant  could
    relocate to other parts of Iraq, including Baghdad and the IKR. Mr  Tan
    for the respondent accepted that there was  no  cross-appeal  but  then
    conceded that the decision  was  based  upon  the  possibility  of  the
    appellant relocating including relocation to Baghdad.

 6.  Reliance  to  an  extent  was  placed  upon  the  Country  Policy  and
    Information Note (the current one being February 2019, which is in much
    the same terms as the one before the First-tier Tribunal). That appears
    to make clear that ethnic Kurds may be able  to  relocate  to  Baghdad.
    There were issues with  regard  to  restrictions  placed  upon  Kurdish
    individuals from outside Baghdad relocating to Baghdad and otherwise in
    order to settle in Baghdad sponsorship may be required.

 7. Mr Tan accepted that the decision in part was based upon the  prospects
    of the appellant, who was a Kurd from Kirkuk, relocating to Baghdad. In
    light of the current case law on Iraq  as  to  the  prospects  of  such
    individuals relocating to Baghdad, Mr Tan conceded that the  judge  had
    failed to consider the issues raised in the case law and therefore  the
    decision contained a material error of law and that the  proper  course
    was for this matter to be remitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  be
    heard afresh.

 8. Ms Butler did not dissent from the view.

 9. I therefore find that there is a material error of law in the decision.
    I set the decision aside and direct that the appeal be remitted back to
    the First-tier Tribunal for hearing afresh.

    Notice of Decision

10. I allow the appeal to the extent that it is remitted back to the First-
    tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing on all grounds. None of the  findings
    of fact are preserved.






Signed

Deputy           Upper           Tribunal           Judge            McClure
Date 18 March 2019.








