
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12788/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 7th August 2019                   |On 12th September 2019               |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                  Hunar [A]
                       (ANONYMITY direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss E. Rutherford (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Miss H. Aboni (Senior HOPO)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Parkes, promulgated on 20th March 2019, following  a  hearing  at
    Birmingham on 26th February 2019.   In  the  determination,  the  judge
    dismissed  the  appeal  of  the  Appellant,  whereupon  the   Appellant
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a  citizen  of  Iraq,  and  was  born  on  7th
    November 1996.  He appeals against a decision of the  Respondent  dated
    22nd October 2018.  This was with respect to the Appellant's claim  for
    refugee asylum status and humanitarian protection pursuant to paragraph
    339C of HC 395.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The essence of the Appellant's claim is that he comes from the  village
    of Albu Najm, and that his father had been a member  of  the  Peshmerga
    and was injured.  The Appellant himself was injured as a  young  child.
    In 2014 ISIS raided his village and the Appellant was at  his  father's
    fish farm, whereupon he escaped to an uncle's house leaving nine months
    later under arrangements made by the uncle.  He had travelled through a
    number of countries before arriving in the UK.   He  could  not  return
    back to his place of origin because he was at risk of ill-treatment and
    did not have a CSID card.

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge held that,

         "I would accept that the Appellant may have worked in a  fish  farm
         but I find that the Appellant has not shown that he came  from  the
         village of Albu Najm although it may well  be  that  is  where  his
         family had lived years ago and that they knew the witness called in
         support.  Even if the Appellant did come from the village  he  says
         that he did and left in the circumstances of an ISIS attack, taking
         that part of his case at its highest,  that  does  not  affect  the
         final conclusion ..." (paragraph 28).

 5. The judge did not accept the Appellant's evidence that he did not  have
    a CSID card "or that he is unable to obtain one"  (paragraph  30).   He
    also observed that,

         "Although ISIS has clearly been defeated in Iraq and cannot present
         a threat to the Appellant the area he comes from remains  contested
         and so as matters stand apparently cannot return  there.   However,
         the Appellant is of Kurdish origin,  speaks  the  Kurdish  language
         and, I find, can go to the IKR" (paragraph 30).

 6. The appeal was dismissed.

Grounds of Application

 7. The grounds of application state that the judge's decision amounted  to
    an error of law, because he had failed to make clear findings on  where
    the Appellant was from, and failed to properly take  into  account  the
    material evidence.  Moreover, the judge had failed to  have  regard  to
    the country guidance in assessing the prospect of  internal  flight  to
    the IKR and how the Appellant could actually obtain a CSID card,  which
    he maintained he had left back in Iraq.  There had also been a  failure
    to give adequate  reasons  to  properly  explain  why  the  Appellant's
    evidence of attending the Iraqi Embassy in order to obtain  replacement
    documentation had been rejected.

 8. On 18th April 2019 permission to appeal was granted.

 9. On 21st May 2019 a  detailed  Rule  24  response  was  entered  by  the
    Respondent Secretary of State to the effect that  the  judge  had  made
    clear findings that the Appellant was not from  Albu  Najm  village  in
    Kirkuk province (see paragraph 28).   It  was  not  accepted  that  the
    Appellant did live in Albu Najm by the judge.  The judge  had  made  no
    such finding.  Indeed, the judge had gone on to say that  even  if  the
    Appellant did come from that village, the Appellant's case, when  taken
    at its highest, would still be refused and the judge had given  reasons
    for that.

Submissions

10. At the hearing  before  me  on  7th  August  2019,  the  Appellant  was
    represented by Miss Rutherford of Counsel again.  She began  by  saying
    that the Rule 24 response,  although  extremely  detailed  in  what  it
    states, does not engage with the essence  of  the  argument  raised  on
    behalf of the Appellant.  It was incumbent upon the  judge  to  make  a
    finding as to exactly where the Appellant was from.  To assert that  he
    "may well be" from the village of Albu Najm (paragraph 28) amounted  in
    fact to an acceptance that he was from that village in Kirkuk,  and  if
    that was the  case,  the  judge  had  to  follow  through  the  logical
    consequences of such a finding.  Secondly,  for  the  judge  to  simply
    state that the Appellant was from a "contested" area, but could  return
    there because he was not  of  Kurdish  origin  and  spoke  the  Kurdish
    language, did not help if the suggestion was that he  could  return  to
    the IKR (paragraph 30), because no explanation was given as to  how  he
    may do so, when his case was that he did not have  a  CSID  card.   The
    plain fact was that the judge had not engaged with the evidence in this
    case.  The determination could not stand.

11. For her part, Miss Aboni relied upon the Rule 24 response.  She  stated
    that the judge had made clear findings of fact.  He did not accept that
    the Appellant was from Kirkuk.  He did not accept  that  the  Appellant
    was from the village of Albu Najm.  Therefore, in  considering  whether
    the Appellant would be at risk, the judge had concluded that  he  would
    not be at risk.  The fact that the Appellant did not have a  CSID  card
    with him in the UK, did not mean that he could not get it in Iraq where
    he had left it.  He could contact his family.  In any event, the  judge
    had made it  clear  that  internal  relocation  was  available  to  the
    Appellant in  the  IKR,  via  Baghdad,  and  that  conclusion  was  not
    unreasonable.

12. In reply, Miss Rutherford submitted that the judge had not engaged with
    the evidence, and insofar as the Secretary  of  State  had  refused  to
    accept the account given by the Appellant, the judge  had  not  engaged
    with the  Appellant's  rebuttal  by  way  of  an  answer  against  that
    rejection.

Error of Law

13. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law, such that  I  should  set  it
    aside (see Section 12(1) of TCEA 2007).  My  reasons  are  as  follows.
    First and foremost, the Appellant's claim that he was from the  village
    of Albu Najm, in  Kirkuk,  has  not  been  definitively  decided.   The
    statement that "the Appellant has not  shown  that  he  came  from  the
    village of Albu Najm although it may well be that  this  is  where  his
    family had lived years ago and that they knew  the  witness  called  in
    support" (paragraph 28) could just as well be read as amounting  to  an
    inference that the Appellant did come from that village,  because  that
    would be the logical conclusion from the acceptance that his family had
    lived in that village.

14. The failure to provide a definitive conclusion is compounded  with  the
    subsequent statement that "the area he comes from remains contested and
    so as the matters stand he apparently cannot return  there"  (paragraph
    30).  In the same way, the  evidence  of  the  witness  "AM",  who  was
    currently a British citizen, of Iraqi Kurdish ethnicity,  was  that  he
    was born and lived in a village near Albu Najm, and that he  knew  both
    of the Appellant's parents and his paternal uncle in Iraq and that  the
    Appellant's family were from the village of Albu Najm  in  Kirkuk.   In
    the circumstances, it is difficult to see why that evidence did not  go
    to the making of a definitive decision as to where the  Appellant  came
    from.  At the very  least,  it  is  not  clear  why  his  evidence  was
    rejected.

15. Second, the judge's conclusion that the Appellant can "go to  the  IKR"
    and that he can do so "through Baghdad or otherwise" (paragraph 31)  is
    not properly reasoned in the light of the country guidance  cases.   If
    the Appellant was not originally from the IKR (but from  Kirkuk),  then
    the Home Office's  current  CPIN,  was  relevant  to  the  effect  that
    admission to the IKR is at the discretion of the border officials there
    (see paragraph 7.1.1); that if a person did not originate from the IKR,
    then they must upon arrival at the airport  travel  to  the  area  from
    where they originally came (paragraph 7.1.5);  and  that  if  a  person
    sought to enter the IKR from a place such as Kirkuk for  example,  then
    they would be removed to Kirkuk.  In the circumstances,  the  potential
    risk of ill-treatment to the Appellant, needed to be properly evaluated
    in the light of AAH [2018] UKUT 212 (given what was stated at  headnote
    paragraph 7 in that case).

16. Finally, the judge did not accept that the Appellant "does not  have  a
    CSID or that he is unable to obtain one". The Appellant's evidence  was
    that he did have a CSID when in Iraq and that it was kept by his father
    in the family home.  If the judge's conclusion was that  the  Appellant
    was in possession of a CSID in the UK, then no  reasoning  is  provided
    for such a finding.  The Appellant's own evidence  was  that  his  CSID
    card was left in Iraq when he fled.  If that is the  case,  then  there
    needs to be an inquiry as to whether he can  get  a  replacement  CSID.
    That needs a  consideration  of  the  evidence  in  that  regard.   The
    Appellant's evidence was that he had  attended  the  Iraqi  Embassy  in
    London without success.  For all  these  reasons,  the  decision  below
    amounted to an error of law.

Decision

17. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law.  The decision is set aside.  I remake the  decision.
    This appeal is remitted back to the  First-tier  Tribunal  pursuant  to
    practice statement 7.2(b) of the Practice Directions, to be heard by  a
    judge other than Judge Parkes for the reasons I have given above.

Decision

18. No anonymity direction is made.

19. The appeal is allowed.



Signed                              Dated

Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Juss                  10th  September   2019


