
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12593/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at North Shields                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 23 November 2017                           |On 18 December 2017           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

Between
               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


                                     o s
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Miss L Brakaj, Solicitor

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against the decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Holmes promulgated on 19 May  2017,  allowing
    OS's appeal against a decision to deport  him  on  the  basis  that  to
    return him there would risk a breach of his Article 3 rights and  would
    also be disproportionate in terms of Article 8.

 2. As Judge Holmes noted at [2] to [6] of his decision, the respondent has
    a complicated immigration history having arrived in the United  Kingdom
    in 2002 and having been granted exceptional leave to remain in 2003.

 3. The respondent's case is that he is from Kirkuk in Iraq,  a  Sunni,  of
    Kurdish ethnicity, that he has no identity documents in his  possession
    and is unable to obtain them from the Iraqi authorities.   As  advanced
    before the judge, his case was that he faces a real  risk  of  harm  in
    Kirkuk as a result of the indiscriminate violence owing to the internal
    armed conflict said to be ongoing there and cannot return there; is not
    returnable directly to the KRG; and, if returned to Baghdad,  would  be
    unable to access the KRG or any other safe area in Iraq,  being  unable
    to relocate owing to a lack of a CSID rendering him  destitute  and  he
    had stated also that given the length of his time out of Iraq a lack of
    family and friends to rely upon and his mental health problems he would
    be unable to relocate.

 4. The Secretary of State's case was that Kirkuk  is  no  longer  an  area
    affected by a state of internal armed conflict.

 5.  The  respondent  also  claims  to  be  in  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship with a qualifying partner and with her daughter with  whom
    he has a parental relationship.

 6. The judge noted at [42] that the respondent had last  been  in  contact
    with his mother in Kirkuk in 2004  but  that  he  had  been  unable  to
    contact family since taking on that his father had been killed and  his
    wife had been murdered and at [43] his wife's family blamed him for her
    murder and are seeking revenge upon him.  The judge noted also at  [44]
    that the respondent had made efforts to contact family through  friends
    and on Facebook.  The judge accepted also at [45] that a letter written
    in January 2008 upon which the Secretary of State relied undermined the
    respondent's credibility it had been written whilst he was in detention
    and was not satisfied it demonstrates him to be a liar.

 7. The judge concluded:-

      i) that the respondent's home area is  Kirkuk  and  that  he  did  not
         currently hold a passport or a  CSID  card  although  he  had  been
         issued with both in the past; that he was  not  in  a  position  to
         obtain the issue of a replacement for either or the  issue  of  any
         emergency travel document in  the  UK  without  the  assistance  of
         members of family in Kirkuk, and thus his return is  not  presently
         feasible;

     ii) that the respondent would not be admitted to the KRG as a returning
         resident and would be returned to Baghdad assuming a laissez passer
         had been issued to him [59]; that the respondent was not in contact
         with family in Iraq who could assist him in  obtaining  replacement
         documents; that he does not know the details of  his  family  book;
         that  he  has  not  got  relevant  documents  therefore  could  not
         demonstrate to the Iraqi authorities who he is and therefore on the
         light of the guidance  in  BA  (Iraq)  [2017]  UKUT  18  (IAC)  and
         AA(article 15 (c) Iraq CG [2016] UKUT  544  was  not  satisfied  he
         could obtain the issue of a CSID card either  from  the  UK  or  on
         return to Iraq;

    iii) that he is at real risk of destitution and of kidnap for ransom  if
         returned either to Baghdad or Kirkuk, his difficulties  in  Baghdad
         being aggravated by his  religion  and  ethnicity  there  being  no
         obvious reason to disbelieve his account of why he  left  Iraq  and
         what had happened once he had done so  and,  he  accepted  that  in
         Kirkuk the respondent will also face the risk of harm from  members
         of his wife's family against which the state  would  not  be  in  a
         position to offer effective protection;

     iv) that he was not satisfied that the threshold with regard to Article
         15(c) was met in respect of the city of Kirkuk;

      v)  that  the  respondent  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting   parental
         relationship with his partner's child.

 8. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal on the grounds  that
    the judge had erred:-

      i) in failing to make clear credibility findings  in  respect  of  the
         respondent's  asylum  claim  in  particular  failing   to   address
         paragraph 29 of the decision letter, this  being  relevant  to  the
         question  of  the  respondent's  family's   whereabouts   and   the
         possibility of obtaining documentation;

     ii) that, having had regard to both AA (Iraq) CG   and  BA  (Iraq)  the
         judge had failed to give clear reasons as  to  why  the  respondent
         would be at risk in Baghdad failing properly to consider  also  the
         headnote of AA (Iraq) CG at D;

    iii) that the respondent had not demonstrated that he had exhausted  all
         the possibilities of obtaining a CSID, having made  no  attempt  to
         contact the authorities although he had  previously  had  an  Iraqi
         passport;

     iv) that the  judge  had  failed  to  identify  what  the  respondent's
         circumstances are and the pressure of being at risk;

      v) that the judge had failed to make proper findings, it being for the
         respondent to show that he had exhausted all available  options  to
         the Tribunal  before  the  Tribunal  could  come  to  conclude  the
         respondent is  undocumented  or  would  be  unable  to  obtain  the
         required  documentation  for  his  return   and,   the   fact   the
         respondent's return is currently not feasible is not  a  reason  to
         grant humanitarian protection.

 9. The Secretary of State set out a number of inconsistencies based on the
    respondent's claim at paragraph [18] of the  refusal  letter  dated  31
    October 2016.  She did not accept:-

      i) that the respondent's father was a  policeman  and  member  of  the
         Ba'ath Party responsible for the death of innocent people;

     ii) that the family had been visited  by  security  forces  and  Ba'ath
         Party members on 20 May and 27 May 2002 and asked to  change  their
         ethnicity;

    iii) that his mother, brother, sister and wife  were  held  by  Saddam's
         regime and that his wife was killed;

     iv) that he had received threats from his late wife's family.

10. In respect of matters (i), (ii) and  (iv),  the  principle  reason  for
    giving this lack of detail (i), inconsistencies (ii) that there  is  no
    evidence that the respondent had been married  or  that  his  wife  was
    claimed as killed.

11. With respect to claim (iii) it was noted that  there  was  no  evidence
    such as arrest warrant,  a  death  certificate  and  that  inconsistent
    information had been provided in the past, reference also being made to
    a letter of 10 January 2008 and the  respondent  having  stated  in  an
    application of 5 January 2007 that his wife was  allegedly  present  in
    the United Kingdom at the time.  Inferences  were  also  drawn  through
    inconsistency as to whether he had applied for asylum in Italy  or  not
    which cast doubt on the chronology of his claim.

12. As Mr Mills submitted, the judge  does  not  expressely  address  these
    issues set out at 9 (iii) above in the terms identified in the  letter.
    Miss Brakaj submits, that in reality the judge had in fact resolved the
    credibility issues and had given adequate and sustainable  reasons  for
    doing so.

13. It is evident from the decision of this experienced judge at [27]  that
    he considered carefully credibility.  It is notable also that he  found
    as he was entitled to  do  that  the  respondent's  evidence  had  been
    consistent that he and his parents were born in Kirkuk which  is  where
    his family continued to live when he left Iraq [35] and that "the cross-
    examination of the  respondent  and  Miss  S  significantly  failed  to
    identify any basis which I could sensibly find that he has not told the
    truth about this".

14. The judge also considered identity documents and the risk too  in  Iraq
    on return setting out in detail some of the respondent's evidence about
    his contact with family and what had happened at [42] to [45].   It  is
    clear that there was substantive cross-examination in this  case  which
    the judge, as it was open to him to do, concluded did not  disturb  the
    respondent's evidence.  The judge noted that much had been  made  of  a
    letter written whilst the respondent was in  detention  and  considered
    that he did not bear the weight that the respondent sought to  rely  on
    it.

15. Similarly, I have considered that letter attached  to  the  application
    form in which it was stated that the respondent's wife was  alive.   It
    is evident when considering the letter the judge  also  considered  the
    statement made that the wife was  dead  that  was  submitted  with  the
    application form and as Miss Brakaj submitted to me it has  never  been
    stated nor is there  any evidence that the respondent's wife  had  been
    present in the United Kingdom.  It is therefore difficult  to  see  how
    any  weight  could  properly  have  been  attached  to  that   apparent
    discrepancy albeit that it is one that would have been serious.

16. This is a case in which an experienced judge heard  evidence  from  the
    respondent which was subject to detailed cross-examination.  The  judge
    has given  adequate  and  sustainable  reasons  for  finding  that  the
    respondent was credible and it is of note that he did  clearly  address
    the different issues arising as to what had happened in Iraq  and  gave
    adequate and sustainable reasons for concluding that the respondent was
    telling the truth.  At [61] he summarised his  conclusions  that  there
    was no obvious reason to disbelieve the respondent's account of why  he
    left Iraq and what  happened  once  he  had  done  so.   It  is  not  a
    requirement for a judge to address each and every point  taken  in  the
    refusal letter when, as here, it does  not  appear  that  the  specific
    points, which had been raised in  cross-examination,  did  not  form  a
    great part of the submissions made.  The thrust  of  the  Secretary  of
    State's case is in reality that in light of AA  (Iraq)  and  BA  (Iraq)
    that the respondent simply cannot succeed.

17. Accordingly, for the reasons set out above  I  am  satisfied  that  the
    judge did properly take account of the Secretary of State's concerns as
    to credibility and for adequate and sustainable  reasons  accepted  the
    respondent's account.  It is of note also that much of the respondent's
    other evidence was not  disputed  and  that  was  properly  taken  into
    account in respect of the other evidence.

18. The Secretary of State's challenges  with  respect  to  Article  3  are
    flawed, as there is no indication that in this case,  any  difficulties
    the respondent would face on return do not flow solely from the lack of
    documentation; there is the sustainable finding by the  judge  at  [61]
    that the respondent is at risk of  harm  from  members  of  his  wife's
    family from whom there would be no effective  protection  in  the  home
    area, Kirkuk.  This, as is noted in R (on the application of H)  v  The
    Secretary of State for the Home Department (application of AA (Iraq CG)
    IJR [2017] UKUT 119 (IAC) at [41] to [42]:

    41. Two points emerge. First, a person who is found  to  be  returnable
    (because he or she has or will be able to obtain a passport or laissez-
    passer) may, nevertheless, face difficulties if he or she cannot obtain
    a CSID, following return. Secondly  (and  crucially),  a  person  whose
    return is not currently feasible may, nevertheless, still succeed in  a
    claim to international protection, if and insofar as the claim is based
    on a real risk of harm, which arises otherwise than by not  having  the
    requisite documentation. [emphasis added]

    42. The significance of this second  point  emerges  clearly  from  the
    Upper Tribunal's  application  to  the  appellant  AA  of  its  country
    guidance:-

    " 206. However, the Respondent has confirmed that the  Appellant  would
    be returned to Baghdad city. There is no evidence  that  the  Appellant
    has access to a current or expired Iraqi passport, or a laissez-passer,
    and we conclude that he does not. In all the circumstances we find that
    he will not be  returnable  until  he  is  able  to  supply  sufficient
    documentation to the Iraqi Embassy in London to enable  it  to  provide
    him with a passport or a laissez passer. This will only occur if he can
    provide a copy of a CSID or Nationality  Certificate.  His  return  is,
    therefore, not currently feasible.

    207. Given that the appellant's return is  not  currently  feasible  it
    could be said that it is unnecessary to hypothesise  any  risk  to  him
    upon his return to Iraq. However, as identified in paragraphs  169  and
    170 above, there may be cases where it will be evident that the  person
    concerned would  be  at  real  risk  of  persecution  or  serious  harm
    irrespective of the lack of documentation and that an applicant  should
    not be precluded for pursuing a claim to  international  protection  in
    circumstances where the asserted risk of harm is not  (or  not  solely)
    based on factors (such as lack of documentation) that currently  render
    a person's actual return unfeasible. "

19. Further, it is to be noted that the guidance in AA(Iraq) CG was amended
    in respect of sections B and C by the Court of  Appeal  in  AA(Iraq)  v
    SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 944. It now reads:
    B. DOCUMENTATION AND FEASIBILITY OF RETURN (EXCLUDING IKR)
    5. Return of former residents of the Iraqi Kurdish Region (IKR) will be
    to the IKR  and  all  other  Iraqis  will  be  to  Baghdad.  The  Iraqi
    authorities will allow an Iraqi national (P) in the United  Kingdom  to
    enter Iraq only if P is in possession of a  current  or  expired  Iraqi
    passport relating to P, or a laissez passer.
    6. No Iraqi national will be returnable to Baghdad if not in possession
    of one of these documents.
    7. In the light of the Court of Appeal's  judgment  in  HF  (Iraq)  and
    Others v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2013]  EWCA  Civ
    1276, an international protection claim made by  P  cannot  succeed  by
    reference to any alleged risk of harm arising  from  an  absence  of  a
    current or expired Iraqi passport or a laissez passer, if the  Tribunal
    finds that P's return is not currently feasible on account of a lack of
    any of those documents.
    8. Where P is returned to Iraq on a laissez passer or expired passport,
    P will be at no risk of serious harm at the point of return  by  reason
    of not having a current passport.
    C. The CSID
    9. Regardless of the feasibility of P's return, it will be necessary to
    decide whether P has a CSID, or will be able to obtain one,  reasonably
    soon after arrival in Iraq. A CSID is generally required in  order  for
    an  Iraqi  to  access  financial  assistance  from   the   authorities;
    employment; education; housing; and medical treatment. If P shows there
    are no family or other members likely to be able to  provide  means  of
    support, P is in general likely to face a  real  risk  of  destitution,
    amounting to serious harm, if, by the time any funds provided to  P  by
    the Secretary of State or her agents to assist  P's  return  have  been
    exhausted, it is reasonably likely that P will still have no CSID.
    10. Where return is feasible but P does not have a CSID, P should as  a
    general matter be able to obtain one  from  the  Civil  Status  Affairs
    Office for P's home  Governorate,  using  an  Iraqi  passport  (whether
    current or expired), if P has one. If P does not have such a  passport,
    P's ability to obtain a CSID may depend on whether P knows the page and
    volume number of the book holding P's  information  (and  that  of  P's
    family). P's ability to persuade the officials that  P  is  the  person
    named on the relevant page is likely to depend on whether P has  family
    members or other individuals who are prepared to vouch for P.
    11. P's ability to obtain a CSID is likely to be severely hampered if P
    is unable to go to the Civil Status Affairs Office of  P's  Governorate
    because it is in an area where Article 15(c) serious harm is occurring.
    As a result of the violence, alternative CSA Offices for  Mosul,  Anbar
    and Saluhaddin have  been  established  in  Baghdad  and  Kerbala.  The
    evidence does not demonstrate that the "Central Archive", which  exists
    in Baghdad, is in practice able to provide CSIDs to those  in  need  of
    them. There is, however, a National Status Court in Baghdad, to which P
    could apply for formal recognition of identity. The  precise  operation
    of this court is, however, unclear.

20. It should be recalled in the context of this case that the issue  under
    consideration is whether, it having been found that the  respondent  is
    at risk of serious harm in his home area, where there is no sufficiency
    of protection, whether it would  be  unduly  harsh  to  expect  him  to
    relocate.  There is no basis for the assertion that the judge  did  not
    have proper regard to the  relevant  guidance.  On  the  contrary,  his
    decision shows reference to both the cases cited by  the  Secretary  of
    State in her grounds.

21. Contrary to what is averred in the grounds, the judge gave adequate and
    sustainable reasons for concluding [58] that the  applicant  could  not
    obtain a passport or CSID without the help of member of the  family  in
    Kirkuk, an area in which he was at risk  and  where  the  judge  found,
    again for sustainable reasons, that the respondent was not  in  contact
    with family.  In the light of the guidance at C  above,  the  assertion
    that the respondent had to exhaust all possibilities  is  mistaken,  as
    are the assertions about obtaining a  passport.  Further,  the  claimed
    error of not addressing feasibility of return does not, on the facts of
    this case, and in the light of the revised guidance, identify any error
    of law which could give rise to a material error, given that absence of
    documentation is not the sole reason the  respondent  fears  return  to
    Iraq.

22. The submission that the judge had not properly engaged with BA  in  not
    reaching a fact-sensitive is simply wrong. It  is  precisely  what  the
    judge did so. Just because he did not agree with the Secretary of State
    is not an error of  law,  whatever  she  may  wish  to  think.  On  the
    contrary, the  judge  properly  set  out  detailed  findings  which  he
    carefully summarised giving adequate and sustainable reasons  why  this
    individual who was at risk in his home area of Kirkuk would not be able
    to relocate to Baghdad, given the real risk of destitution which  meets
    the revised guidance in AA(Iraq).

23. In summary, the grounds challenging the judge's approach to  article  3
    are nothing more than an attempt to re-argue the appeal,  and  fail  to
    identify any error in the judge's reasoning, or approach either to  the
    relevant law.

24. In the circumstances, having found that  the  respondent's  deportation
    would be in breach of article 3 of the  Human  Rights  Convention,  any
    error with respect to the analysis of article 8 rights  which  includes
    the assertion of an incorrect approach to section117C (5) of  the  2002
    Act is not capable of creating a material error.

    SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS.

 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    an error of law and I uphold it. I maintain the anonymity order made by
    the First-tier Tribunal, given the need to protect the identity of  the
    respondent's partner and her child.

Signed                                  Date 15 December 2017
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul
