
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/12023/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 12th July 2019                  |On 2nd August 2019                 |
|                                   |                                   |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DEANS


                                   Between

                                     E O
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Miss L Crichton, Katani & Co, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This appeal is brought against a decision by Judge of the First-tier
      Tribunal Clough dismissing an appeal on protection and human rights
      grounds.

   2. The appellant is a national of Nigeria.  He left Nigeria in 1995 and
      spent about 7 years in Greece before coming to the UK.  He is HIV
      positive.  He claims that in 2002 he joined the Biafra Community in
      the UK and has attended demonstrations and protests on behalf of this
      organisation.  The appellant expresses a fear that the Nigerian
      government will persecute him because of his support for Biafran
      independence.

   3. The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal did not believe that the
      appellant had been involved with an organisation campaigning for
      Biafran independence.
   4. Permission to appeal was granted on two grounds.  The first was that
      the judge arguably failed to give adequate reasons for her adverse
      credibility findings.  The second ground was that arguably the judge
      speculated about what the organisation the appellant claimed to
      support would or would not have done.

Submissions
   5. At the hearing Miss Crichton referred to paragraph 18 of the decision
      of the First-tier Tribunal, where the judge made her adverse
      credibility findings.  The judge referred to a letter from a Mr Okanjo
      of the Biafra Community but the judge stated that this letter did not
      specify any protests or demonstrations attended by the appellant,
      which the judge would have expected had the appellant been an active
      member of the organisation.

   6. Miss Crichton directed my attention to a letter dated 12th November
      2018 from Mr Uwakwe of the Biafra Community, which was before the
      First-tier Tribunal in the third bundle for the appellant.  This
      letter states on the second page that the appellant has participated
      in demonstrations at the Nigerian High Commission in Trafalgar Square
      and at Westminster.  Miss Crichton submitted that the Judge of the
      First-tier Tribunal failed to take this evidence into account.

   7. In paragraph 18 the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal also drew adverse
      inferences from a membership card for the Biafra Community relied upon
      by the appellant.  According to the judge the membership card was
      headed "BIAFFtA Community Membership Card" but on the reverse stated
      that it was a membership card of the "Biafra Community".  The Biafran
      flag was not correctly printed on the membership card as the three
      coloured stripes on the flag were not of equal width.  The judge
      stated that she would have expected "an independence movement,
      particularly one with such a history, to be scrupulous in getting such
      details correct."

   8. Miss Crichton again referred me to the letter of 12th November 2018
      from Mr Uwakwe.  This letter acknowledges that the name "Biaffta
      Community" on the front of the card, instead of Biafra Community, was
      a mistake "which occurred during computer printing" of the card.  As
      far as the depiction of the flag was concerned, the quality and
      standard of the card depended upon the quality and standard of the
      computer and printer used to produce it.  The latter states that
      nevertheless the "identity card" was the "identity card of the Biafra
      Community".  Miss Crichton submitted that the judge did not address
      this evidence when giving reasons for finding that the card was not
      reliable evidence of the appellant's membership of the Biafra
      Community.

   9. Mr Diwnycz acknowledged that he was at a disadvantage in responding to
      Miss Crichton's submission.  No rule 24 response was available and he
      did not have in his file all the appellant's bundles of evidence.
      Miss Crichton pointed out that the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal
      referred at paragraph 8 of her decision to three bundles having been
      lodged for the appellant.  Mr Diwnycz accepted that he was not in a
      position to object to a remittal sought by Miss Crichton.

Discussion
  10. The issue before me is not whether the appellant was or was not giving
      truthful evidence but whether the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal was
      entitled to make adverse credibility findings for the reasons which
      she gave.  In making her adverse findings at paragraph 18 the judge
      entirely neglected to take account of the letter of 12th November 2018
      from Mr Uwakwe in the appellant's third bundle.  Because she failed to
      take account of this evidence the reasons given by the judge for her
      adverse findings are inadequate.  In addition, the judge's comments on
      the membership card take no account of the explanations in the letter
      of 12th November.  Had she considered those explanations the judge
      might have been entitled to reject them but the judge erred by not
      taking them into account.

  11. The judge's errors go to the core of the adverse credibility findings.
       As no reliance can be placed upon those findings the extent of fact-
      finding required to re-make the decision means that remittal is the
      appropriate course, in terms of paragraph 7.2(b).  Accordingly the
      decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside and the appeal is
      remitted to the First-tier Tribunal with no findings preserved for a
      fresh hearing before a differently constituted tribunal.

Conclusions
  12. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the
      making of an error of law.

  13. The decision is set aside.

  14. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal with no findings
      preserved for a fresh hearing before a differently constituted
      tribunal.

Anonymity
The First-tier Tribunal did not make a direction for anonymity.  In order
to preserve the positions of the parties until the appeal is decided I make
such a direction in the following terms.  Unless or until a court or
tribunal directs otherwise no report of these proceedings shall directly or
indirectly identify the appellant or any member of his family.  This
direction applies to the appellant and the respondent.  Any breach of this
direction may give rise to contempt of court proceedings.



M E Deans
                                        24th July 2019
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
