
                                    [pic]



Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/12671/2018



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard at: Manchester Civil Justice |Decision & Reasons Promogulated    |
|Centre (remote)                    |                                   |
|On: the 24th November 2020         |On: 6th January 2021               |


                                   Before


                         Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce


                                   Between

                                     CSR

                         (anonymity direction made)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and



                 Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                  Respondent



For the Appellant:     Mr Hussain, Counsel instructed by Lei Dat and Baig

For the Respondent:  Mr Tan, Senior Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS



 1. The Appellant is a national of Iran born  in  1998.   He  appeals  with
    permission against the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
    Brookfield) to dismiss  his  appeal  on  protection  and  human  rights
    grounds.


 2. The basis of the Appellant's claim before the First-tier  Tribunal  was
    that he faces a real  risk  of  persecution  in  Iran  because  he  has
    converted from Islam to Christianity. His  claim,  and  appeal,  failed
    because the Respondent, and then the Tribunal,  rejected  that  factual
    assertion.


 3. Judge Brookfield gave no fewer than fifteen reasons  why  she  did  not
    believe the Appellant. Permission to appeal was granted  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Kelly in respect of  only  one  of  those  matters,  which  he
    evidently considered to be so fundamental to  her  ratio  that  if  the
    finding in question is flawed for error of  law,  the  entire  decision
    arguably falls with it.  The impugned passage reads as follows:


         "The appellant claims  that  he  was  born  a  Muslim  but  stopped
         practising Islam when his cousin [X] was executed in  2015  by  the
         Iranian authorities for being a member of an opposition  party  and
         also for religious  reasons.  The  appellant  does  not  know  what
         opposition party his cousin joined. The appellant does  not  advise
         that his cousin converted from Islam to another religion, so it  is
         difficult to accept his cousin was executed for religious  reasons.
         The appellant does not explain why he blamed  Islam  in  particular
         for his cousin's death, when he claims his cousin was executed  for
         political reasons..."



 4. Judge Kelly thought it arguable that Judge Brookfield had here  created
    an "artificial distinction  given  the  intimate  relationship  between
    religion and politics within the Islamic Republic of Iran".  Before  me
    the parties were in agreement that Judge Kelly's observations were well
    made. Two points  can  be  extracted  from  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    reasoning. First, that it is not credible that the Iranian  authorities
    would execute someone 'for religious reasons' if  that  individual  had
    not in fact converted to another  faith.  Any  cursory  review  of  the
    country background material will reveal the fallacy in that. The entire
    criminal code in Iran was redrawn after the Islamic revolution to frame
    crimes against the state as crimes against God.   Human rights  reports
    over the past forty years demonstrate that a wide range  of  defendants
    have faced accusations framed in religious terms.  That  leads  to  the
    second point: that the Tribunal appeared to doubt  that  the  Appellant
    would blame Islam itself, rather than the Iranian government,  for  his
    cousin's death. Again, in the context of a repressive theocracy  it  is
    not surprising that he would do so. The line between 'Iran' and 'Islam'
    has been deliberately blurred and it is in no way implausible  that  an
    individual in the position of the Appellant would blame  both  for  his
    loss.


 5. The question, submits Mr Tan, is whether this apparent misunderstanding
    about the nature of the Iranian state is such that the decision  should
    be set aside. He submits that the decision must be read as a whole, and
    given the overwhelming nature of the findings  against  the  Appellant,
    the decision can safely be upheld.   Mr  Hussain  emphasised  that  the
    alleged error went to the heart of the  Tribunal's  findings,  that  it
    framed them and set the context for  the  rest  of  the  findings  that
    followed. Had the Tribunal accepted that initial part of the account as
    plausible, its findings on all of the other elements of the  story  may
    have been other than they were.


 6. The remaining reasons given by the First-tier  Tribunal  for  rejecting
    the evidence were:


              i) That it is not credible that the Appellant would leave  his
                 religion at a time that he was grieving;


             ii) The Appellant gave inconsistent evidence about  whether  he
                 was looking for another faith after  he  stopped  following
                 Islam;


            iii) He claimed that he was  unable  to  conduct  research  into
                 Christianity  in  Iran  because  there  were  no  resources
                 available  to  him.  This  contrasts   with   the   country
                 background material which  states  that  here  are  24-hour
                 Christian satellite channels available there;


             iv) It is not credible that the Appellant's  cousin  would  not
                 have ben able to provide him  with  some  written  material
                 about Christianity if he had converted himself;


              v) The Appellant's evidence about whether he  knew  conversion
                 to be dangerous was inconsistent;


             vi) It is not credible that the Appellant would decide to visit
                 a house church after "only limited  discussions"  with  his
                 cousin;


            vii) The Appellant stated that when he attended the house church
                 he was asked to give his name and address,  and  that  this
                 was later revealed to the authorities by a member  who  was
                 arrested.  It is not credible that he would  be  asked  for
                 his name and address,  given  the  dangers  that  attendees
                 face, since it would put the entire congregation at risk if
                 one of their number were arrested;


           viii)  In  light  of  the  severe  punishments  meted   out   for
                 proselytising it is highly likely  that  the  leader  of  a
                 house church would undertake  stringent  enquiries  of  any
                 newcomers (ie to make sure that they  weren't  a  spy).  In
                 light of that it is not credible that the  Appellant  would
                 simply be admitted because his cousin vouched for him;


             ix) The Appellant's claim that the congregation  met  on  seven
                 occasion in two different locations  in  inconsistent  with
                 the background evidence that house churches move frequently
                 to make it more difficult for the  Iranian  authorities  to
                 locate them;


              x) It was not credible that the  Appellant  would  decided  to
                 convert after only seven visits to a house church;


             xi) It is not credible that the Appellant would  place  himself
                 and his family  in  danger  by  possessing  Farsi  language
                 Christian literature when he is unable to speak or read  in
                 that language;


            xii) The account of the Appellant escaping after  hearing  shots
                 fired near his house church is not credible (other reasons,
                 specific to the account of this incident, are given in  the
                 decision);


           xiii) The evidence of the Dorodian  witness,  although  accepted,
                 attracted  only  little   weight   since   Rev.   Cirtina's
                 interactions with the Appellant were restricted to being in
                 church - he had  no  knowledge  of  the  Appellant's  life,
                 behaviour or faith outside of that space;


            xiv) The Appellant's own evidence tended to indicate that he was
                 not attracted to Christianity because it fulfilled  a  deep
                 spiritual need. Rather it indicated that he equated it with
                 Western social values: "Being a Christian  is  freedom  and
                 you can drink alcohol and be with girls";


             xv) The Appellant was in the United Kingdom for 6 months before
                 he started attending church, which indicates  that  he  was
                 not particularly interested in doing so.


 7. Judge Kelly expressly refused to  grant  the  Appellant  permission  to
    challenge any of these  findings,  considering  the  grounds  to  be  a
    quarrel with findings open to the Tribunal on the evidence  before  it.
    For my own part I have reservations about some of the  findings.  I  do
    not, for instance, think it appropriate  that  we  as  decision  makers
    should think ourselves able to 'make windows into men's souls'  in  the
    way that the Tribunal apparently has at its finding (i). There is to my
    mind nothing inherently implausible about someone losing their faith in
    grief.  Reasons (vii) and (viii) appear contradictory  -  either  house
    churches conduct thorough vetting of prospective  members  or  they  do
    not. I note that in fact the Appellant's account on this point at least
    is entirely consistent with the evidence given to the Upper Tribunal in
    PS (Christianity - risk) Iran CG [2020] UKUT 00046 (IAC)  in  that  new
    members of the congregation are commonly introduced by family members.


 8. That said it is abundantly  clear  that  the  Tribunal  comprehensively
    disbelieved  this  witness.    It  repeatedly  says   so,   and   gives
    individually and collectively well-reasoned explanations as to why.   I
    have to weigh that against the error identified by Judge Kelly. Did the
    Tribunal's  background  view  -  if  I  can  call  it  that  -  of  the
    relationship between the government  and  people  of  Iran  colour  its
    assessment of the  remaining  evidence?    I  have  given  that  matter
    careful consideration but in the end I have concluded that it did  not.
    None of the credibility findings I have summarised above  turn  on  the
    point. The fact was that the Appellant  gave  evidence  that  was  both
    internally discrepant and  inconsistent  with  the  country  background
    information, and gave  a  wholly  unconvincing  -  even  to  the  lower
    standard of proof - account of  his  claimed  faith.  It  follows  that
    notwithstanding the error identified Judge Brookfield's  decision  must
    stand and the appeal is dismissed.


    Anonymity Order

 9. This appeal concerns a claim for protection.  Having had regard to Rule
    14 of the Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008  and  the
    Presidential Guidance Note No 1 of 2013: Anonymity Orders  I  therefore
    consider it appropriate to make an order in the following terms:



         "Unless and until a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
        Appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
        shall directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his
        family.  This  direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  both  the
        Appellant  and  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply  with   this
        direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings"


    Decisions


10. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contains no material error
    of law and it is upheld. The appeal is dismissed.


11. There is an order for anonymity.





                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce

                                                          12th December 2020
