
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12068/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 1st July 2019                     |On 23rd August 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES


                                   Between

                                     E L
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Da Silva, Fountain Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Lindsay, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant appeals against the decision of First-tier Tribunal
Judge Page, promulgated on 23 August 2018, dismissing his protection claim
on asylum grounds, humanitarian protection grounds and human rights
grounds.

2.   Permission was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson on 29 March
2019 on the ground that it was arguable the judge failed to give sufficient
reasons for finding that the Appellant was not bi-sexual or seeking to
transition as a woman. The reasons given at paragraph 27 were based on the
late claim for asylum and there was no reference to or rejection of the
Appellant's evidence about his past relationships or involvement with LGBT
groups in prison (Ground 1). Further, the findings in paragraph 28 were
arguable contrary to HJ (Iran) as to the reasons why the Appellant stated
he would live discreetly in Ghana (Ground 2). Lastly, there was arguably
insufficient consideration of the family court proceedings notwithstanding
the unassailable conclusion, on the evidence, that there was no current
family life as a parent (Ground 3).


The Appellant's Immigration History

3.   The Appellant is a national of Ghana born in 1968. He arrived in the
UK in May 2009 with entry clearance as a spouse of a British citizen. This
relationship broke down in April 2011 and his divorce was finalised in
January 2012. The Appellant met his current partner [CS] in March 2011. He
applied for a settlement in May 2011 and was granted indefinite leave to
remain in July 2011. His daughter PL was born in January 2012. He became
engaged to CS in September 2013 and his second daughter ML was born in
March 2014.

4.   On 28 February 2014 the Appellant was convicted of two counts of
assaulting a female child under 13 and sentenced to 7 years' imprisonment.
He was found guilty of assaulting a 10-year-old girl (a friend of his
partner's two children) on two occasions during a sleepover at the house he
shared with CS. The Appellant still maintains that he is not guilty of the
offences.

5.   The Appellant was served with a notice of intention to deport in
September 2014 and responded by claiming asylum on 27 October 2014 on the
ground that if he returned to Ghana he would face ill treatment by the
father of the victim of the sexual assaults. The Appellant was served with
a notice of intention to deport in May 2016 and a section 72 notice in
September 2016. He was interviewed on 23 November 2016, 15 December 2016
and 6 February 2017. The Appellant's relationship with CS ended in early
2017. The Respondent refused the Appellant's asylum and human rights claims
and maintained the decision to deport on 7 November 2017.

6.   On 22 November 2017 the Appellant issued proceedings under the
Children Act 1989 in respect of his two children born in 2012 and 2014. The
hearing in May 2018 was adjourned to a date in November 2018. On 16
November 2018 the Appellant was granted supervised contact with his
children three times a year. The Court ordered that if he is deported he is
to have supervised indirect contact three times a year.

7.   On 22 January 2018 the appellant re-claimed asylum on the ground that
he faced a risk on return to Ghana as a bisexual man who intended to
undergo surgery to become a transgender woman. His appeal listed in
February 2018 was adjourned to enable the fresh asylum claim to be decided.
The Appellant was interviewed again on 13 March 2018. The Respondent, in a
supplementary refusal decision dated 9 April 2018, refused the fresh asylum
claim and maintained the decision to deport.


Submissions

8.   Mr Da Silva  submitted  that  there  was  sufficient  evidence  in  the
    Appellant's bundle to show  that  he  was  bi-sexual  which  the  judge
    ignored. The judge failed to properly apply  HJ  Iran.  There  were  on
    going family proceedings and there were very  compelling  circumstances
    which justified a grant of leave to stay in  the  UK  to  see  his  two
    British citizen children.

9.   Mr Lindsay submitted the main issue  in  the  appeal  was  whether  the
    judge was entitled to find the Appellant was not  a  credible  witness.
    The judge took into account the fact that the  Appellant  continued  to
    deny the offences of which he was convicted by a jury  at  a  trial  in
    which the complainant,  a  minor,  gave  evidence.  This  significantly
    damaged his credibility. Further,  section  8  applied  and  the  judge
    demonstrated that he attached significant  weight  to  the  Appellant's
    late  claim  for  asylum  on  grounds  of  sexuality.  The  judge  also
    considered the Appellant's explanation for why he had not  raised  this
    issue earlier and gave adequate reasons for why this was not credible.

10.  It was apparent from paragraph 21 that the judge took into account  all
    the evidence before him even that to  which  he  had  not  specifically
    referred. There was nothing in his findings which demonstrated  he  had
    missed a part of the evidence or misunderstood  it.  Having  considered
    all the documents, the judge found that the Appellant was not  credible
    because he had lied to a jury and his claim was made at the last minute
    when all other avenues  had  been  exhausted.  There  was  no  lack  of
    reasoning when the decision was read as a whole and following  UT  (Sri
    Lanka) [2019] EWCA Civ 1095 at [26][27] the judge's  reasons  could  be
    inferred. He did not have to set out every step in  his  reasoning  and
    judicial restraint should be exercised in examining those reasons.  The
    judge had considered all the evidence in concluding the  Appellant  was
    not credible.

11.  The evidence in  the  Appellant's  bundle  post-dated  the  refusal  of
    asylum and section 8 applied. There was an irresistible inference  that
    the judge was not persuaded by it. None of the  judge's  findings  were
    contradicted by the documents in the Appellant's bundle. The judge  had
    been clear and concise. There was no reason to suppose the judge missed
    anything out. He did not have to refer to every piece of evidence  and,
    in this case, there was a powerful  and  unambiguous  inference  to  be
    drawn. The  reasons  given  were  sufficient  to  demonstrate  why  the
    Appellant's appeal was dismissed.

12.  In relation to ground 3, the judge had addressed the  questions  in  RS
    (Immigration and family court proceedings) India [2012] UKUT  218.  The
    outcome of the contemplated  family  proceedings  was  unlikely  to  be
    material to this immigration  decision.  Taking  the  evidence  at  its
    highest, the circumstances regarding the Appellant's children could not
    meet the unduly harsh requirement and could not arguably be said to  be
    very compelling circumstances. Secondly, there were  compelling  public
    interest reasons for excluding the Appellant irrespective of outcome of
    the family proceedings and the best interests of the children which the
    judge addressed at paragraph 43. Thirdly, the  judge  found  there  was
    reason to believe the proceedings  had  been  instituted  to  delay  or
    frustrate removal (paragraph 22 of the decision).

13.   Applying  MS  (s.117C  "very  compelling  circumstances")  Philippines
    [2019] UKUT 122, there were no very compelling circumstances such as to
    outweigh the public interest, which included deterrence and the need to
    maintain public confidence in the system. This case could  not  succeed
    under Article 8.

14.  Mr Da Silva submitted  that  the  Appellant  had  served  his  term  of
    imprisonment and had been given permission to see  his  children  three
    times a year. He accepted there was no  evidence  of  this  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal. He submitted the judge had failed  to  follow  the
    correct test and had ignored the Appellant's claim to be bi-sexual. The
    judge failed to take into account the  anxiety,  stress  and  shame  in
    considering the Appellant's late claim. He failed to consider the  risk
    on return and how the Appellant could avoid persecution. The First-tier
    Tribunal failed to adopt the correct approach and the  decision  should
    be set aside and remade.


Conclusions and reasons

15.  The judge made it clear at paragraph 21 that he had considered the
    oral evidence, submissions and documentary evidence even if he had not
    mentioned it in his decision. At paragraph 24, he specifically took
    into account the Appellant's oral evidence, his witness statement and
    the supporting documents. At paragraph 27 he stated: "After considering
    all the appellant's evidence and the evidence in the appellant's
    bundle, I do not find the appellant credible to the low standard of
    proof that he is truthfully bi-sexual or that he intends to undergo
    gender realignment (sic) surgery." I find that the judge did not ignore
    the Appellant's claim to be bi-sexual and he took into account all the
    evidence in the Appellant's bundle in assessing the credibility of the
    Appellant's claim.

16.  The judge gave numerous reasons, at paragraph 27, for finding that the
    Appellant was not credible:

    (i)  the Appellant's failure to claim asylum based on his sexuality
         until his appeal was pending;


    (ii) the number of times the Appellant had the opportunity to disclose
         his claim and failed to do to;


    (iii)    the Appellant's reasons for choosing not to disclose his claim
         earlier was not credible. The Appellant stated, "he did not want to
         put all his eggs in one basket" and he did not want his partner to
         learn about his sexuality. This did not adequately explain the
         failure to disclose given that he separated from his partner in
         early 2017, but did not claim asylum until January 2018;


    (iv) The Appellant's failure to mention that he would be at risk on
         return on account of his sexuality in his asylum interview when he
         claimed that he feared his victim's family.


    (v)  The Appellant raised his sexuality as a ground for asylum when he
         realised he had no other basis on which to resist deportation.

17.  The judge made a clear finding that the Appellant was not a credible
    witness and gave adequate reasons for concluding that the Appellant had
    fabricated his claim to be bi-sexual and prospective transgender woman.



18.  Following UT (Sri Lanka), it could be inferred from the decision that
    the judge attached little weight to the evidence in the Appellant's
    bundle: a character reference dated 25 March 2018 from the Shannon
    Trust Co-ordinator; an undated letter from Matthew; and a letter from
    the community engagement manager of G4S dated 8 March 2018, which
    stated that the Appellant informed that he was bi-sexual on 16 October
    2017 and attended two LGBT meetings on 26 November 2017 and 21 December
    2017. These documents do not undermine the judge's conclusion that the
    Appellant raised his sexuality as a last ditch attempt to resist
    deportation.

19.  The minutes from the LGBT meeting dated 30 September 2015 and the
    Appellant's claim to have written to the Respondent after his interview
    were adequately dealt with in the refusal letter and did not undermine
    the judge's credibility findings in any event. The Appellant's claim to
    have had three same-sex relationships was not supported by oral or
    documentary evidence which the Appellant ought to have been able to
    produce if his account was true. The judge gave adequate reasons for
    why the Appellant was not a credible witness and therefore it was
    implicit in this conclusion that he attached no weight to these
    unsupported assertions. There was no material error of law in relation
    to ground 1.

20.  There was no misdirection in law. The judge answered the first
    question in HJ (Iran) and concluded that the Appellant had failed to
    show to the lower standard that he was bi-sexual or that his intended
    to undergo gender reassignment surgery. There was no need for the judge
    to go any further. Any error in relation to ground 2 was not material.

21.  The judge properly directed himself following RS (India). There were
    compelling public interest reasons to exclude the Appellant from the
    United Kingdom irrespective of the outcome of the family proceedings or
    the best interest of his children. The outcome of the family
    proceedings was not material.  Given the unchallenged finding that
    there was no current family life, the Appellant's Article 8 claim could
    not succeed.
22.  Taking his claim at its highest, there were no very compelling
    circumstances to outweigh the public interest in deportation. There was
    no material error of law in relation to ground 3.

23.  Accordingly, I find that there is no error of law in the judge's
decision and I dismiss the Appellant's appeal.


Notice of Decision

Appeal dismissed

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


                  J Frances

Signed                                  Date: 8 July 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Frances




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


                  J Frances

Signed                                  Date: 8 July 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Frances

