
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
                (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA128152016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Columbus House,       |Decision and Reasons Promulgated|
|Newport                         |                                |
|On: 25 August 2017              |On: 31 August 2017              |
|                                |                                |

                                   Before

                 DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J F W PHILLIPS


                                   Between

                                     MTM
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:    Ms M Bayoumi, Counsel instructed by Qualified Legal
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. This is an appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge
       Solly in which the Judge dismissed the appeal of  the  Appellant,  a
       citizen of Iraq, against the Secretary of State's decision to refuse
       asylum and set removal directions.

    2. The Appellant arrived in the United  Kingdom  on  16  May  2016  and
       claimed asylum the same day. His  application  was  refused  by  the
       Respondent on 11 November 2016. The Appellant exercised his right of
       appeal against this decision and this is the appeal that  was  heard
       before Judge Solly on 3 February 2017 and dismissed. The Appellant's
       application for permission to appeal against the First-tier Tribunal
       Judge's decision was refused by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Grant  on
       14 March 2017 but on renewal to the Upper Tribunal was granted on  3
       May 2017 by Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor in the following terms

    "The renewed grounds argue that the judge  made  a  number  of  factual
    errors in  the  determination.  I  note  that  the  judge  who  refused
    permission  to  appeal  in  the  first  tier  also   acknowledged   the
    difficulties with the  determination  but  refused  permission  on  the
    ground that no  challenge  was  made  to  the  relocation  findings  in
    relation to Baghdad. However, the area where the appellant  comes  from
    is within Baghdad. It is right to say that  on  the  face  of  it,  the
    original judge did not explain why she considered some of  the  matters
    put forward by the appellant to be inconsistent with  each  other,  and
    there is a lack of clarity in her reasoning. It may be that on  further
    exploration they are not material. However, it is right that permission
    ought to be granted, so that arguments can be pursued."

    3. By a rule 24 response dated 18 May 2017 the Respondent  opposed  the
       appeal.

    4. At the hearing before me Mr McVeety appeared for  the  Secretary  of
       State and Ms Bayoumi  represented  the  Appellant  and  submitted  a
       written skeleton argument.

Background

    5. The Appellant is 31years old and a citizen of Iraq from Baghdad. His
       claim for  international  protection  is  based  on  persecution  by
       government backed militia due to  his  perceived  political  opinion
       because of his association, through employment, with a former deputy
       president of Iraq and the general risk associated with a  return  to
       his home area.

    6. In dismissing his appeal, the First-tier Tribunal Judge  found  that
       the Appellant's account was  not  credible  due,  in  the  main,  to
       discrepancies and inconsistencies  in  his  account  highlighted  at
       paragraph 54 of the statement of reasons. So far as general risk was
       concerned the Judge found that he was at no greater risk than  other
       members of the Sunni  population  in  his  area  and  following  the
       decision in BA (returns to Baghdad) Iraq CG [2017] UKUT 00018  (IAC)
       the level of general violence was  not  sufficient  to  justify  the
       grant of subsidiary protection.

Submissions

    7. Ms Bayoumi relied on the grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal. Mr
       McVeety said that he had discussed the grounds with Ms  Bayoumi  and
       had considered the inconsistencies referred to at  paragraph  54  of
       the statement of reasons. He accepted that the credibility  findings
       were  'jumbled'  and  that  matters  highlighted  by  the  Judge  as
       inconsistencies or discrepancies were not inconsistent or discrepant
       at all. He accepted that the decision could not stand.

    8. I said that the appeal would be allowed and I  reserved  my  written
       decision.

Error of law

    9. In dismissing the appeal the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  found  (at
       paragraph 54) that the appellant's claim for asylum was not credible
       because  "it  contains  discrepancies  and  statements   which   are
       contradictory and not internally consistent, the  cumulative  effect
       of which is to cast  serious  doubt  upon  the  reliability  of  the
       Appellant's evidence and the veracity of his  individual  evidence".
       The Judge goes on to detail examples of the defects in his account.

   10. The grounds of appeal (at paragraph  4)  address  the  examples  put
       forward and explain why these are not examples of inconsistency.  Mr
       McVeety, on behalf of the Respondent, accepts that matters found  to
       be inconsistent or discrepant are not inconsistent or discrepant  at
       all.

   11. It is clear, and indeed accepted, that the Judge fell into error  by
       taking  into  account  irrelevant  matters  in  making  an   adverse
       credibility finding. The effect of this error must be to render  the
       credibility findings as a whole unsafe. Due to  the  nature  of  the
       error of law and in accordance with the President's direction it  is
       appropriate for  this  matter  to  be  remitted  to  the  First-tier
       Tribunal for hearing de novo with no findings preserved.

Conclusion

   12. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the  making  of  an
       error of law for the reasons set out above.

   13. I  set  aside  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  in
       accordance with the President's direction this  matter  is  suitable
       for and should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.  No  findings
       are preserved.





Signed:                                                  Date:  30/8/2017

J F W Phillips
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
