
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12099/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 25th January 2018                   |On 30th January 2018                 |
|                                       |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN


                                   Between

                                     T G
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No attendance by representatives.
For the Respondent:    Miss R Petterson (Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal to the Upper Tribunal by the Secretary of State, with
    permission, in relation to  a  Decision  and  Reasons  of  Judge  Myers
    following a hearing at Bradford on 26th April 2017.  In a Decision  and
    Reasons promulgated on 5th May 2017 the appeal was allowed.

 2. For the sake of continuity and clarity I  shall  refer  to  TG  as  the
    Appellant and to the Secretary of  State  as  the  Respondent  in  this
    judgment.

 3. The Appellant had claimed asylum on the basis that he is a  Pentecostal
    Christian from Eritrea.

 4. The Secretary of State asserted that he was not credible on  the  basis
    that he spoke  only  Amharic  and  could  not  answer  questions  about
    Eritrea.

 5. Permission to appeal having been granted by an  Upper  Tribunal  Judge,
    the matter came before me to decide whether the First-tier Tribunal had
    made an error of law in its Decision and Reasons and if so whether  and
    to what extent the Decision and Reasons should be set aside.

 6. The Appellant is represented by J D Spicer Zeb  Solicitors.   They  did
    not attend.  My clerk telephoned their offices and was  told  they  had
    received no Notice  of  Hearing  and  requested  an  adjournment.   The
    Appellant had attended but there was no interpreter and he cannot speak
    English.

 7. Having prepared the case and formed a preliminary view that  there  was
    no error of law, I discussed with Miss Petterson whether she  was  gong
    to argue the error of law.  She accepted there was no error of law.  On
    that basis I did not adjourn but dismissed  the  Secretary  of  State's
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal.   The  Appellant's  representatives  were
    notified that the Secretary of State's appeal had been dismissed.

 8. My reasons for dismissing the appeal are as follows.

 9. The Secretary of State  had  asserted  that  the  Judge  had  erred  in
    applying the wrong standard of proof  in  respect  of  the  Appellant's
    potential nationality.  It was said that  the  Judge  had  applied  the
    lower standard of proof instead of a balance of probabilities.  It  was
    asserted that the Judge's acceptance of  the  Appellant's  evidence  in
    regard to  his  visit  to  the  Ethiopian  Embassy  did  not  meet  the
    Tribunal's definition of "all reasonable steps" as set out in the  head
    note to ST (Ethnic Eritrean - nationality-return)  Ethiopia  CG  [2011]
    UKUT 00252 (IAC).

10. In the Decision and Reasons the Judge set  out  the  Appellant's  claim
    that he moved to Ethiopia with his parents aged two and remained  there
    until deported in 2000.  In Eritrea he and his father  practised  their
    Pentecostal faith in secret.  However the Appellant  was  arrested  and
    detained from a Pentecostal church in 2002.  After his release he  left
    Eritrea for the Sudan.  He did not return to Eritrea.

11. The Judge noted that the Appellant had given a detailed account of  his
    deportation and life in Eritrea.

12. The Judge noted that there was a letter from the Eritrean Community  in
    London supporting his claim to be Eritrean but  found  that  to  be  of
    limited value.

13. The Judge noted the evidence of the Appellant's friend, an Eritrean who
    knew the Appellant in Eritrea as they had been deported  from  Ethiopia
    together.  He has  Refugee  status  as  an  Eritrean.   She  found  his
    evidence credible.  That is not challenged by the Secretary of State.

14. With regard  to  the  fact  that  the  appellant  cannot  speak  fluent
    Tigrinya,  the  Judge  accepted  that  this  was  consistent  with  his
    background.  That has not been challenged by the Secretary of State.

15. The Judge then noted that  although  the  Letter  of  Refusal  did  not
    specifically state that the Secretary of State believed  the  Appellant
    to be Ethiopian, it was implied.  The Judge noted the evidence that the
    Appellant had visited the Ethiopian Embassy, that his friend went  with
    him and that there were photographs of them inside  the  Embassy.   His
    evidence was that he gave his personal and family details and  that  he
    had been deported from Ethiopia in 2000.  He was told that he would not
    be issued with an Ethiopian passport. The Judge followed  the  guidance
    of  the  Country  Guidance  case,  which  she  specifically  quoted  at
    paragraph 26 of the Decision and Reasons.

16. The Judge reached sustainable conclusions on the evidence  before  her.
    There is no indication that she applied too low a  standard  of  proof.
    The grounds are in reality a disagreement with her conclusions.

17. The Decision  and  Reasons  contains  no  error  of  law,  material  or
    otherwise.



Notice of Decision

The Secretary of State's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any member of their family.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings


Signed                              Date 25th January 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Martin
