
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12198/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 28 March 2019                            |On 09 April 2019              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS

                                   Between

                                    F.S.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Masood of Aden & Co.
For the Respondent:    Ms S Cunha, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Bowler promulgated on 6 December  2018  dismissing  on  protection  and
    human rights grounds the appeal against a decision of the Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department refusing a protection claim.


2.   I am grateful to both representatives for the helpful and  constructive
    discussion that took place during the course of the hearing in  respect
    of the issues and evidence in the appeal.


3.   The Appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan born on 3 January 1995.


4.   By way of context the starting point for consideration  of  the  issues
    before the Upper Tribunal is the findings of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge expressed at paragraph 60 of her decision.  Having  reviewed  the
    evidence in respect of the Appellant's narrative account - including  a
    careful consideration of elements of the evidence that might be said in
    some way to undermine the account - the Judge stated:

         "Applying the lower standard of proof,  I  find  that  despite  the
         matters damaging his credibility, the  evidence  is  sufficient  to
         conclude that:

         a.   The Appellant has a brother Z who works for the PPS;


         b.   the Taliban threatened Z and his family as  a  result  of  his
             work for the PPS;


         c.   the Taliban shot and killed R at the end of 2015."

    In this regard 'PPS' is the Presidential  Protection  Service;  'R'  is
    another brother of the Appellant's; R was  killed  in  the  Appellant's
    family's home region.


5.   Paragraph 60 is immediately  followed  in  the  Decision  by  the  sub-
    heading 'Internal relocation to Kabul'.  It is to be noted that it  was
    not expressly stated in the decision that the Judge concluded that  the
    Appellant was at risk of persecution in his  home  area.   However  the
    Judge's immediate progression to a consideration of internal relocation
    is consistent with that having been the conclusion  -  whether  overtly
    stated or not.  Indeed it is common ground before that that is the only
    reasonable  inference  from  the  juxtaposition  of  the  findings   at
    paragraph 60 and the sub-heading on internal relocation.


6.   At the core  of  the  Appellant's  submissions  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal was an expert's report dated 13 November 2018 prepared  by  Dr
    Antonio Giustozzi (Appellant's bundle before the First-tier Tribunal at
    pages 65-94).  That the report was a central plank of  the  Appellant's
    case before the First-tier Tribunal is  evident  from  the  Appellant's
    Skeleton Argument before the First-tier Tribunal - both in the  context
    of  providing  corroboration  for  his  narrative   account   (Skeleton
    Argument, Submission 1), and in establishing entitlement to  protection
    by reason of risk (Submission 2).


7.   The challenge to  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  pursued
    before the Upper Tribunal is in respect of the Judge's consideration of
    Dr Giustozzi's report.


8.   Permission to appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal,  having  in  the  first
    instance been refused by First-tier Tribunal Judge Povey on  9  January
    2019, was subsequently granted by Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor on
    28 January 2019 in these terms:

         "The judge accepted that the core of the  Appellant's  account  was
         true, in particular that he  had  a  brother  who  worked  for  the
         Presidential Protection Service, that as a consequence he  and  his
         family had been threatened by the Taliban, and that another brother
         had been killed in 2015.


         She dismissed the appeal on the  basis  that  the  Appellant  could
         safely and reasonably relocate to Kabul.


         The grounds submit in doing so, she did not adequately consider the
         report of Dr Giustozzi, prepared for  this  case,  and  erroneously
         considered that she was being asked to depart from the  conclusions
         in AS (Safety of Kabul) Afghanistan [2018] UKUT 00118.


         They are arguable."


9.   The reference therein to the 'erroneous consideration' that the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge was being asked to depart from the  conclusions  in
    AS appears to echo a passage in paragraph 7 of the Appellant's  grounds
    submitted in support of the application for permission to appeal -  "It
    is not being suggested that the judge should  have  departed  from  the
    findings in the country guidance case of AS ..."


10.  After discussion of the nature of the country  guidance,  the  contents
    of  the  report  of  Dr  Giustozzi,  and  the  particular   facts   and
    circumstances  of  the  Appellant's  claim,  Mr  Masood   very   fairly
    acknowledged that in substance the First-tier Tribunal Judge was  being
    asked to depart from the country guidance  set  out  in  AS.   This  is
    manifest when the matter  is  seen  this  way:  absent  Dr  Giustozzi's
    report, if the Judge were simply to apply the country  guidance  in  AS
    then it is acknowledged that the appeal would have been duly dismissed;
    the Appellant relies on aspects of  the  expert  report  to  justify  a
    conclusion different from that which would be reached following AS.


11.  Be that as it may, for the  purposes  of  considering  the  Appellant's
    challenge the key paragraphs of the First-tier Tribunal's decision  are
    paragraphs 63-67.  At paragraph 61 the Judge set out the headnote  from
    AS; at paragraph 62 - with reference to the risk categories  identified
    in the headnote - the Judge stated  "The  Appellant  is  not  a  senior
    government or security services official, or a spy".  Paragraphs  63-67
    are then in these terms:

         "63. Dr Giustozzi is one of the experts referred to extensively  in
             the AS case.  In that case the judgement refers  to  the  fact
             that Dr Giustozzi was of the view that unless references  were
             sought specifically from that appellant's home village, no one
             would know that appellant's whereabouts and then  there  would
             be very little chance that the Taliban would even know he  was
             in  Afghanistan.   Taliban  informers  in  Kabul   would   not
             necessarily know that the appellant was wanted (even if he was
             on the "blacklist" referred to [by] Dr Giustozzi).  The  Upper
             Tribunal expressed concern about the blacklist but found  that
             even if a blacklist did exist  in  the  way  described  by  Dr
             Giustozzi, his evidence as to who has access to it and how  it
             is used places a  lower  level  person  of  interest  at  very
             negligible risk (so low as to not amount to a real risk)  even
             if  they  are  named  on  it  because  it  would  require   an
             increasingly unlikely series of events to unfold.


         64.  Now Dr Giustozzi states in the expert report for the Appellant
             dealing with the Appellant's fear of  return  and  ability  to
             relocate that the Appellant's fears are justified because  the
             Taliban seek collaborators and their family  members  even  in
             Kabul.  However, he has not addressed the  conclusions  in  AS
             about the level of that risk.  I therefore  do  not  find  his
             report to be cogent enough evidence to justify departing  from
             the guidance in AS.


         65.  In addition, in AS Dr Giustozzi's evidence was that  a  person
             does not need any references or network  to  obtain  unskilled
             labouring work.  As a result  the  Upper  Tribunal  stated  at
             paragraph 207:


                  'Whilst we accept the evidence that for more formal and/or
                  expensive  accommodation  or  to   obtain   more   skilled
                  employment (particularly for  those  jobs  requiring,  for
                  example,  trustworthiness,  i.e.  accountants   or   those
                  handling  large  sums  of  money)  is  likely  to  require
                  references from  someone  within  a  support  network,  we
                  prefer the evidence of  Dr  Giustozzi  that  this  is  not
                  essential to obtain accommodation or employment  in  every
                  case (underlining added).  He was able  to  give  specific
                  examples of situations where such a reference  or  support
                  network would or would not be essential with justification
                  for why that was so depending on the context, particularly
                  of the type of employment sought.'

         66.  In contrast, Dr Giustozzi says in this case that the Appellant
             could be relatively easily  tracked  down  around  Afghanistan
             including  in  Kabul  unless  he  hides  indefinitely  without
             seeking employment.  He explains this is because of  the  need
             to look for a source of livelihood  and  accommodation  "which
             will make it impossible for him to  hide  in  order  to  avoid
             detection".


         67.  Dr Giustozzi has not explained his change in view expressed in
             the report prepared for the Appellant.  As a result I find the
             evidence in that report to lack the cogency to depart from the
             conclusions in the AS case."


12.  It may be seen that there are essentially two elements to  the  Judge's
    consideration at paragraphs 63-67: consideration as  to  the  means  by
    which a person might be pursued by the  Taliban,  and  the  concomitant
    level of risk (paragraphs  63  and  64);  and  the  slightly  different
    consideration - albeit inter-related because it impacts upon  the  risk
    of 'detection' - in respect of the necessity or  otherwise  of  passing
    over personal information  in  order  to  secure  accommodation  and/or
    employment (paragraphs 65-67).


13.  In this latter regard,  during  the  course  of  argument  nothing  was
    identified to me in Dr Giustozzi's report - and I am  otherwise  unable
    to identify anything for myself - that offers the sort  of  explanation
    that the Judge considered was required to  understand  the  basis  upon
    which Dr Giustozzi had seemingly changed his opinion as to what was  or
    was not required in order to access  accommodation  and  employment  in
    Kabul.  In such circumstances it seems to me clear that paragraph 67 of
    the Judge's decision is adequately reasoned and is  not  vulnerable  to
    criticism as being in any way in error of law.


14.  Necessarily this meant that the focus of argument was  particularly  on
    paragraphs 63 and 64.


15.  The Judge's comments at paragraph 63 as to the substance of  the  Upper
    Tribunal's consideration of issues of risk appear to  reflect  what  is
    said at  paragraph  183  of  AS  following  on  from  the  analysis  at
    paragraphs 173 et seq..  The first sentence of paragraph 64 in  context
    appears to be a reference to paragraphs 6-13 of Dr Giustozzi's  report.
    Those paragraphs are in these terms:

         "6.  In order to gather additional information about the  targeting
             of relatives  of  government  officials  and  security  forces
             officers, I have tasked my  research  team  to  carry  out  an
             interview with an  officer  of  the  National  Directorate  of
             Security. Officer [A] serves  at  the  counter  terrorism  and
             detection department of NDS in Kabul and was interviewed on 10
             November 2018.


         7.   Officer [A] stated that


                  The  Taliban  are  regularly   abducting   and   torturing
                  relatives of security forces members and then  force  them
                  to put pressure on their relatives in the security  forces
                  leave their jobs.

             The NDS has recorded 1,893 such cases  only  last  year.   446
             relatives of members of the security  forces  were  killed  or
             abducted (79).  This year the numbers are  going  up  and  the
             total number so far is already higher than in 2017: 3,168 case
             of abuse of relatives and 939 cases of murder  and  abduction.
             This all confirms that face to face threats are commonly  used
             by the Taliban.  Threat letters and telephone calls  are  used
             where the Taliban operate underground.


         8.   Cases of this kind even happen in Kabul city.  In 2018 so  far
             182 cases of violence against members of the  security  forces
             and their relatives took place, of which 54  resulted  in  the
             death of the target, mostly in districts 4, 16, 8, 12, 14, 20,
             22, 9, 7 and 17.  This is a  considerable  increase  over  the
             previous year, when 135 cases of violence were recorded and 35
             resulted in a death.


         9.   In other cities under government control, such as Herat, cases
             of violence against  relatives  of  members  of  the  security
             forces are also  common.   This  year  out  of  867  cases  of
             violence in the city, 308 were against relatives of members of
             the Afghan security forces.  In Mazar-i Sharif, there were  78
             cases of violence against relatives of members of  the  Afghan
             security forces, of which 28 were murders.


         10.  The Taliban also target relatives of civilian officials:  from
             January 2018 to November 2018, the NDS recorded 3,254 cases of
             violence of this type.  These violent attacks occur  in  Kabul
             city too.  One murder of a relative occurred just  before  the
             interview took place, in Bagrami  district  of  Kabul.   Apart
             from abduction and torture, that  is  not  possible  in  Kabul
             city, the  Taliban  carry  out  acid  attacks,  magnetic  bomb
             attacks and murders with pistols, equipped with silencers.


         11.  Usually the Taliban prefer to target the  sons  of  government
             officers and officials.  Last year even some case  of  infants
             being  killed  took  place.   Should  targeting  sons  not  be
             possible, then the Taliban will target other  relatives,  such
             as brothers, fathers, nephews,  occasionally  even  daughters,
             sisters and wives.


         12.  According to Officer [A], it is not  only  relatives  of  high
             profile officials who are targeted, as the numbers  themselves
             suggest.  In 2018 the approximate breakdown of  the  Taliban's
             victims according  to  Officer  [A]  was  the  following:  40%
             members of  the  security  forces  and  their  relatives;  30%
             members of civilian government and their relatives, 20%  staff
             of private companies and 10% interpreters, NGO staff,  UN  and
             NGO employees.


         13.  As for Kabul city the same breakdown is: 50%  members  of  the
             security forces and their relatives; 30% members  of  civilian
             government  and  their  relatives,  20%   staff   of   private
             companies, interpreters, NGO staff, UN and NGO employees."


16.  Paragraph 8 of the report in  particular  addresses  the  situation  in
    Kabul.


17.  I pause to note that the  figures  given  do  not  distinguish  between
    whether the victims of violence were members of the security forces  or
    the relatives of members of the security forces - a combined figure  is
    given for the two categories.   To  that  extent  the  evidence  is  of
    limited value in establishing the number of relatives who are  targeted
    in Kabul as distinct from the number of members of the security forces.


18.  The passages from the report that I have cited  are  clearly  based  on
    information gathered by Dr Giustozzi through his contacts  as  recently
    as November 2018 - and therefore after the decision  in  AS,  and  only
    very shortly before the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal.


19.  The same cannot really be said of the vast majority of the rest of  the
    report.  For example, the next section of the report - headed  'Taliban
    reach' - is set out with numerous footnotes as to sources which for the
    main part date from 2007, 2008, 2009, 2011, 2014, 2015  and  2016;  the
    closing few sentences of this section of the report refer  to  incident
    reported in June 2017 , January 2018 and April 2018.  Similarly much of
    the evidence in relation to availability of protection dates back to  a
    time before the decision in AS - as indeed  do  the  footnotes  in  the
    section under the heading of relocation.  This is not to undermine  the
    expertise of the author, or to criticise methodology: it is appropriate
    that a recent historical narrative is provided both for general context
    and to permit the identification of  trends,  or  otherwise  to  relate
    developments. Rather it is to highlight that  for  the  main  part  the
    report does not obviously represent any advance on the materials before
    the Tribunal in AS.


20.  Accordingly, inasmuch as there might be any  material  in  this  report
    that might justify  a  departure  from  the  contents  of  the  country
    guidance in AS it seems specifically that it must be in relation to the
    paragraphs I have quoted above based on the enquiries made in  November
    2018.


21.  As noted above, it seems to me it is adequately clear that  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge had these paragraphs in mind at paragraph 64 in the
    sentence starting "Now Dr Giustozzi states...".


22.  Dr Giustozzi took all of these  matters  forward  into  the  concluding
    passages of his report, which are stated in the following terms:

         "29. In conclusion [the  Appellant]  would  be  at  risk  from  the
             Taliban because of his brother's job in  the  PPS.   The  risk
             would be greatest in  Chak,  because  there  the  Taliban  are
             largely in control and [the Appellant] would almost be certain
             to be targeted by them as indicated by NDS source above.   The
             Taliban do target relatives  of  wanted  individuals  even  in
             Kabul in significant numbers.

         30.  In summary [the Appellant]'s fears are justified  because  the
             Taliban do seek and  target  collaborators  and  their  family
             members, even in  Kabul.   In  my  opinion  [the  Appellant]'s
             brother is certainly  considered  a  collaborator  as  he  has
             continued to work for PPS.  Because of  the  large  number  of
             collaborators the Taliban compile target lists  of  all  those
             they can identify and locate.  [The Appellant] would  have  to
             live in constant fear of being tracked  down.   His  brother's
             position will certainly put his life at great risk.  It is  my
             opinion  that  regardless  of  whether  [the  Appellant]   was
             previously targeted or not he will remain  at  risk  of  being
             identified and located by the Taliban  due  to  his  brother's
             position.  He will therefore remain at risk of being  targeted
             by Taliban sooner or later.  The fact that his brother is  out
             of reach of the  Taliban  (as  he  lives  in  palace  and  has
             protection) only provides an incentive for the Taliban  to  go
             after close relatives like [the Appellant] in order to send  a
             wider message  to  those  working  with  the  government  'the
             collaborators'."


23.  The references at paragraph 30 of the report to the  Taliban  compiling
    target lists is an echo of  the  evidence  given  by  Dr  Giustozzi  in
    respect of 'blacklists' that was considered in some detail by the Upper
    Tribunal in AS, and to which the First-tier Tribunal Judge herein  made
    reference at paragraph 63.


24.  The First-tier Tribunal  Judge's  approach  to  these  aspects  of  the
    expert report of Dr  Giustozzi  is  that  set  out  in  the  concluding
    sentences of paragraph 64, which I repeat:

         "However, [Dr Giustozzi] has not addressed the  conclusions  in  AS
         about the level of that risk.  I therefore do not find  his  report
         to be cogent enough evidence to justify departing from the guidance
         in AS."



25.  In my judgement that observation, that  evaluation  of  Dr  Giustozzi's
    evidence, was entirely open to the Judge on the materials  before  him.
    It cannot be disputed that the report identifies  some  risk,  but  the
    ultimate question is whether the level of risk is such as to reach  the
    - albeit - low  threshold  required  in  protection  cases:  was  it  a
    negligible risk, or a real risk?  It seems to me that it  was  open  to
    the Judge to conclude that the evidence did not address what  was  said
    about level of risk in AS, and did not otherwise provide  a  sufficient
    factual basis cogent enough  to  justify  departing  from  the  country
    guidance. The citation of statistics - which as I have noted  above  do
    not  distinguish  between  security  force  members  and  relatives  of
    security force members - even if showing an increase  in  the  combined
    figure over the last 10 months or so, did not require to be accepted as
    cogent evidence to upset the conclusion in AS that risk did  not  reach
    the 'protection' threshold.


26.  Accordingly I conclude that there was  no  error  of  approach  in  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge, and reject  the  Appellant's
    challenge.


Notice of Decision

27.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge  contained  no  error  of
    law and accordingly stands.


28.  The Appellant's appeal remains dismissed




Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


The above represents a corrected transcript of ex tempore reasons  given  at
the conclusion of the hearing.



Signed:                                 Date: 4 April 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis
