

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/12501/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester CJC                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 15 January 2019                         |On 14 May 2019                |
|                                           |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER

                                   Between

                                     FS
                          ANNONYMITY DIRECTION MADE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Bushall, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms Young, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless  the  Upper  Tribunal  or  a
Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  the  original
first Appellant in this determination identified as FS.

Introduction

       1. I have maintained the anonymity direction made in  the  First-tier
          Tribunal ('FTT').


       2. The appellant has appealed against the  FTT  decision,  which  was
          sent on 22 January 2019, to  dismiss  his  appeal  on  asylum  and
          human rights grounds.


       3. The appellant, a citizen of Iran of Kurdish ethnic origin,  is  30
          years old.  He claims that he would be persecuted if  returned  to
          Iran because of a  combination  of  his  Kurdish  ethnicity,  pro-
          Kurdish opinions likely to  be  imputed  to  him  by  the  Iranian
          authorities for reasons related to his sur  place  activities  and
          his conversion to Christianity.

       4. The appellant's claim for asylum was refused by the respondent  in
          a decision dated 10 October 2018.   The  respondent  relied  on  a
          previous  FTT  decision   dismissing   the   appellant's   appeal,
          following a hearing on heard on 7 March 2008.  The respondent  did
          not accept that the appellant is a genuine  Christian  convert  or
          that his sur place activities would lead to adverse interest  from
          the Iranian authorities.

Grounds of appeal

       5. The grounds of appeal submit that FTT Judge Birk:


          1) misapplied the country guidance in HB (Kurds)  Iran  CG  [2018]
             UKUT 00430 (IAC);


          2) acted procedurally unfairly in  using  his  own  experience  of
             coming from an evangelical Church as a yardstick  by  which  to
             measure   whether   the   appellant's   activities   constitute
             evangelising or proselytising activities.

       6. In a decision dated 18 February  2019  FTT  Judge  Saffer  granted
          permission to appeal on both grounds.

Hearing

       7. Ms Young conceded that the two grounds of  appeal  contain  errors
          of law such that the FTT decision should be set aside.


       8. Both representatives agreed that I should remake the  decision  in
          the Upper Tribunal ('UT') by allowing the appeal on the  basis  of
          the appellant's Kurdish ethnic origin together with his low  level
          sur place political activities.  I made it  clear  to  Ms  Bushall
          that I could not make any clear findings  on  the  genuineness  of
          the appellant's  claimed  conversion  to  Christianity.   This  is
          because the appellant was not  present  and  this  aspect  of  his
          claim remained in dispute.  Ms Bushall took instructions over  the
          phone with the assistance of an  interpreter  and  confirmed  that
          that the appellant was content  with  this  course.   I  therefore
          confirmed  that  the  appeal  is  allowed  on  Refugee  Convention
          grounds by consent,  and  that  a  short  written  decision  would
          follow.

Country guidance

       9. It is uncontroversial that  the  FTT  was  obliged  to  apply  the
          country guidance that as an illegal departee, the appellant  would
          be questioned on return - see SSH and  HR  (illegal  exit:  failed
          asylum seeker) Iran CG [2016] UKUT 308, as approved in  the  first
          headnote  of  HB.   In  SSH  the  Upper  Tribunal  found  that  if
          "particular concerns" arose, there would be a  period  of  further
          questioning, which carried with it a real risk  of  detention  and
          ill-treatment, and said this at [23]:

                 "In our view the evidence does not establish that a  failed
                 asylum  seeker  who  had  left  Iran  illegally  would   be
                 subjected on return to a period of detention or questioning
                 such that there is a real risk of Article 3  ill-treatment.
                 The evidence in our view shows no more than that they  will
                 be  questioned,  and  that  if  there  are  any  particular
                 concerns arising from their previous activities  either  in
                 Iran or in the United Kingdom or whichever country they are
                 returned from, then  there  would  be  a  risk  of  further
                 questioning, detention and potential ill-treatment. In this
                 regard, it is relevant to return to Dr Kakhki's evidence in
                 re-examination where he said that the treatment they  would
                 receive would depend on their individual case. If they  co-
                 operated and accepted that they left illegally and  claimed
                 asylum abroad then  there  would  be  no  reason  for  ill-
                 treatment, and questioning would  be  for  a  fairly  brief
                 period. That seems to us to sum up the position  well,  and
                 as a consequence we conclude that a person with no  history
                 other than that of being a failed  asylum  seeker  who  had
                 exited illegally and who could  be  expected  to  tell  the
                 truth when questioned would not face a real  risk  of  ill-
                 treatment during the period of questioning at the airport."

      10. The headnote of  HB  provides  the  following  additional  country
          guidance:

                 "(2)  Kurds  in  Iran  face  discrimination.  However,  the
                 evidence  does  not  support   a   contention   that   such
                 discrimination is, in general, at such a level as to amount
                 to persecution or Article 3 ill-treatment.


                 (3)    Since  2016  the  Iranian  authorities  have  become
                 increasingly  suspicious  of,  and  sensitive  to,  Kurdish
                 political activity. Those of  Kurdish  ethnicity  are  thus
                 regarded with even greater suspicion than hitherto and  are
                 reasonably likely to be subjected to heightened scrutiny on
                 return to Iran.


                 (4)   However, the mere fact of being a returnee of Kurdish
                 ethnicity with or without a valid  passport,  and  even  if
                 combined with illegal exit,  does  not  create  a  risk  of
                 persecution or Article 3 ill-treatment.


                 (5)   Kurdish  ethnicity  is  nevertheless  a  risk  factor
                 which, when combined with other factors, may create a  real
                 risk of persecution or Article  3  ill-treatment.  Being  a
                 risk factor it means that Kurdish ethnicity is a factor  of
                 particular significance when assessing risk.  Those  "other
                 factors" will include the matters identified in  paragraphs
                 (6)-(9) below.


                 (6)   A period  of  residence  in  the  KRI  by  a  Kurdish
                 returnee is  reasonably  likely  to  result  in  additional
                 questioning by the authorities on return. However, this  is
                 a factor that will be highly fact-specific and  the  degree
                 of interest that such residence will  excite  will  depend,
                 non-exhaustively,  on  matters  such  as  the   length   of
                 residence in the KRI, what the person concerned  was  doing
                 there and why they left.


                 (7)    Kurds  involved  in  Kurdish  political  groups   or
                 activity are at risk of  arrest,  prolonged  detention  and
                 physical abuse  by  the  Iranian  authorities.  Even  Kurds
                 expressing peaceful dissent or who speak out about  Kurdish
                 rights also face a real risk of persecution  or  Article  3
                 ill-treatment.


                 (8)   Activities that can be perceived to be  political  by
                 the  Iranian  authorities  include   social   welfare   and
                 charitable  activities  on   behalf   of   Kurds.   Indeed,
                 involvement with any organised activity on behalf of or  in
                 support of Kurds can be perceived  as  political  and  thus
                 involve  a  risk  of  adverse  attention  by  the   Iranian
                 authorities with the  consequent  risk  of  persecution  or
                 Article 3 ill-treatment.


                 (9)   Even 'low-level' political activity, or activity that
                 is perceived to be political, such as, by  way  of  example
                 only, mere possession of leaflets espousing  or  supporting
                 Kurdish rights, if discovered, involves the  same  risk  of
                 persecution or Article 3 ill-treatment. Each case  however,
                 depends on its own facts and an assessment will need to  be
                 made as to the nature of the material possessed and how  it
                 would be likely to be viewed by the Iranian authorities  in
                 the context of the foregoing guidance.


                 (10)   The Iranian authorities demonstrate  what  could  be
                 described as a 'hair-trigger' approach to  those  suspected
                 of  or  perceived  to  be  involved  in  Kurdish  political
                 activities or support for Kurdish rights. By 'hair-trigger'
                 it means that the threshold for suspicion is  low  and  the
                 reaction of the authorities  is  reasonably  likely  to  be
                 extreme."

      11. The Home Office Country Information and Guidance on Iran "Kurds
          and Kurdish political groups" version 2.0, July 2016 ("CIG")
          contains the following:

                 "3.1.1    Kurds in Iran face discrimination which affects
                 their access to basic services. However, in general, this
                 level of discrimination will not reach the level of being
                 persecutory.

                 3.1.2 Those involved in Kurdish political groups are
                 however, at risk of arbitrary arrest, prolonged detention
                 and physical abuse from the Iranian authorities .  Even
                 those who express peaceful dissent or who speak out about
                 Kurdish rights can be seen as a general threat and face a
                 real risk of persecution.

                 3.1.3 Family members of persons associated with a Kurdish
                 political group are also harassed and detained and may be
                 subject to inhumane treatment.

                 3.1.4       Where a person can demonstrate to a reasonable
                 degree of likelihood that they are known or likely to be
                 made known to the Iranian authorities on the basis of their
                 membership or perceived membership of a Kurdish political
                 group they should be granted asylum."

Error of law

      12. Ms Young was entirely correct to concede that the  FTT's  decision
          contains errors of law for the reasons set out in the  grounds  of
          appeal.

Ground one - country guidance

      13. The guidance in SSH and HB, in the context of  this  case  can  be
          summarised as follows:


              i) as an illegal departee from Iran, the  appellant  would  be
                 questioned at the point of return to  Iran  -  he  will  be
                 returned without a passport, having never  had  any  -  see
                 [97] of HB;
             ii) the initial  questioning  would  be  for  a  "fairly  brief
                 period" (at [12]  of  SSH  the  Internal  Organisation  for
                 Migration considered  that  in  the  context  of  voluntary
                 returnees, questioning might take a few hours);
            iii) if "particular concerns"  arose  from  previous  activities
                 either in Iran or in the United Kingdom, then  there  would
                 be the risk of  further  questioning  accompanied  by  ill-
                 treatment;
             iv) the assessment of whether "particular concerns" are  likely
                 to arise turns upon all the individual factors,  considered
                 cumulatively;
              v) however,  as   set  out  in  HB,  since  2016  the  Iranian
                 authorities have become  increasingly  suspicious  of,  and
                 sensitive to, Kurdish political activity. Those of  Kurdish
                 ethnicity are thus regarded  with  even  greater  suspicion
                 than hitherto and are reasonably likely to be subjected  to
                 heightened scrutiny on return to Iran.
             vi) in addition, the Iranian authorities demonstrate  a  'hair-
                 trigger' approach to those  suspected  to  be  involved  in
                 Kurdish  political  activities  i.e.  the   threshold   for
                 suspicion is low and the likely reaction extreme.
            vii) the appellant would be expected  to  tell  the  truth  when
                 questioned;
           viii) the evidence suggests no appetite to prosecute for  illegal
                 exit alone, but if there is another offence,  illegal  exit
                 will be added on, the  cases  where  illegal  exitees  were
                 imprisoned show much more by way of specific  activity,  as
                 opposed to simple imputation - see [31] of SSH;
             ix) this appellant is a failed asylum seeker  who  exited  Iran
                 illegally but there are additional matters relevant to  his
                 history and profile,  which  require  careful  scrutiny  in
                 light of the country guidance.

      14. SSH must be applied alongside BA (demonstrators in Britain -  risk
          on  return)  Iran  CG  [2011]  UKUT  36  and  HB.   Unfortunately,
          although Judge Birk  considered  the  nature  and  extent  of  the
          appellant's political activities in the UK at  [30]  and  [32]  in
          the context of the guidance provided in BA, in  order  to  support
          his conclusion at [32] that the appellant would not  come  to  the
          adverse attention of the authorities, but failed  to  ask  herself
          whether "particular concerns" would  arise  from  the  appellant's
          circumstances and characteristics.  These  include  the  following
          accepted facts:

           - The appellant is a Kurd.
           - He has been a low-level supporter of the KDPI in the UK and he
             has attended two meetings and a demonstration.
           - He has posted pro-Kurdish material on his Facebook page.
           - He left Iran illegally.

      15. At no stage in its decision did the  FTT  consider  whether  there
          was a real risk of questioning (as an illegal departee from  Iran)
          revealing these characteristics, and whether this would lead to  a
          period of  further  questioning  during  which  serious  harm  was
          reasonably likely.  As the grounds of appeal point out  even  very
          low  level  pro-Kurdish  political  activities  are  viewed   with
          heightened suspicion in Iran.  The FTT failed  to  properly  apply
          the guidance to this  effect  in  HB.   The  FTT  also  failed  to
          consider to what extent the appellant's activities  including  his
          Facebook  posts  would  emerge  upon  return  as   part   of   the
          authorities'  investigation  into  his  background  in  order   to
          determine whether there  were  any  "particular  concerns"  -  see
          [116] of HB.  I am therefore satisfied that the FTT erred  in  law
          in its application of the country guidance.

Ground 2

      16. I also accept that Ms Young was entirely correct to  concede  that
          it was  unfair  for  Judge  Birk  to  use  her  own  knowledge  or
          understanding of evangelism in the Christian faith as a  barometer
          by which to assess the appellant's claim that  he  evangelised  or
          conducted proselytising activities.  I am satisfied that this  has
          infected the finding that the appellant is not a genuine convert.

Disposal

      17. I have had regard to para 7.2 of the relevant  Senior  President's
          Practice Statement and  the  nature  and  extent  of  the  factual
          findings required in remaking the decision,  and  I  have  decided
          that this is an appropriate case to re-make the  decision  myself.



Re-making the decision

      18. The parties accept that the appeal should be  allowed  on  Refugee
          Convention grounds because there is a real risk that  the  Iranian
          authorities' will have "particular concerns" about the  appellant,
          by reason of the factors set out at  [14]  above.   The  appellant
          faces a real risk of  persecution  because  the  authorities  will
          impute an anti-regime political opinion to him as a  result  of  a
          combination of his Kurdish ethnic origin,  illegal  departure  and
          low level sur place  activities.   I  entirely  accept  that  both
          parties were correct to agree that this conclusion follows from  a
          proper application of HB, and for this reason there is no need  to
          provide any further reasons.


      19. I  have  overturned  the  FTT's  adverse  findings  regarding  the
          appellant's conversion to Christianity and claim  to  be  involved
          in an evangelical Church.  The  respondent  continues  to  dispute
          this issue.  However, I accept that both parties were  correct  to
          agree that given the positive conclusion that has been reached  on
          the remainder of the appellant's asylum claim, it  is  unnecessary
          to reach any findings on this discrete aspect of his claim.

Decision

      20. The FTT decision contains an error of law such that  the  decision
          is set aside.




      21.  I  remake  the  decision  by  allowing  the  appeal  on   Refugee
          Convention grounds.


Signed:
Ms M. Plimmer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date:
10 May 2019

