
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/12011/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 29 March 2019                     |On 17 April 2019                     |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                      M
                            (ANONYMITY DIRECTED)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs R Pettersen (Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr T Hussain (Counsel)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    This is the Secretary of State's appeal to the Upper Tribunal  brought
with the permission of a judge of the First-tier Tribunal, from  a  decision
of the First-tier Tribunal which  it  made  on  2  July  2018,  following  a
hearing of 15 June 2018 and which it sent to the parties  on  5  July  2018.
Its decision was to allow  the  claimant's  appeal  from  the  Secretary  of
State's decision of 3 November 2-017 refusing  to  grant  him  international
protection.

2.    By way of brief background, the claimant, who was  born  on  20  April
1993, is a Sudanese national hailing from Darfur. He  is  a  member  of  the
Tanjur tribe and is not,  therefore,  of  Arab  ethnicity.  He  applied  for
international protection in the United Kingdom (UK) on 9 May 2017,  claiming
to have been targeted by the Janjaweed militia who  had  harmed  members  of
his family. It was also part of his claim that he could not be  expected  to
internally relocate to Khartoum.

3.    The tribunal did not find everything  the  claimant  had  said  to  be
truthful. But it did accept that as a member of a  non-Arab  Darfuri  tribe,
he would face a real risk of serious harm if he were to return to Darfur  in
Sudan. Its  finding  as  to  that  has  not  been  the  subject  of  further
challenge. As to internal flight to Khartoum (the only place suggested as  a
viable  destination  within  Sudan)  it  concluded   that,   following   the
applicable  country  guidance  decisions  of   AA   (non-Arab   Darfuris   -
relocation) Sudan CG [2009] UKAIT 00056 and MM (Darfuris)  Sudan  CG  [2015]
UKUT 10 (IAC) it would be unduly harsh to expect him to relocate  there.  As
to the question of departure from country guidance on the point, it said  at
paragraph 29 of its written reasons of 2  July  2018  "I  am  bound  by  the
country  guidance  on  Sudan  as  expressed  in  AM  and  MM,  as  there  is
insufficient   evidence   to   demonstrate   the   situation   has   changed
significantly to allow me to depart therefrom".  The  reference  to  AM  was
clearly intended to be a reference to AA.

4.    The Secretary of State, in seeking  permission  to  appeal,  contended
that since it had been argued before the  tribunal  that  it  should  depart
from country guidance and since reliance had expressly  been  placed  as  to
that upon information contained in the Country Policy and  Information  Note
(CPIN) relating to non-Arab Darfuris of August 2017, the tribunal  had  been
required to say more than it did by way of explanation  for  its  conclusion
that departure was not appropriate.  In  short,  it  was  said  it  had  not
engaged with the evidence and the argument  provided  by  the  Secretary  of
State on the point. Permission to appeal was granted on that basis  and  the
matter was then listed for a hearing before the Upper Tribunal  (before  me)
so that consideration could be given as to whether the  tribunal  had  erred
in law and,  if  so,  what  should  flow  from  that.  The  directions  made
provision for any necessary remaking of the decision  to  be  undertaken  at
the same hearing. Representation at that hearing was as stated above  and  I
am grateful to each representative for their assistance and their  practical
and straightforward approach.

5.    Mrs Pettersen relied upon the grounds as submitted. Mr  Hussain,  once
I had made him aware of the fact that the tribunal's record  of  proceedings
did demonstrate that the argument regarding departure had been  put  to  the
tribunal, acknowledged that its failure to address the evidence in the  CPIN
in more detail amounted to "an omission". That was realistic of him and,  in
the face of  no  persuasive  argument  that  I  should  do  otherwise  being
offered, (or indeed being available) I have decided that I should set  aside
the tribunal's decision. That is because it did  fail  to  engage  with  the
evidence presented to it by the Secretary  of  State  as  contained  in  the
relevant CPIN. It failed,  therefore,  to  give  adequate  reasons  for  its
decision with respect to internal flight. But I would wish to  stress  that,
other than that, I regard the tribunal's written reasons as  being  careful,
thoughtful and impressive. Although in light of the above I must  set  aside
the tribunal's decision I have, therefore, decided  I  should  preserve  its
findings as to risk the claimant  would  face  as  a  non-Arab  Darfuri,  in
Darfur.

6.    Both representatives, once I had informed  them  that  I  was  setting
aside the tribunal's decision  on  the  above  basis,  indicated  they  were
content to immediately proceed to the remaking of the  decision.  There  was
no need for any further evidence as a prelude to remaking  and  so  no  need
for matters to be put back for a further hearing on a different  date.   The
sole issue as to remaking, in light of the above, was whether  I  should  or
should not depart from country guidance. The  test  for  doing  so  is  well
established albeit that it has been stated in a  number  of  different  ways
but, essentially, I was tasked with deciding whether the evidence before  me
amounted to cogent evidence of a durable change in  Khartoum  such  that  it
was not now, generally speaking, unduly harsh to expect a  non-Arab  Darfuri
to relocate to Khartoum.

7.    Mrs Pettersen argued that  I  should  conclude  that  there  had  been
sufficient relevant change in Khartoum. She  relied  upon  the  August  2017
CPIN. There was some discussion regarding paragraph  2.3.9  and  2.3.10.  of
that document. It  is  stated,  therein,  that  reports  are  now  available
indicating that whilst non-Arab Darfuris  have  reported  discrimination  in
Khartoum such persons are  no  longer  the  victim  of  widespread  systemic
targeting on the grounds of ethnicity. It is further stated that,  in  fact,
there  is  now  "a  significant  and  established  population"  of  non-Arab
Darfuris living in Khartoum.

8.    I accept that what is contained in the CPIN is sufficient to  give  me
pause for thought as to whether or  not  I  should  be  satisfied  that  the
relatively stringent test for departure from country guidance has been  met.
It is by now some very considerable period of time since AM was decided  and
even MM might be thought to be a little dated. If there  are,  indeed,  non-
Arab Darfuris living in Khartoum then that is capable of suggesting that  it
will not be unduly harsh, ordinarily, to expect  such  persons  to  relocate
there. But the previous country  guidance  decisions  did  involve  detailed
consideration  of  a  great  deal  of  relevant  background  material   then
available. All that has been placed before me to  evidence  material  change
is the CPIN itself. There are  references  in  there  to  a  Danish-UK  fact
finding mission which  resulted  in  the  production  of  a  report;  to  an
Australian Government report of April 2016  and  also  to  some  information
from the Foreign and Commonwealth Office. But those  reports/documents  were
not themselves placed before me though I do note there  is  attached  to  my
copy of the CPIN a letter of 29 September 2016 written by the ambassador  to
the British Embassy in Khartoum suggesting that concerns  of  discrimination
for non-Arab Darfuris in Khartoum  "are  not  overriding".  That  letter  is
relatively  brief  and  does  not  clearly  indicate  the  source   of   the
information contained within it. Whilst the CPIN does refer to sources  such
as the above reports, those reports have not themselves  been  provided.  In
the circumstances, and whilst  not  purporting  to  issue  Country  Guidance
myself (this is not a Country Guidance case) and whilst  not  purporting  to
make a decision which would bind any other judge at  any  level,  I  am  not
persuaded on the basis of the material currently before  me  that  departure
from Country Guidance is yet  appropriate  though  I  do  not  discount  the
possibility that I might have concluded  otherwise  had  the  above  reports
been made available to me. But, of course, that  would  have  depended  upon
what I had made of those reports and I do not know what I  would  have  made
of them.

9.     In  the  circumstances,  therefore,  whilst  I  have  set  aside  the
tribunal's decision I have gone on to remake the decision in the same  terms
and to allow the claimant's appeal from the decision  of  the  Secretary  of
State.



Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  of
law and is set aside. In remaking the decision, the  Upper  Tribunal  allows
the claimant's appeal from the Secretary of State's decision of  7  November
2017. It does so on asylum grounds (race) and on human rights grounds  under
Article 3 of the European Convention on Human Rights.


Signed:     Dated: 11 April 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway



Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal granted the  claimant  anonymity.  I  continue  that
grant under rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules  2008.
Accordingly, no report of these proceedings shall identify the  claimant  or
any member  of  his  family.  The  grant  applies  to  all  parties  to  the
proceedings. Failure to comply may result in contempt of court proceeding.


Signed:     Dated: 11 April 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway



To the Respondent

Fee award

Since no fee is payable and since I have allowed the appeal,  there  can  be
no fee award.


Signed:     Dated: 11 April 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway

