
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12311/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham CJC              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8th August 2019                   |On 12th September 2019               |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                 master M F
                         (ANONYMITY direction given)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S. F. Ell (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr C. McVeety (Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Phull, promulgated on 27th February 2019, following a hearing  at
    Birmingham on 3rd  January  2019.   In  the  determination,  the  judge
    allowed the appeal of  the  Appellant  on  human  rights  grounds,  but
    dismissed it on asylum grounds.  The  Appellant  appealed  against  the
    decision to refuse the appeal on asylum grounds.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Iraq, and was born  on  5th  June
    2001.  He appealed against the decision of  the  Respondent  dated  9th
    October 2018, refusing  his  claim  for  asylum  and  for  humanitarian
    protection pursuant to paragraph 339C of HC 395.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The essence of the Appellant's claim was well  set  out  by  the  judge
    below in the following terms.  It was recorded that he was  of  Kurdish
    ethnicity, came from Suleiman Beg, a sub district of Tuz Khurmatu,  and
    that in 2014 he and his brother were at their maternal uncle's home  in
    Kirkuk, when they heard that ISIS had attacked their home  in  Suleiman
    Beg.  Following the attack of Suleiman Beg, they continued to  live  in
    Kirkuk with their maternal uncle.   However,  the  maternal  uncle  was
    involved in a blood feud because he had killed  someone.   The  killing
    was prior to their moving in with their uncle in  Kirkuk.   There  were
    several threats made as a result of the blood feud.  Fearing for  their
    safety, their uncle arranged for them to flee Iraq (see paragraphs 8 to
    9 of the determination).

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge stated that, "I accept the Appellant's evidence  as  credible
    that in Kirkuk, his family had a blood feud with another family because
    he had killed someone and the victim's family were seeking revenge ..."
    (paragraph 24).  The judge went  on  to  refer  to  the  expert  report
    highlighting the risks to the Appellant in terms of  the  "tribal  dika
    (hit)" (see paragraph 24).  The judge also went on to say that, "I find
    that the Appellant has consistently stated that he cannot return to any
    part of Iraq because he has a fear of ISIS, has no family to  help  and
    support him on return and he  does  not  have  a  CSID  document  or  a
    passport" (paragraph 34). Even so, the judge went on to  conclude  that
    the appeal would be allowed  on  Articles  2  and  3  of  the  European
    Convention, but refused on asylum grounds.

The Hearing

 5. At the hearing before me  on  8th  August  2019,  there  was  agreement
    between Mr Ell, appearing on behalf of the Appellant, and  Mr  McVeety,
    appearing on behalf of the Respondent  Secretary  of  State,  that  the
    judge had erred  in  dismissing  the  appeal  on  asylum  grounds.   Mr
    McVeety, in particular, stated that although it would appear  that  the
    question about the "blood feud"  had  not  been  specifically  laboured
    before the judge, nevertheless, it formed  part  of  the  grounds,  and
    figured in the skeleton argument of the Appellant.  I would add to that
    that in addition to this there was extensive discussion  of  the  blood
    feud by the judge (from paragraph 21 onwards  to  paragraph  25).   The
    judge had also accepted that the Appellant has consistently stated that
    he cannot return to any part of Iraq because he has  a  fear  of  ISIS.
    Given  that  the  judge  does  not  actually  conclude  that   internal
    relocation is open to the Appellant,  I  accept  that  the  refusal  on
    asylum grounds, as contended for by Mr  Ell,  and  agreed  upon  by  Mr
    McVeety, is not sustainable.  Accordingly, the judge fell into error in
    this regard.

Remaking the Decision

 6. I have remade the decision on the basis of the findings of the Regional
    Judge, the evidence before her, and the submissions that I  have  heard
    today.  Given that there is agreement between  both  sides,  and  given
    what I have set out above, this appeal is allowed on asylum grounds  by
    the Appellant in this case.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  on
a point of law.  The decision shall be set aside.  I remake the decision  as
follows.  This appeal is allowed on asylum  grounds  as  well  as  on  human
rights grounds.

An anonymity direction is made.

The appeal is allowed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 10th September 2019




