
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12989/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 15 January 2018                            |On 6 February 2018            |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY

                                   Between

                                     AAS
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Nwaekwu, of Moorehouse Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms K Pal, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

1.   The appellant appeals, with permission, against a decision of Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal Paul, who in a determination promulgated on  18
    July 2017, dismissed his appeal against a decision to refuse  to  grant
    asylum.  The judge did not make an anonymity order but  I  consider  in
    the light of the facts in this case that it is appropriate to do so.

2.   The appellant arrived in Britain in 2009 as a student and had leave  in
    that capacity until  17  August  2015.   His  leave  was  curtailed  in
    December 2014  when  he  was  detained  whilst  undergoing  a  marriage
    ceremony.  He then claimed asylum, on the grounds that  he  would  face
    persecution on return to Pakistan because he was gay.  His  application
    was refused in May  2015  and  his  appeal  against  that  refusal  was
    dismissed by Immigration Judge Seelhoff on 5 February 2016.

3.   On 28 October 2016 he made  further  submissions  that  he  would  face
    persecution on return to Pakistan.  As  new  documentary  evidence  was
    provided it was decided, when his  application  was  refused,  that  it
    would be appropriate that he should  be  granted  a  further  right  of
    appeal.  The appeal came before Immigration Judge Paul on 29 June 2017.
     The basis of the appellant's claim to asylum was again that  he  would
    face persecution as a gay  man  in  Pakistan  and  that  he  was  in  a
    relationship with  another  Pakistani  man,  his  cousin,  SFA.   Judge
    Seelhoff had dismissed the first appeal because he had found that there
    were certain discrepancies in the evidence. He found that the appellant
    had not discharged the burden of proof upon him to  show  that  he  was
    gay.  It is of note that Judge Seelhoff did not state in terms that  he
    did not accept that the appellant was gay.  When the  further  evidence
    was submitted in the second application the appellant put in  a  bundle
    of documents showing that he was now married to SFA  and  that  he  had
    become involved with a large number of gay organisations.   There  were
    also witness statements from two friends, both of whom stated that they
    believed that the appellant was gay.   Moreover,  there  were  a  large
    number of photographs showing the appellant and SFA at  their  marriage
    ceremony as well as attending a number of gay events.

4.     The  judge,  when  hearing  the  appeal  correctly  referred  to  the
    determination of the first  judge  under  the  principles  set  out  in
    Devaseelan, stating that if an appellant  was  proceeding  to  rely  on
    facts that were not materially different from those put  to  the  first
    judge, then the second judge should regard the issues as settled by the
    first determination rather than allowing the matter to be  relitigated.
    He noted that the first determination had recorded a delay in  claiming
    asylum despite the fact that the appellant said  that  he  had  entered
    into a homosexual relationship in 2011 and, moreover, that there was  a
    lack of corroborative evidence.  There had been  no  evidence  to  show
    that the appellant was gay in the period of three years  prior  to  his
    arrest.  It was also pointed out that the appellant and SFA were  first
    cousins and it was  stated  that  the  appellant's  partner  had  given
    evidence that was designed to mislead the Home Office.

5.   The judge did refer to the consideration of the further documents  made
    by the respondent and  to  the  witnesses  and  also  set  out  further
    evidence given at the hearing.  In paragraphs 24 onwards he set out his
    conclusions and reasons.  In paragraph 27 he said that,  from  a  close
    reading of the letter  from  the  respondent,  granting  the  appellant
    permission to marry,  did not indicate  that  the  Secretary  of  State
    accepted that it was a genuine marriage.

6.   The judge went on to say that what was striking by  the  evidence  that
    had been adduced before him was that nothing had been provided to  deal
    with the situation of the appellant and his partner in the period prior
    to the first Tribunal decision and that there was no  corroboration  of
    their claims prior to that decision.  The two witnesses  who  had  been
    called stated they had met the appellant and his partner in  June  2016
    through ELOP, a gay organisation, and  he  stated  that  that  did  not
    provide corroborative evidence to the standard required. He said  that:
    -


         "It is  self-evident  that  the  contact  with  ELOP  has  all  the
         hallmarks of being a self-serving process, and in any  event  these
         two witnesses cannot speak about the appellant's relationship prior
         to that."


    He stated that the evidence of the witnesses added nothing to the case.

7.   He then went on to refer to a joint bank account  on  which  there  had
    been no activity, stating that he believed that that bank  account  had
    only been opened in January 2017 and until 5 June 2017 there  had  been
    no activity therein.   He  said  that  it  was  inconsistent  that  the
    appellant and his partner were living as a married couple "so to speak"
    if they had a joint bank account which was not being used.

8.   Finally, in paragraphs 30 and 31 the judge said:-


         "30. Taken as a whole, therefore, I am satisfied that the  decision
             of  the  first  judge  involved  an  exhaustive  and   careful
             examination of all the evidence that was properly  adduced  at
             the time.  The appellant and his partner have clearly had  the
             advantage of legal advice, at the point of which they attended
             the original marriage interview, and were fully  aware  as  to
             what evidence they needed to produce.  They failed to do so.


         31.  None of the evidence that has been produced at this appeal  is
             corroborative of the alleged relationship in the period up and
             until the first decision of the Tribunal.  In my view,  it  is
             also self-serving and of  an  extremely  tenuous  nature.   It
             follows, therefore, that I am not satisfied that the appellant
             has established, to the  requisite  standard,  that  they  are
             engaged in a gay relationship."


9.   He therefore went on to dismiss the appeal.

10.  The grounds of appeal on which Mr Nwaekwu relied argued that the  judge
    had misinterpreted the guidance in Devaseelan (Second Appeals - ECHR  -
    Extra-Territorial Effect)  Sri  Lanka*  [2002]  UKAIT  00702  where  in
    paragraphs 37, 38 and 39 it was stated that findings of fact made by  a
    first Adjudicator could be built upon and as a result  the  outcome  of
    the hearing before the second Adjudicator might be quite different from
    that which might have  been  expected  from  a  reading  of  the  first
    determination  only  and  that  it  was  important  that   the   second
    Adjudicator must be careful to recognise that the issue before  him  is
    not the issue before the first Adjudicator.

11.  Paragraph 39 of that determination stated:-

         "39. In our view the second Adjudicator should treat  such  matters
             in the following way.


             (1)  The first Adjudicator's determination  should  always  be
                  the starting-point.  It is the authoritative assessment of
                  the Appellant's status  at  the  time  it  was  made.   In
                  principle  issues  such  as  whether  the  Appellant   was
                  properly represented, or whether  he  gave  evidence,  are
                  irrelevant to this.


             (2)    Facts   happening   since   the   first   Adjudicator's
                  determination can always be  taken  into  account  by  the
                  second  Adjudicator.   If  those  facts  lead  the  second
                  Adjudicator to the conclusion that, at  the  date  of  his
                  determination  and  on  the  material  before   him,   the
                  appellant  makes  his  case,  so  be  it.   The   previous
                  decision, on the material before the first Adjudicator and
                  at that date, is not inconsistent.


             (3)   Facts   happening   before   the   first   Adjudicator's
                  determination but having no relevance to the issues before
                  him can  always  be  taken  into  account  by  the  second
                  Adjudicator.  The first Adjudicator  will  not  have  been
                  concerned with such facts, and his determination is not an
                  assessment of them."

12.  The grounds argue that the judge had erred in his consideration of  the
    further evidence and in particular the fact that the appellant and  his
    partner were now married.  They refer to the fact that  Judge  Seelhoff
    had stated:-


         "Assessing all the evidence in this case in the round I  find  that
         while I cannot exclude the possibility that the appellants are  gay
         and in a genuine relationship with each other  I  do  not  consider
         that they have proved that this is  likely  to  be  the  case  with
         reference to the lower standard of proof and accordingly I  do  not
         consider that it  is  likely  that  either  would  be  at  risk  of
         persecution on return  to  Pakistan  on  account  of  their  sexual
         orientation.  I do consider it  likely  that  the  claim  has  been
         manufactured so as to avoid the  appellants  having  to  return  to
         Pakistan."


13.  It was argued that  the  further  evidence  was  crucial  in  that  the
    Secretary of State had investigated the appellant's  relationship  with
    his partner and found it to be  genuine  before  issuing  a  letter  of
    entitlement to marry and secondly, the fact that  the  marriage  itself
    went ahead in light of  instructions  given  to  registrars  to  report
    suspicious marriages cast doubt on the original findings  made  by  the
    first judge.  It was therefore argued that the judge had  not  properly
    weighed up the further evidence before him.  It was also argued that it
    was unfair for the judge to raise the issue of the bank statements  and
    that had not been put to the appellant.

14.  Ms Pal when replying to the submissions made stated that the judge  had
    noted the evidence of the civil partnership and was  clearly  aware  of
    that development and had also set out details of the evidence which  he
    had considered.  He had also  referred  to  the  evidence  of  the  two
    further witnesses.  She  asked  me  to  find  that  he  had  reached  a
    conclusion which was fully open to him on the evidence.

Discussion

15.  I consider that there is a material error of law in  the  determination
    of the Immigration Judge.  While I consider that there is no  merit  in
    the assertion that the Home Office must have accepted the  marriage  as
    genuine before issuing  the  certificate  of  entitlement  as  that  is
    clearly not the case and, further, I do not place weight  on  the  fact
    that the judge did not put to the appellant the  fact  that  there  had
    been no movement in the joint account,   I do consider that  the  judge
    erred in law in his consideration of the additional evidence.

16.  He heard evidence from supporting witnesses, both of whom  stated  that
    the appellant was gay.  The judge  does  not  say  whether  or  not  he
    considered that those witnesses were knowingly not telling the truth or
    that what they said was not credible nor did he give reasons why he did
    not accept their evidence.   Indeed, there does not appear  to  be  any
    record of what evidence they gave, let alone  the  judge's  conclusions
    thereon.  Moreover, there is a vast quantity of additional evidence  of
    the appellant and his partner taking  part  in  gay  organisations  and
    events.  The judge merely dismisses this as  self-serving.   I  do  not
    consider that that conclusion is sufficient, given  the  membership  of
    the various groups which the appellant and  his  partner  have  joined.
    There is nothing whatsoever to indicate that the appellant was  put  on
    notice that  that  evidence  would  not  be  accepted  or  why  it  was
    considered  to  be  self-serving.   Similarly,  the  evidence  of   the
    photographs of the marriage and the events  leading  thereto  does  not
    appear to have been analysed.

17.  Given the low standard of proof, I consider  that  the  judge  did  not
    analyse sufficiently the evidence before him  and  in  fact  did  place
    inappropriate weight on the evidence  of  Judge  Seelhoff.   For  these
    reasons I set aside the determination of the judge and direct that this
    appeal proceed to a hearing de novo.

18.  Given the terms of the  Senior  President  of  Tribunal's  direction  I
    consider it appropriate that this appeal proceed to a hearing afresh on
    all issues in the First-tier.

19.  It is  appropriate  that  the  appellant's  representatives  produce  a
    further indexed bundle of documents with a  skeleton  which  lists  the
    various events which the appellant attended and their dates as well  as
    details of the organisations of which he is a member.  I would add that
    I  have  made  this  decision  in  the  knowledge  that  SFA's  appeal,
    PA/10249/2017, was dismissed and that an application for permission  in
    the First-tier has been refused.



Notice of Decision
The decision of the Judge in the First-tier is set aside and the  appeal  is
remitted to the First-tier for a hearing afresh on all grounds.


Direction
The appellant must serve a indexed  bundle  of  documents  together  with  a
skeleton argument which will contain a list of the events the  appellant  as
attended cross reference to the  photographs  and  other  documents  in  the
bundle.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed:  [pic]                      Date: 2 February 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy

