
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12125/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester via Skype                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 16 December 2020                          |On 13 January 2021            |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                     FDH
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr Islam instructed by Fountain Solicitors (Walsall).

For the Respondent: Mr Tan Senior Home Office Presenting officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS


     1. By a decision promulgated on 3 July 2020 the Upper Tribunal found a
        judge of the First-tier Tribunal had  erred  in  law  in  a  manner
        material to the  decision  to  dismiss  the  appeal  and  set  that
        decision aside.
     2. The  scope  of  this  rehearing  is  limited  to  the  question  of
        reasonableness of  internal  relocation  within  the  IKR  or  Iraq
        generally in light of the country material and preserved findings.







Background


     3. The core of the appellant's case is that he faces a  real  risk  of
        being killed on return to Iraq for not upholding the family honour.
        The preserved findings are those set out at [40 - 41] of the First-
        tier decision in which the Judge writes:


        40.  Therefore, I am prepared to accept that the appellant's mother
             did elope with [K] and the  appellant  based  on  his  uncle's
             tribal beliefs, was told that to protect the family honour, he
             had to kill her and he refused. I am satisfied  that,  as  the
             notional head of the household, the  appellant  would  be  the
             first in line expected to uphold the family honour  and  would
             be considered to have himself dishonoured the family if he did
             not. Page 253 makes it clear that wrong-doing  against  honour
             is considered unforgivable and this means  that  the  risk  of
             violence can continue for years to come because 'the matter of
             a tarnished honour of a family not yet rectified, is  eternal'
             (page 257). The objective evidence supplied by  the  appellant
             makes it clear that men, who are at risk of honour crimes, are
             in real danger because honour is a genuine issue and it  would
             [be] shameful for a man under threat of  an  honour  crime  to
             approach the police for protection and the only way a man  who
             fears revenge could be protected by the police,  would  be  to
             remain in police custody, but that is not considered to  be  a
             durable solution.


        41.  Having considered the evidence and the background  sources,  I
             am satisfied that the appellant is a member  of  a  particular
             social group (PSG) - a man who is perceived to have failed  to
             protect his family honour and who fears therefore fears honour
             violence. That is not a characteristic he can  change  because
             it is based upon the perception of the  appellant  by  society
             and, given the evidence about tarnished honour being  eternal,
             the appellant will find that label very hard to shake. The IKR
             is still very tribal as the background  evidence  acknowledges
             and therefore anyone  who  transgresses  tribal  law  will  be
             regarded as being different.


     4. The appellant's mother is a widow but a proposal of marriage by [K]
        at the house of the appellant's maternal uncle [S], the head of the
        family, was refused with [S] stating that if she married  again  it
        will bring shame upon the family.
     5. The appellant's chronology shows that in September/October 2018 [K]
        attended [S's] house with elders  of  his  tribe  and  an  Imam  to
        propose a third time but that [S]  ordered  another  uncle  of  the
        appellant [M] to get KDP gunmen. The situation deteriorated and [K]
        was ordered to leave the house.
     6. In February 2019, the appellant was told on the telephone that  his
        mother had eloped with [K].
     7. On 1 March 2019, the chronology shows that [S] was contacted by [K]
        on the telephone. [S] became very angry and declared  he  will  get
        revenge upon [K] and the appellant's mother. [S] handed  a  gun  to
        the appellant and ordered him to find  his  mother  and  kill  her.
        When the appellant refused, he was beaten by [S].
     8. [K's] house was raided by the appellant's uncles and  shot  at  and
        [S] again told the appellant he  must  kill  his  mother.  When  he
        refused, [S] started to  beat  him  again  but  was  stopped  by  a
        paternal uncle [H]. The appellant  claimed  that  later  that  same
        evening [S] beat him again when he refused to kill his mother  once
        more, pulled out his gun, and tried  to  shoot  him,  although  the
        appellant was saved by another uncle.
     9. As a result, the appellant was told by one of his aunts that he had
        to leave as [S] will kill him. Another uncle assisted the appellant
        to leave Erbil by car, in which he travelled to the Turkish  border
        and from there left the country with the  assistance  of  an  agent
        arranged by the uncle.
    10. Although in his submissions Mr Tan suggested some  aspects  of  the
        appellants claim "did not add up", the findings of  the  First-tier
        Tribunal have not been set aside and  it  was  not  made  out  they
        should be at this late stage.




Discussion



    11. The appellants home area, and that of his family, is Erbil.
    12. A number of sources of country  material  were  identified  in  the
        Error of law hearing as follows:


       21. The reference by the Judge to page 261 of the appellant's bundle
           is a reference to a page in a  document  headed  "Honour  Crimes
           against men in KRI. Availability of Protection".  On  that  page
           there is reference to a person who claimed  to  have  personally
           experience  of  a  related  threat  who  was  able  to  stay  in
           Sulaymaniyah as a result of the fact the father of his wife  was
           unaware of his presence in  the  IKR,  indicating  that  persons
           father in law did not have sufficient influence to find him.
       22. What there is not in the decision, is  reference  to  any  other
           aspect of that report.  In  Chapter  3  headed  availability  of
           protection, page 259 of the bundle, it is written:


             Khanim R. Latif, Asuda Sulemaniyah, stated that  male  victims
             of honour disputes are much less likely  than  women  to  find
             assistance and protection from  the  police  and/or  from  the
             authorities as well as NGOs.  Basically,  men  who  are  under
             threat of another crime, such as killing, only have the option
             to flee the country.


       23. The same report records there  are  shelters  for  accommodating
           women but no NGOs or governmental institutions that address  the
           issue of men as victim of honour threats. Despite this  Dr  Jwan
           Ihsan Fawzi, University of Sulaymaniyah, is recorded  as  having
           stated he did not consider that assistance to  men  who  may  be
           victims of honour revenges would never take  place  in  the  KRI
           (IKR) as crimes are punishable according to the  law,  and  that
           the fact a court will take on a case relating to  honour  crimes
           did not mean there was any guarantee that the  victim  would  be
           safe for that reason.
       24. In section 3.1 of the report headed "Protection  and  assistance
           from the police" it is written:


             Kajaw Jamal Jalal, Hawlati newspaper  Sulemaniyah,  considered
             that when men are at risk of being victims of  honour  crimes,
             they are in real danger. Honour is a genuine  issue  it  would
             often be shameful for a male under threat of honour  crime  to
             approach the police  for  protection.  Should  a  man  request
             assistance and protection from the police, it is by  no  means
             certain that the police would be able to  address  the  threat
             against him permanently.


             In some cases, the  police  might  attempt  to  reconcile  the
             parties involved in  the  conflict.  However,  one  cannot  be
             confident that a police officer  would  consider  the  alleged
             threat against the claimant as a genuine issue. On  the  other
             hand, the police would allow  the  claimant  to  file  a  case
             against his alleged perpetrator.


             Hassan Berwari, Diakonia Dahuk, stated that  sexual  relations
             between an unmarried couple is considered a crime according to
             tribal tradition. Should a male  offender  fear  revenge  from
             relatives of the woman with whom he  has  had  a  relationship
             approach  the  police,  he  would  most  likely   be   offered
             protection. However, the only  way  possible  for  him  to  be
             protected would be to be kept in police custody. At  the  same
             time, the police would most likely try to solve the  issue  by
             requesting the tribal leaders to settle the  dispute.  It  was
             emphasised that if a married woman has a  sexual  relationship
             with another man,  she  would  definitely  be  killed  by  her
             husband's family or tribe due to their perception of honour.


             DVW  Sulemaniyah,  informed  that  those  men  who  lives  are
             threatened due to an on offence can be protected by the police
             temporarily. Protection can be given by permitting  them  [men
             at risk] to stay in police detention.
             Hassan Berwari, Diakonia, Dahuk, stressed that the authorities
             will not be able to protect a man at risk of an  honour  crime
             in the long run. It is not  a  durable  solution  to  stay  in
             prison.


             Dr Jwan Ihsan Fawzi, University of Sulemaniyah, stated that to
             approach the police in an attempt to avoid becoming  a  victim
             of an honour crime, is not a feasible solution. The  influence
             and power of the offending family may well  be  stronger  than
             the authority of the police.  The  vast  majority  of  persons
             under  threat  from  honour  crimes  would  never   seek   the
             protection of the police. Many police officers are  influenced
             by tribal authority and tradition. It was added that the local
             community is likely to support tribal solutions with regard to
             offences of honour, even when this involves the killing of the
             offender/offenders.


             Kajaw Jamal Jalal, Hawlati newspaper, Sulemaniyah,  emphasised
             that the course of action police in KRI is not  compatible  to
             action taken by police in Europe or Canada  for  example.  The
             only option in KRI is that the police may offer  a  man  about
             risk of honour crime protection in detention.


             Kajaw Jamal Jalal, Hawlati newspaper, Sulemaniyah stated  that
             he had personally experienced on a related threats. The father
             of his wife does not accept her marriage, and the only  reason
             that Kajaw Jamal Jalal dares to stay  in  Sulemaniyah  is  the
             fact that the father of his wife is unaware of his presence in
             the KRI. Kajaw Jamal Jalal stated that should  the  father  of
             his wife attempt to trace him in order to restore  his  family
             honour, the police would not be able to do much to protect him
             against the threats related to honour. The police are unlikely
             to act before a crime of honour has been committed.


             Ari Rafiq and Huda S. Zangana, DVW, Erbil, emphasized that the
             protection of men by the police can never be 100% but that the
             police can attempt to reconcile the parties  involved  in  the
             matter.


             There is no guarantee that such a settlement will be a lasting
             solution There may be circumstances where the  police  do  not
             have the power or influence to reconcile the parties.  It  was
             added that the KRG authorities are unable to  protect  a  male
             offender of honour for the rest of his life.


             Sardasht  Abdulrahman  Majid  and  Aree  Jaza  Mahmoud,  DHRD,
             Sulemaniyah, had never heard of a man involved in  a  conflict
             concerning honour seeking the assistance of  the  authorities.
             Theoretically a male offender, who has been  threatened  as  a
             result of a  sexual  affair,  can  approach  the  police,  but
             Sardasht  Abdulrahman  Majid  and  Aree  Jaza  Mahmoud,  DHRD,
             Sulemaniyah, had never heard of this being the case.


             A man might seek protection of the police or the DVW, however,
             this is not a durable solution. If  the  offender  has  had  a
             sexual relationship with an underage girl, i.e. a  girl  under
             18, he would be detained by the police. On the other hand,  if
             the girl is not under age the  police  might  accept  that  he
             filed a complaint at the station.


             It was stressed that it is not illegal by law for a girl  over
             18 years of age  to  have  consensual  sex,  however,  it  was
             emphasised that according to traditional  values  of  society,
             she would risk being punished by her family or tribe or having
             such relations. It was added that whether or  not  the  police
             would be willing to address  his  complaint,  depends  on  the
             societal status of the man's family.


             Mahidi M. Qadr and Fakhir Ibrahim, PAO. Erbil stated  that  it
             is unlikely that a person  involved  in  adultery  would  seek
             protection with the police, as this is considered  a  criminal
             act. Man could seek temporary protection  in  police  custody,
             however, upon release he would  still  be  at  risk  from  the
             family of the woman.




       25. The above sets out the context in  which  the  issue  of  family
           honour arises in light  of  the  claim  the  appellant's  mother
           eloped with [K] and the issue of family  honour  arising  having
           been found credible, which  the  appellant  failed  to  satisfy.
           There is therefore far more to this section of the reports  than
           the entry at page 261 referred to by the Judge.
       26. It is also not clear how the Judge has factored section  3.6  of
           the report into account in the decision-making process. This  is
           headed "Protection by going into hiding or fleeing the  country"
           in which it is written:


             DVW Sulemaniyah, dated that the only solution for a  man  need
             of protection is to disappear, i.e. to  escape  abroad.  There
             are examples of men who have left for Iran, Syria, and  Turkey
             or even to Europe in order to seek protection  against  honour
             killing. If a man from a poor family marries a  woman  from  a
             more influential or rich family if he stays in Iraq.  However,
             it could also be the case of the family of  the  woman  simply
             chooses never to see her again and that she is outcast by  her
             own father.


             DVW Sulemaniyah, explained that a man will find it easier than
             a woman to travel abroad on his own. On the other hand a woman
             would more easily be able to access protection and  assistance
             from the police, the DVW and NGO's in KRI.


             Sardasht  Abdulrahman  Majid  and  Aree  Jaza  Mahmoud,  DHRD,
             Sulemaniyah, stressed that if the couple is  unable  to  marry
             for whatever reason, then the only durable solution  available
             to the male offender would be to "runaway".


             Mahdi M. Qadr and Fakhir Ibrahim, PAO, Erbil, aware  of  cases
             where compensation had been demanded from a young man's family
             where this has not  been  feasible  for  the  family.  It  was
             explained that even the family of the boy [the offender]  will
             not defend the young man could even agree to kill him. A young
             man is likely to flee in order to find protection.


             Concerning the crimes of honour committed against  men,  Mahdi
             M. Qadr and Fakhir Ibrahim, PAO, Erbil,  confirmed  that  such
             cases existed [in KRI], and that person are likely to flee  to
             avoid persecution.


             When asked which options a man at risk of an honour crime  has
             to seek protection, DVW  Sulemaniyah,  stated  that  the  only
             option would be to seek protection abroad. Reference was  made
             to a recent incident in a part  of  the  city  of  Sulemaniyah
             called Rizgari where a couple in love had married.  They  were
             married for three months, however without the consent  of  the
             girl's brother or uncle. As a result the woman's uncle and her
             brother  came  to  Sulemaniyah  and  killed  the  husband  and
             seriously wounded the wife who was pregnant.  The  police  are
             now investigating the case and they consider it to be a murder
             case. If caught and tried in  court,  the  uncle  and  brother
             would risk being charged with murder according to the law.


             According to DVW Sulemaniyah,  the  truth  is,  that  if  they
             [couples marrying against the will of their families] stay  in
             Iraq, they are at risk of being killed by the family.


             Jwan Ihsan Fawi, University  of  Sulemaniyah,  explained  that
             when reconciliation is not durable the  man  at  risk  can  do
             nothing but try to flee the country. He might even attempt  to
             relocate within Iraq all the while changing his name to  avoid
             being found.


             Kajaw Jamal Jalal, Hawlati newspaper, Sulemaniyah  informs  it
             is not safe for a man under threat from  an  honour  crime  to
             remain in Iraq. It might not even be safe  for  him  to  leave
             Iraq for e.g. Iran, Turkey, or Syria. Even if the person under
             threat stays abroad for  a  number  of  years  and  eventually
             returns to KRI, it is not certain that  he  would  be  out  of
             danger before the honour of the family involved is restored.


             Hassan Berwari, Diakonia, Dahuk,  stated  that  relocation  to
             another part of KRI was [is]  not  an  option  as  the  family
             seeking him is likely to pursue him.


             Edrees Salih, Erbil, informed that it would not be  an  option
             for a man at risk of another crime to go into  hiding  for  an
             extended period of time.


             Regarding  runaways,  Khanim  R.  Latif,  Asuda,  Sulemaniyah,
             explained that a man who  has  offended  the  family's  honour
             could always be victim to an honour crime.  Khanim  R.  Latif,
             Asuda, Sulemaniyah, referred to the above-mentioned case  from
             Rizgari, Sulemaniyah. In this case the man of a runaway couple
             was killed by members of the woman's family and the woman  was
             seriously wounded. The woman was subsequently abandoned by her
             own family. However, the father of the male victim offered  to
             adopt the woman and her daughter. Investigation of the case is
             still ongoing, and the woman remains under threat from her own
             family as the issue has not yet been settled.


             However, it was added that even when a man at risk  of  honour
             killing escapes abroad, there is no guarantee that you will be
             safe, not even in Europe. It is the obligation of the  father,
             or as a male members, of the offended family  to  re-establish
             the family's honour, and that may often involve killing of the
             offender.


    13. It is not suggested the appellant will  be  able  to  live  in  his
        immediate home area as the Judge has found the threat from  [S]  is
        credible and it was not made out he will  be  able  to  live  there
        without being discovered by [S].
    14. It was suggested by Mr Tan that the appellant can live elsewhere in
        the IKR as [S] is not as powerful as he claims and will not be able
        to find him.
    15. It was not suggested the appellant is able to relocate to Bagdad or
        anywhere outside the IKR on the facts.
    16. I also accept as credible the appellants claim that even though one
        of his aunts and uncles helped him escape and leave  the  IKR  they
        are unlikely to assist him in returning and  resettling  out  of  a
        fear that if this was discovered by [S], it  would  place  them  at
        risk too.
    17. The appellant will therefore have to return and  establish  himself
        without the benefit of a family network or support.
    18. It is noted that [S] did not find the appellant during the time  he
        was hiding near the Turkish border  but  that  is  not  the  issue.
        Although  Mr  Tan  submitted  there  was   no   evidence   of   the
        interrogation of family members  by  [S]  to  ascertain  where  the
        appellant was, it is not clear how the appellant  as  a  person  in
        hiding and later in the UK could have discovered what [S] was doing
        as he has had no contact with his immediate family in Iraq.
    19. I note Mr Tan's submission that the question of honour affects  all
        male members of the family but, even if that is so, it a  preserved
        finding that the appellant was told to kill  his  mother  which  he
        refused to do making him the target of a related reprisal.
    20. The submission of Mr Tan in relation  to  the  evidence  concerning
        whether court proceedings had been issued to arrest the appellant's
        mother or whether a named military figure had  verbally  instructed
        that the appellant's mother's photograph  should  be  sent  to  all
        checkpoints and that she should be arrested if encountered, as  the
        appelanst alleged he heard, was contradictory is noted.
    21. Mr Tan also submitted by reference to the country guidance case  of
        SMO that as the appellant was required the use of his CSID  in  his
        daily life and business affairs he would know his CSID  number  and
        will be able to recall the same, but that was not put the appellant
        in cross-examination and nor was the submissions that  friends  and
        the appellants former business partner will be willing and able  to
        assist him with obtaining documentation. No submissions  were  made
        regarding the ability of the  appellant  to  obtain  a  replacement
        identity card in light  of  the  abolition  of  the  CSID  and  its
        replacement with  the  new  Iraqi  identity  document  and  interim
        temporary document referred to in the country material. In light of
        the inability of the appellant to be able to seek  assistance  from
        other male members of his immediate family it was  not  established
        that he will be able to redocument himself in the United Kingdom.
    22. In relation to risk on return, the appellant's case concerning  his
        mother and the events giving  rise  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
        findings have been found to be  credible.  To  the  lower  standard
        applicable in a protection appeal it has  not  been  made  out  the
        appellant's claim that a paternal uncle assisted him  leaving  Iraq
        as a result of the risk he  faced  at  the  hands  of  [S]  is  not
        credible, and nor is the appellant's assertion  that  other  family
        members whilst willing to help him leave Iraq would not be  willing
        to expose themselves to possible harm by enabling him to return and
        re-establish himself in his home country.
    23. The appellant claimed that his maternal uncle [S]  is  sufficiently
        powerful or of influence to enable him to track down the  appellant
        in the IKR if he is returned. The photographic evidence  shows  the
        person the appellant claims to be  his  uncle  with  others  either
        carrying weapons  or  near  weapons  including  armoured  vehicles,
        rocket launchers, etc. To the lower standard it  appears  that  the
        evidence does establish that [S] is either a person involved in the
        peshmerga or has a  close  association  with  persons  within  that
        organisation. There is, in addition, the tribal element  identified
        by the First-tier Tribunal. The appellants evidence,  either  as  a
        result of a court order or word-of-mouth based upon what he  claims
        he overheard, is that the photograph of his mother and her name has
        been circulated to the checkpoints. The country material refers  to
        frequency of checkpoints and need for identity  documents  to  pass
        through  the  same  meaning  there  is  a  possibility   that   the
        appellant's return will be discovered and passed  to  the  military
        commander who ordered the photograph to be circulated  and  through
        him to [S]. It is therefore not necessary, to the applicable  lower
        standard, for the appellant  to  establish  that  [S]  is  powerful
        enough in his own right to discover the appellant's return  on  his
        own. It was not made out why, if the majority of what the appellant
        had said has been accepted as credible by the First-tier  Tribunal,
        and  in  the  absence  of  persuasive  countervailing  evidence  or
        submissions, and  in  light  of  the  evidence  in  the  chronology
        disclosing the extent of [S's] anger in relation  to  sisters  (the
        appellant's mother's) actions, that the appellant's claim  relating
        to their being a real risk from [S] is not credible too.
    24. The key question when discussing internal relocation is whether  it
        is reasonable  in  all  the  circumstances.  The  country  material
        clearly shows there is no effective support for  the  appellant  in
        the situation in which he will find himself other than  to  confine
        himself in a cell  in  a  police  station  or  live  in  isolation,
        effectively as a hermit. It is not made out that having to  isolate
        away from the community and only been permitted to  remain  at  the
        whim  of  enforcement   services   is   reasonable   in   all   the
        circumstances. The appellant will not be able to return to  another
        part of the IKR and live as near a normal life as he can.
    25. The country material speaks of the  possibility  of  reconciliation
        though  the  intervention  of  tribal  elders,  but  it   was   not
        established on the evidence tat his is  a  viable  option.  In  any
        event, if the appelanst  had  to  be  personally  involved  in  the
        process, [S] would be aware of the appellants return.
    26. In summary, it is not made  out  the  appellant  will  be  able  to
        redocument himself such that he can return to Iraq in light of  the
        lack of evidence of possession of his CSID, the failure  to  pursue
        in cross-examination whether he could remember the  details,  or  a
        member of his friendship group assist  him,  or  in  light  of  the
        current situation that prevails in light of the introduction of the
        new Iraqi identity card. In light of the preserved findings of  the
        First-tier Tribunal and in light of the  absence  of  any  credible
        evidence the appellant will receive support from any of his  family
        members in Iraq, it is made out it is not reasonable  in  light  of
        the country information for the appellant to internally relocate to
        another part of the IKR. The evidence supports the comment made  in
        one of the reports referred to in the error of  law  decision  that
        the only realistic option for a male found to  be  at  risk  of  an
        honour killing is to leave Iraq. The appellant chose to leave  Iraq
        and there is, on  the  specific  facts  of  this  appeal,  credible
        evidence to show that this  is  the  only  realistically  available
        option to him. It is also of relevance that,  as  accepted  by  the
        First-tier Tribunal, honour is unforgivable  meaning  the  risk  of
        violence can continue for years  to  come  because  the  matter  of
        tarnished honour of the family not yet rectified is eternal. It  is
        not reasonable for  the  appellant  to  have  to  effectively  hide
        forever to avoid harm from [S].
    27. I find the appellant has established the lower applicable  standard
        the causal link between the reason he has been found to be a member
        of a PSG and the real risk of harm  from  [S]  for  the  breach  of
        family honour sufficient to entitle him to a grant of international
        protection.
    28. This decision sets no precedent and nor is it intended to do so. It
        is a decision made on the specific facts  of  this  appeal  and  in
        light of the preserved findings of the First-tier Tribunal, on  the
        basis of which this appeal is allowed.

Decision

    29. I remake the decision as follows. This appeal is allowed.

   Anonymity.


    30. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)  of
        the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


I continue the order previous lade pursuant  to  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal
Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.


Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 18 December 2020.












