
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12627/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 24 September 2018                          |On 25 October 2018            |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM


                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     CSB
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer of
                    the Specialist Appeals Team
For the Respondent:    Mr G Goddard, Legal Representative of the Citizens
                    Advice Bureau (London)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   I shall refer to the Respondent  as  "the  Appellant"  throughout  this
    decision as she was known  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   I  have
    anonymised the Appellant  because  the  case  involves  children.   The
    Appellant is a citizen of Jamaica.  Her date of birth is  12  September
    1981.

2.   On 19 August 2015  the  Respondent  decided  to  deport  the  Appellant
    pursuant to Section 5(1) of the  1971  Act.  On  2  November  2016  the
    Respondent certified the Appellant's asylum claim under Section  72  of
    the 2002 Act, her  refused  her  human  rights  claim.   The  Appellant
    appealed. Her appeal was allowed by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Goodman,
    following a hearing at Taylor House on 14 December 2017. It was allowed
    under Article 8. The judge found in favour of the Appellant in  respect
    of The Section 72 certification. The appeal  was  dismissed  on  asylum
    grounds.  The  decision  was  promulgated  on  10  January  2018.   The
    Secretary of State  was  granted  permission  by  Judge  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal Storey on 6 August 2018.

3.   There is a  long  immigration  history  which  I  will  summarise.  The
    Appellant arrived in the UK on 3 February 2001.  She  sought  leave  to
    enter as  a  visitor  and  was  refused.   She  was  granted  temporary
    admission. Her removal was arranged to take place on 11 February  2001.
    She failed to report as required and failed to  maintain  contact  with
    the Home Office.  On 27 November 2006 she was convicted  at  Canterbury
    Crown Court of six counts of supplying a class A drug.  On  16  January
    2007 she was sentenced to two years' imprisonment on each count to  run
    concurrently.

4.   On 29 January 2013 she was issued with a notice of a decision  to  make
    a deportation order.  On 8  February  2013  she  appealed  against  the
    deportation order.  Her appeal was successful is so far as the Tribunal
    found that the decision was not in accordance with the law.

5.   On 23 August 2013 the Appellant committed further offences relating  to
    child  cruelty  and  neglect.  There  was  no  information  forthcoming
    clarifying the  details  of  the  charge.  She  was  convicted  in  the
    Magistrates' Court. Mr Mills confirmed to me that the victims were  the
    Appellant's children and she was sentenced  to  twelve  weeks  on  each
    offence  to  consecutively  and  therefore  in  total  she  received  a
    custodial sentence of 12 weeks.

6.   On 19 March 2014 the Appellant claimed  asylum.  This  application  was
    refused on 22 May 2015.  On 5 June 2014 she made a claim to  have  been
    trafficked and this was refused on 27 June 2014.       In  response  to
    the decision  of  the  FtT  that  the  deportation  order  was  not  in
    accordance with the law, the Respondent issued a  deportation  decision
    on 19 August 2015.

The decision of the FtT

7.   The judge set out the factual summary at paragraphs 12  to  39  of  her
    decision.  From this it is clear that by any account the Appellant  had
    a very difficult childhood in Jamaica.  She came here at the age of  19
    with a man referred to as RS for what was to be a  three-  week  visit.
    She absconded.  Her evidence was that she remained here  working  in  a
    brothel and eventually managed to escape.  She started  a  relationship
    with AK, a citizen of Jamaica, and  in  May  2002  gave  birth  to  her
    daughter, C.  She became embroiled in  drug-related  violence  and  her
    evidence was that she had been raped by AK and as a result of this,  in
    August 2004 she gave birth to a son, K.

8.   The Appellant became involved in drug dealing which  resulted  in  2006
    to her being charged with six counts  of  supplying  a  class  A  drug.
    There was evidence from the prosecution that she had supplied drugs  to
    a 14 or 15- year old.  When sentencing the judge stated that there  was
    "an element of coercion from somebody not before the court" but did not
    accept that the Appellant was simply a runner.   The  sentencing  judge
    took into account that she was the mother of  two  young  children  and
    there was before him a very good report from her time in custody.   The
    sentencing judge said that he had to pass a sentence of two years.  The
    Appellant served just under  a  year  in  prison.   She  refused  early
    release with a tag for fear of reprisals from AK who  might  think  she
    had given police information about him.  AK was  subsequently  deported
    in 2009.

9.   The Appellant was released from prison in August 2007.  She  started  a
    relationship with a Jamaican man and gave  birth  to  a  girl,  KW,  in
    February 2009.  In 2010 she gave birth to a  boy,  L,  by  a  different
    Jamaican man.

10.  The judge at paragraph 21  found  that  the  Appellant  downplayed  the
    offences committed in 2013, considering the sentence that she  received
    and that as a consequence her four children were taken  into  care  and
    had not been returned to her.  There was evidence before the judge that
    in December 2013 there was an order made in the Family Division of  the
    High Court placing three of the four children in the care of the London
    Borough of Southwark.  KW at the time was living with her father.

11.  The Appellant was released from  prison  in  March  2014.   She  had  a
    relationship with another Jamaican man.  She gave birth  to  her  fifth
    child, N, on 24 November 2015.  The  Appellant  and  the  father  of  N
    travelled to Scotland in the hope that the birth would not  be  noticed
    by the social services, however, ultimately N was taken into  care  and
    fostered with a view to adoption.  It was  considered  that  she  would
    suffer significant harm in the care of her parents.

12.  In June 2016 the Appellant went to live in the manse  of  Peckham  Park
    Baptist Church with the pastor, Anne Luther, and an  older  couple  who
    live there.  The Appellant had split up with N's  father  and  she  was
    homeless and without recourse to public funds.  The  judge  noted  that
    this period had been good for the Appellant because it had offered  her
    a period of stability.  The judge acknowledged that the  Appellant  had
    been baptised and was a successful speaker talking  to  others  in  the
    community about past difficulties (see paragraph  26).   The  Appellant
    had a very positive reference from Ms Luther which the judge took  into
    account.  There was a final hearing in June 2017 when an order was made
    that N was to  live  with  the  Appellant  subject  to  twelve  months'
    supervision by Southwark Social Services.  The judge attached weight to
    the positive changes that had been recognised by the Family Court.

13.  N joined her mother in the manse. N's  father  had  supervised  contact
    every two weeks.  The judge attached weight  to  the  evidence  of  the
    child's guardian, David Abrahams. Mr Abrahams supported the chance  for
    N to be returned  to  the  Appellant  "because  of  the  very  positive
    changes" that the Appellant had made to her lifestyle.  In his view she
    had not simply "learned the language of therapy".

14.  At the time of the hearing children K and L (aged 13  and  7)  were  in
    foster care.  At paragraph 32  the  judge  recorded  that  it  was  the
    Appellant's ambition to apply  one  by  one  for  the  children  to  be
    restored to her care, but the social services took a more cautious view
    and that she was not assessed to be in a position to care for C,  K  or
    L, but it was at least possible at some stage that C could go and  live
    with her.  The plan was that K and L should remain  with  their  foster
    families and that the Appellant had contact with them six times a year.
     She was generally consistent  in  attendance  and  the  evidence  from
    social workers was that they looked forward to visits.  KW's father had
    not complied  with  the  arrangements  for  access  and  there  was  no
    subsisting relationship between the Appellant and her daughter, KW.

15.  The judge attached weight to the report of  C's  social  worker,  Clare
    Ryan from Southwark Social Services dated 30 November  2017.   She  had
    organised for the Appellant to be placed at the Baptist Church.  C  had
    been in a  secure  unit.  She  was  transferred  with  the  Appellant's
    assistance to a residential home.  There was an attempt  to  place  her
    with her mother in early 2016, but this had not been successful. C  had
    become violent towards the Appellant.   C had supervised  contact  with
    the Appellant six times a year, however she had  informal  unsupervised
    contact with her mother by phone and face-to-face.  It was Clare Ryan's
    evidence that C uses the Appellant as a source  of  support  and  makes
    contact in times of crisis. The Appellant had  been  co-operative  with
    the social services and informed them when C  had  absconded  from  her
    home and gone to her.  Clare Ryan commented that C did not  have  other
    family or a foster placement and she  "really  does  benefit  from  the
    relationship she has with her mother and the ability to have a flexible
    contact arrangement". In addition she enjoyed her relationship with  N.
    Clare Ryan's evidence was that if the Appellant "did not remain in  the
    UK it would have a particularly negative impact on C."

16.  At the date of the hearing  before  the  judge  the  Appellant  was  no
    longer living at the manse. She had moved out to live with N in a  flat
    near to the church.  She was visited there by Ms Luther  who  confirmed
    that she was managing and she still attended the  church  in  order  to
    visit  Ms  Luther  and  an  older  couple.   The  Appellant   kept   up
    participation in the church  and  with  the  local  community.   In  Ms
    Luther's view the Appellant had made permanent changes to her life.

17.  At paragraph 34 the judge set  out  the  Appellant's  relationships  in
    Jamaica noting that the only person  with  whom  she  had  had  a  warm
    relationship was her grandmother, now deceased.  The judge  found  that
    the Appellant could return to Jamaica, but found that her  fear  of  AK
    was genuinely felt by her. The judge found at [60] that she  would  not
    have close supportive family  or  the  support  from  the  church  that
    currently benefited from.

18.  The judge found that the Appellant had rebutted the  presumption  under
    Section 72 of the 2002 Act.  The judge  attached  significance  to  the
    fact that she had not been convicted  of  a  drugs  offence  in  eleven
    years.  He found at paragraph 67 that it was  not  known  if  drugs  or
    violence were involved in the 2013 offences, but the Respondent in part
    relied on them.  The judge concluded that it was likely that the  facts
    surrounding these offences did not involve drugs.  The  judge  attached
    weight to the fact that the Appellant was older no longer  keeping  the
    coercive company of her  first  partner  (AK).   The  judge  found,  at
    paragraph 67, that  "in  the  company  she  keeps  at  present  it  was
    implausible that she would reoffend."  The judge also  found  that  the
    Appellant was determined to keep her youngest daughter and  would  know
    this would change if she was to reoffend and  that  in  light  of  this
    there was an incentive.  The judge concluded, at paragraph 67, that the
    likelihood of repetition of offending was small and that the  Appellant
    was not a danger to the community and as such the presumption had  been
    rebutted.

19.  The judge made the following findings in relation to paragraph  399  of
    the Rules:

         "80. Moving to paragraph 399, the first question is whether she has
             a genuine and subsisting parental relationship  with  a  child
             under 18 within the UK, who is either British or has lived  in
             the UK continuously for at least 7 years.  The youngest child,
             N, the only who lives with her, is not British, and  has  only
             recently turned 2.  It could not be said at present  that  her
             ties with Britain are substantial, and prime  facie  her  best
             interest is to be with her mother.  It  remains  to  be  asked
             whether it is unduly harsh for N to live in  Jamaica,  or  for
             the child to remain in the UK without her.  As to N's  welfare
             in Jamaica, of course generally children grow and thrive there
             as they do in the UK.  However, N, was placed with her  mother
             only six months ago, and  that  was  premised  on  her  mother
             having changed her circumstances dramatically, and established
             a regular way of life,  supported  by  the  church  community.
             There must be some doubt whether the Appellant would have  the
             resilience to continue providing a stable and structured  home
             for N if she had  to  return  to  Jamaica  without  close  and
             involved family  or  church  support,  and  without  means  of
             financial support, given that for much of her adult  life  she
             has struggled to do so, and particularly in the period between
             2007 and 2013.  N is no longer in care, and could  depart  for
             Jamaica with her mother; it may be questioned whether it is in
             N's best interest, rather than remaining here  in  the  church
             community, to return.  The question under the rules is whether
             it would be 'unduly harsh' for N to live  in  Jamaica,  or  to
             remain in the UK without her mother.  It may be unduly  harsh,
             if her mother's morale collapses in the struggle to settle  in
             Jamaica, which will be coupled, whether well-founded  or  not,
             by fear of violence.  The  Appellant  has  been  found  to  be
             strong  and  resilient  by  the  social  workers   where   her
             children's best  interests  are  concerned,  but  without  her
             current supportive arrangement she may not  be  equal  to  the
             challenge.  If N remains in the  UK,  she  will  return  to  a
             foster home and is likely to be adopted.  At  the  age  of  2,
             parting from the mother to whose care she  has  recently  been
             restored will be harsh, but not unduly so.


         81.  Of the next three children, she has contact six times  a  year
             with two of them, and none with the third.   This  is  contact
             which can be  maintained  by  telephone,  Skype,  and  so  on,
             without damaging the children unduly: they  would  still  know
             she cared for them.


         82.  The eldest child, C, is another matter.  Although she has  not
             lived with her mother for 4 years, it is possible to say there
             is a genuine and subsisting parental relationship, though  not
             a conventional one, it is real, and it is the only parental or
             quasi-parental relationship that C has.  On  the  evidence  of
             C's social workers, C contacts her mother informally  as  well
             as the formal access, and does so when she is trouble, and  it
             is rewarding contact.  It can be said here that  it  would  be
             unduly  harsh  for  C  to  be  deprived  of  the   only   non-
             institutional relationship she has in the UK.  Without it, her
             life, which in adolescence has been marked so far by disturbed
             behaviour, school exclusion and a secure unit, (which  may  be
             causally related to her mother's  past  inadequate  parenting)
             may not recover any benchmark of normality.  It is  not  clear
             that C can readily relocate to Jamaica and join her mother  in
             two and a half years' time when of age: she has lived  in  the
             UK all her  life,  and  though  familiar  with  some  Jamaican
             culture from  her  mother's  associations,  she  has  attended
             British  schools  and  is  otherwise  familiar  with   British
             culture.  She has Jamaican nationality at present.  Her father
             may be there, but he has played little part in her life.


         83.  As 399A is met, with regard to C at any rate, it is  necessary
             to weight (sic) and balance the factors for  family  life  and
             public interest.  The best interest of  C  is  to  have  ready
             access to her mother, and to a lesser extent, her baby sister.
              This is her only family life.  That can only be achieved  for
             the time being and possibly  longer,  in  the  UK.   The  best
             interest of N are to be with her mother in the present set-up;
             being with her mother in Jamaica carries  a  real  risk  of  a
             return to chaotic living arrangements which will not be in her
             interests and where she might be better off being parted  now,
             though that is  hard  when  the  Family  Court  only  recently
             decided she should live with her mother.  For reasons  already
             stated, less weight should be attached to the other children's
             interest.  The claimant's conduct since 2016 should carry some
             weight: several others attest to her acknowledgement  of  past
             fault and serious effort to change her behaviour in  order  to
             keep her child.  So should the time that has elapsed since the
             drug offences, and  the  improbability  of  recurrence.   Less
             weight should be attached to the public interest that  she  is
             to a danger  to  the  community  (sic).   As  for  immigration
             control, she has never  been  here  lawfully  and  misled  the
             courts about her status in  2016-7.   Some  weight  should  be
             attached to that.  Weighing the family  life  factors  against
             the public interest,  the  children's  best  interests,  C  in
             particular, prevail."

The Grounds of Appeal

20.  The Secretary of State's grounds of appeal are twofold.  It  is  argued
    in the first ground that the judge failed to properly apply the  unduly
    harsh test as defined by the Court of Appeal in MM (Uganda) [2016] EWCA
    Civ 617 in respect of C.The second ground argues that the judge did not
    properly  assess  the  public  interest  taking   into   account   that
    deportation in pursuit of preventing crime and disorder is  not  to  be
    seen as one dimensional in effect.  It  has  the  effect  not  only  of
    removing the risk of reoffending by the deportee, but also of deterring
    other  foreign  criminals.   The  deportation  of   foreign   criminals
    preserves public confidence in a system of  control  whose  loss  would
    itself tend towards crime and disorder.  The judge has failed  to  give
    weight to the required public interest. There was no challenge  to  the
    certification decision.

Submissions

21.  I heard oral submissions from Mr Mills.  Mr  Mills  conceded  that  the
    judge had factored  into  the  proportionality  assessment  the  public
    interest at paragraph 83.  However, inadequate weight has been given to
    the public interest and the judge did not  recognise  the  high  hurdle
    involved in satisfying the unduly harsh test.  Mr Mills said that there
    was a structural  error  in  the  assessment  of  proportionality  with
    reference to unduly  harsh,  but  conceded  that  this  alone  was  not
    sufficient to give rise to a material error. The material error  arises
    from the failure to place sufficient weight on the public interest.

22.  I heard submissions from Mr Goddard. He relied on the Appellant's  Rule
    24 response.  Mr Goddard's submissions were essentially that the  judge
    considered all relevant circumstances.  He referred  me  to  paragraphs
    77, 16, 23, 79and 83 of the decision.  He relied on Ali v Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2016] 1 WLR 4799 (the Hesham  Ali  case)
    at paragraph 70 where Lord Wilson expressly disavows his  previous  use
    of the term "society's revulsion  at  serious  crimes"  as  being  "too
    emotive a concept to figure in the analysis".

The Legal Framework

23.  As Lord Reed JSC pointed out at paragraphs 3 to 9 of  his  judgment  in
    the Hersham Ali case, Section 3(5) of the Immigration Act 1971 provides
    that a person who is not a British citizen  is  liable  to  deportation
    from the United Kingdom if the Secretary of State deems his deportation
    to be conducive to the public good.  Section 5(1) provides that,  where
    a person is liable to deportation under Section 3 (5), the Secretary of
    State may make a deportation order against him.  Further, Section 32 of
    the UK Borders Act 2007 (the "2007  Act")  requires  the  Secretary  of
    State to make a deportation order if its provisions are  satisfied  and
    none of the exceptions in Section 33 apply.  There  is  no  dispute  in
    this case that the Appellant is a foreign criminal for the purposes  of
    Section 32.  Paragraph 398 of the Immigration Rules applies which reads
    as follows:

         "398.    Where a person claims  that  their  deportation  would  be
                contrary to the UK's obligations  under  Article  8  of  the
                Human Rights Convention, and


                ...


                (b)     the  deportation  of  the  person  from  the  UK  is
                    conducive to the public good and in the public  interest
                    because they have been convicted of an offence for which
                    they have been sentenced to a period of imprisonment  of
                    less than 4 years but at least 12 months; or


                (c)    ... the Secretary of State in  assessing  that  claim
                    will consider whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and,
                    if it does not, the public interest in deportation  will
                    only be outweighed by other factors where there are very
                    compelling circumstances over and above those  described
                    in paragraphs 399 and 399A".

24.  Paragraph 399 reads as follows:

         "399.    This paragraph applies where  paragraph  398  (b)  or  (c)
                applies if -


                (a)    the person has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
                    relationship with a child under the age of 18 years  who
                    is in the UK, and


                    (i)    the child is a British Citizen; or


                    (ii)   the child has lived in the UK continuously for at
                        least the 7 years immediately preceding the date of
                        the immigration decision; and in either case


                        (a)    it would be unduly harsh for  the  child  to
                             live in the country to which the person  is  to
                             be deported; and


                        (b)    it would be unduly harsh for  the  child  to
                             remain in the UK without the person who  is  to
                             be deported;".

25.  Since 28 July 2014 where a court or Tribunal is required  to  determine
    whether a decision made under the Immigration Act breaches  a  person's
    Article 8 rights and as a result, would be unlawful under Section 6  of
    the Human Rights Act  1998  1998,  the  provisions  of  Section  117A-D
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (the  "2002  Act")  apply.
    When considering what is defined as  the  "public  interest  question",
    meaning the question of whether an interference with a  person's  right
    to respect for private and family life is justified under Article 8(2),
    the court or Tribunal is required to have regard, in all cases, to  the
    considerations set out in Section 117B  and  in  cases  concerning  the
    deportation of foreign criminals, to  the  considerations  set  out  in
    Section 117C; Section 117A.

26.  Where relevant, Sections 117B and C provide as follows:

         "117B    Article8: public interest considerations applicable in all
                cases:


         (1)  The maintenance of effective immigration controls  is  in  the
             public interest.


         ...


         (4)  Little weight should be given to-


             (a)      a private life, or


             (b)      a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,


             that is established by a person at a time when the  person  is
             in the United Kingdom unlawfully.


         (5)  Little weight should be given to a private life established by
             a person at a time when the  person's  immigration  status  is
             precarious.


         ...


         117C  Article  8:  additional  considerations  in  cases  involving
                foreign criminals


         (1)   The  deportation  of  foreign  criminals  is  in  the  public
             interest.


         (2)  The more serious the offence committed by a foreign  criminal,
             the greater is the  public  interest  in  deportation  of  the
             criminal.


         (3)  In the case of a foreign  criminal  ('C')  who  has  not  been
             sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years  or  more,
             the public interest requires C's deportation unless  Exception
             1 or Exception 2 applies.


         ...


         (5)  Exception 2 applies where  C  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
             relationship with a  qualifying  partner,  or  a  genuine  and
             subsisting parental relationship with a qualifying child,  and
             the effect of C's deportation on the partner or child would be
             unduly harsh.


         ..."

27.  The meaning of "unduly harsh"  in  paragraph  399  of  the  Immigration
    Rules and Section 117C(4) of the 2002 Act was considered  in  MM.Having
    stated that the phrase is an ordinary English expression,  the  meaning
    of which is coloured by context, Laws LJ with whom Vos and Hamblen  LJJ
    agreed went on to state  that  the  context  invited  emphasis  on  two
    factors, being the public removal of foreign criminals and the need for
    the proportionate assessment of any interference with Article 8 rights;
    see paragraphs 22 and 23.  Laws LJ went on to say:

         "24.  This  steers  the  tribunals  and   the   court   towards   a
             proportionate assessment of the criminal's deportation in  any
             given case. Accordingly the more pressing the public  interest
             in his removal, the harder it will be to show that the  effect
             on his child or  partner  will  be  unduly  harsh.  Any  other
             approach  in  my  judgment  dislocates  the   'unduly   harsh'
             provisions from their context. It would mean that the question
             of undue hardship would be decided wholly  without  regard  to
             the force  of  the  public  interest  in  deportation  in  the
             particular case.  But  in  that  case  the  term  'unduly'  is
             mistaken for 'excessive' which imports a different idea.  What
             is due or undue depends on all the circumstances,  not  merely
             the impact on the child or partner in the given case.  In  the
             present context relevant circumstances certainly  include  the
             criminal's immigration and criminal history."

28.  Lord Reed at paragraphs 44 and 46 of his judgment  in  the  Hesham  Ali
    case stated as follows:

         "44. Fifthly, in considering the issue arising under article  8  in
             the light of its findings of  fact,  the  appellate  authority
             should give appropriate weight to the reasons relied on by the
             Secretary of State to justify the decision  under  appeal.  In
             that connection, Lord Bingham gave as examples  a  case  where
             attention was paid to the Secretary of State's  judgment  that
             the probability  of  deportation  if  a  serious  offence  was
             committed had a general deterrent  effect,  and  another  case
             where weight was given to the Secretary  of  State's  judgment
             that the  Appellant  posed  a  threat  to  public  order.   He
             continued:


                  'The giving of weight to factors such as these is not,  in
                  our  opinion,  aptly  described  as   deference:   it   is
                  performance of the ordinary judicial task of  weighing  up
                  the competing considerations on each  side  and  according
                  appropriate weight  to  the  judgment  of  a  person  with
                  responsibility for a given subject matter  and  access  to
                  special sources of knowledge and advice. That is  how  any
                  rational judicial decision-maker is  likely  to  proceed.'
                  (para 16 of Huang  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
                  Department [2007] UKHL 11)


         ...


         46.  These observations  apply  a  fortiori  to  tribunals  hearing
             appeals against deportation decisions.  The special feature in
             that context is that the decision under  review  has  involved
             the application of rules which have been made by the Secretary
             of State in the exercise of a responsibility entrusted to  her
             by Parliament, and which Parliament has approved.  It  is  the
             duty of appellate tribunals, as independent  judicial  bodies,
             to  make  their  own  assessment  of  the  proportionality  of
             deportation in any particular case on the basis of  their  own
             findings as to  the  facts  and  their  understanding  of  the
             relevant law.  But, where the Secretary of State has adopted a
             policy based on a general assessment of proportionality, as in
             the present case, they should attach  considerable  weight  to
             that assessment: in particular, that a custodial  sentence  of
             four  years  or  more  represents  such  a  serious  level  of
             offending  that  the  public  interest   in   the   offender's
             deportation    almost    always    outweighs    countervailing
             considerations of private or family life;  that  great  weight
             should generally be  given  to  the  public  interest  in  the
             deportation of a foreign offender who has received a custodial
             sentence  of  more  than  12  months;  and  that,  where   the
             circumstances do not fall within rules 399 or 399A, the public
             interest in the deportation of such offenders can generally be
             outweighed only  by  countervailing  factors  which  are  very
             compelling, as explained in paras 37-38 above."

Conclusions

29.  The judge directed himself on the law in relation to Article 8 in  some
    detail at paragraphs 50 through to 58.  There is no  challenge  to  the
    judge's self-direction.  The judge found that it would be unduly  harsh
    for C to be separated from her mother.  It was not argued that C  could
    go with her to Jamaica. That was clearly not  an  option  open  to  her
    whilst she was in the care of the  social  services.   To  remain  here
    without her mother was found by the judge to be unduly harsh. N was not
    a qualifying child at that time. The judge found  it  is  in  her  best
    interest to be with her mother. She found that it was unduly harsh  for
    her to go to Jamaica. She found that it would not be unduly  harsh  for
    her to stay here without her mother (and to go back into foster  care).
    L and K may be qualified,  but  the  judge  found  that  contact  could
    continue if she were to be deported. The issue raised  in  the  grounds
    relates to C. The judge did not make  a  clear  finding  about  C  best
    interests, but reading the decision, it is clear that  she  found  they
    would be served by her mother remaining in the UK

30.  The judge erred in assessing unduly harsh in  the  context  of  C.  The
    assessment is not in accordance with  MM  because  the  judge  did  not
    factor into the assessment the public interest. Mr Mills conceded  that
    this was a structural error which did not in  itself  give  rise  to  a
    material error of law. The judge  did  not  conclude  that  the  appeal
    should be allowed on the basis that deportation would be  unduly  harsh
    in respect of C, but went onto consider  proportionality,  taking  into
    account the public interest.

31.  The judge directed herself at paragraph 51 in respect of  Section  117C
    acknowledging that more serious the  offence  the  greater  the  public
    interest in deportation. A proper reading of the decision (rather  than
    focussing on  the  last  paragraphs)  make  it  clear  that  the  judge
    understood that risk of re-offending was  not  the  only  consideration
    when considering the public interest. The judge acknowledged  that  the
    public interest requires deportation. There  is  no  challenge  to  the
    judge's self-direction.    I am satisfied that considering the decision
    as a whole the judge took into account all relevant circumstances  when
    assessing the public interest.

32.  I  am  satisfied  that  the  judge  factored  into  the  assessment  of
    proportionality the strength of the public interest in deportation. The
    judge's findings about C and the children generally are not challenged.
    The Appellant has committed very serious  offences  involving  class  A
    drugs and the prosecution case was that she had supplied  to  a  child.
    The Appellant's position is aggravated by her having committed  further
    offences in 2013. This was all understood by the judge.  The judge  was
    entitled to accept that there had been a  complete  turnaround  in  the
    Appellant's life. The evidence to support, particularly that N had been
    placed into her care by a Family Court, was strong.  There  was  cogent
    evidence of the adverse impact of separation on C. As  conceded  by  Mr
    Mills, the judge was entitled to attach weight to the delay in making a
    deportation order and the time  that  had  elapsed  since  the  trigger
    offences were committed and that since the offences in 2013  there  had
    been a significant change in the Appellant's lifestyle.  The judge  was
    entitled to attach weight the Appellant's circumstances  on  return  to
    Jamaica.

33.   The  judge  was  entitled  to  that  deportation  would   breach   the
    Appellant's rights under Article 8.  On  the  findings  of  the  judge,
    conducting a proper MM compliant assessment of unduly harsh,  it  would
    be unarguably unduly harsh for the Appellant to be returned  leaving  C
    here without a  mother.   The  judge  properly  considered  the  public
    interest. The error is one of form and not  substance.  The  judge  was
    entitled to allow the  appeal  under  Article  8  as  informed  by  the
    immigration Rules at paragraph 399 pursuant to s117C (5)  of  the  2002
    Act.

34.  At the hearing before me  the  Appellant  submitted  further  evidence.
    There is now evidence that  the  child  N  is  a  British  citizen,  so
    therefore she is now a qualifying child.   There  is  a  letter  of  29
    August 2018 from Southwark Council Safeguarding Family Support relating
    to N indicating that N is no longer subject to a child in need plan and
    her file is now closed.  I note the penultimate paragraph of the letter
    which states as follows:

         "I am happy to have met you and wish you well for the future.   I'm
         sure all the hard work you are putting in will pay off!  Good  luck
         with everything and please do pass on my best wishes to N  and  the
         rest of your family."

35.  There was a letter from Southwark Council Safeguarding  Family  Support
    of 6 August 2018 relating to child C.  It has now been  agreed  that  C
    can have overnight stays  with  her  mother  who  is  recognised  as  a
    supportive factor in C's life, which the council are actively trying to
    support and maintain.

36.  This evidence was not material to the error of law  decision.  However,
    had the judge materially erred, I would have taken it into account when
    remaking the decision. Mr Mills conceded the evidence strengthened  the
    Appellant's case.  If I had reconsidered proportionality, I would  have
    reached the same conclusion as the judge.

37.  The decision of the FTT is lawful and sustainable.   The  Secretary  of
    State's application is dismissed.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed        Joanna McWilliam                   Date 22 October 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam


