
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12458/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5 March 2019                               |On 18 April 2019              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR


                                   Between

                                Muhammad [A]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms S Akinbolu, Counsel instructed by Connaughts
For the Respondent:    Ms S Jones, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS
                 (Decision delivered orally on 5 March 2019)

Introduction

 1. The appellant is a citizen of  Pakistan,  born  in  October  1989.   He
    entered the United Kingdom on or around 25 March 2012 as a student. The
    appellant's application for an extension of such leave was  refused  on
    19 November 2014.

 2. Subsequently, the appellant made a protection and  human  rights  claim
    founded primarily on the fact that he is gay and, it is said, would  be
    persecuted  in  Pakistan  as  a  consequence  (whether  this  be  as  a
    consequence of him living openly or, alternatively, being  required  to
    hide the fact that he is gay in  order  to  avoid  persecution).   This
    application was rejected by way of a  decision  of  14  November  2017.
    Ostensibly, the Secretary of State disbelieved the core assertions made
    by the appellant.

Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 3. The appellant appealed the Secretary of State's decision to the  First-
    tier Tribunal. In a decision promulgated on 5 October  2018  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Geraint Jones QC dismissed the appeal.

 4. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson  in  a
    decision dated 4 January 2019.  The core reasoning  deployed  by  Judge
    Jackson in granting permission reads as follows:

         "The appeal of the First-tier Tribunal materially erred in law  in,
         first,   reaching   adverse   credibility   findings   which   were
         unreasonable and/or irrational; secondly,  its  assessment  of  the
         evidence; and finally, in its risk of inconsistency with Mr Ahmed's
         appeal.

         The grounds of appeal are all arguable, in  particular  the  manner
         and tone in which the decision  is  drafted,  including  commencing
         with statements tending towards  findings  of  adverse  credibility
         before consideration of any of  the  detail  of  the  evidence  was
         considered together with the statement in paragraph  14,  discloses
         arguable bias by the judge in considering protection  claims  based
         on sexuality from men from particular countries.   It  is  arguable
         that the appeal was not approached by the judge with an  open  mind
         or that a holistic assessment of credibility was undertaken.  It is
         further arguable that too much weight was placed on the appellant's
         screening interview."

Setting aside the FtT's Decision

 5. The grounds of appeal are framed so as to  identify  three  substantive
    grounds, but each of those grounds contains a  number  of  sub-grounds,
    making the reading and understanding  of  the  grounds  very  difficult
    indeed.


 6. Despite the thorough nature of Ms Jones' response  to  the  grounds  my
    conclusion  is,  that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is
    unsustainable and must be set aside.  I have come  to  this  conclusion
    for three reasons.


 7. First, is the concern over the context and framework within which FtT's
    credibility assessment sits. A prime example of this can  be  found  in
    paragraph 14 of the FtT's decision wherein the following is said:

         "This is one of those appeals  that  has  been  encouraged  by  the
         higher courts wedging open the floodgates which  have  resulted  in
         very many men who do not wish to return to return to some parts  of
         Asia, but who wish to procure continued residence in  this  country
         belatedly coming forward to allege that they cannot be expected  to
         return to their native land  because  they  are  homosexual.   This
         Tribunal has experienced a torrent of such  appeals  which  perhaps
         was only to be expected once the floodgates  have  been  so  firmly
         wedged open.  The significance of that fact  is  that  one  has  to
         examine each individual ... claim with considerable care because of
         the ease with which such allegations can be made  by  those  intent
         upon procuring continued residence in this country."

 8. At paragraph 28 the FtT also says:

         "If as the appellant now claims he had mixed with homosexual  Asian
         men some of whom  would  have  been  trying  to  procure  continued
         residence in this country it is inconceivable that  the  now  well-
         trodden asylum route would not have been a  subject  of  discussion
         and/or advice and/or research on the internet."

 9. Ms Jones made no observations about these  comments  and,  for  reasons
    which Ms Jones was unable to explain, there is no rule 24 response from
    the SSHD dealing with them.

10. When these comments are read together and seen in the  context  of  the
    decision as a whole it is clear to me that the FtT took the  view  that
    this 'category' of claim - which is said to be claims by Asian gay  men
    to be homosexual - required particularly careful consideration  because
    of the possibility that the  applicants  are  not  telling  the  truth.
    There was, however, absolutely no evidence before the FtT that (i) this
    particular applicant had any awareness of the preponderance  of  claims
    by Asians to be at risk of persecution because they are  gay,  or  (ii)
    there is a preponderance of asylum applications by Asians  claiming  to
    be at risk because they are gay. Furthermore, the appellant was neither
    put on notice of this claimed fact nor of the FtT's views  in  relation
    to it so that he could be given an opportunity to rebut the 'assertion'
    if thought appropriate.

11. Whilst the FtT provides a number of reasons for finding  the  appellant
    not credible, these reasons must be considered through the lens what is
    said above.  I only need to address two  of  these  reasons,  Ms  Jones
    being unable to identify any rational basis for either.

12. The first is found at paragraphs 17 and  42(vi)  of  the  decision,  in
    which the FtT found implausible the appellant's assertion to have  gone
    into hiding in Pakistan. This conclusion is said to be founded  on  the
    answer to question 12 of the appellant's asylum interview  -  the  full
    text of the question and answer reading as follows:

         "12. Question:

         Before you left PAK in 2012 did you have any problems  with  anyone
         for any reasons?

         Response:

         Yes [Can you tell me what problems  you  had].  As  I  said  I  was
         homosexual I used to live in hiding.  No one knew about me  Pak  in
         Islamic country they don't like people like ... and  if  they  find
         out about anyone they beat them up and even kill  them."  (emphasis
         added)

13. The FtT construed this answer as the appellant asserting  that  he  had
    gone into hiding in Pakistan i.e. moved to a place  where  nobody  knew
    who or where he was.  It is palpably clear, however, that the appellant
    was in fact stating that he was required to hide the fact that  he  was
    gay. When set in this context it is clear that the FtT's  reasoning  at
    paragraphs 17 and 42(vi) of its decision is wholly irrational.

14. The second example of irrationality in the FtT's decision is  found  in
    paragraphs 25 and  42(viii)  therein,  in  which  the  FtT  treats  the
    appellant's evidence that his alleged partner took the appellant  to  a
    gay club despite not knowing at the time that the appellant was gay, as
    being implausible. This conclusion must be founded  on  the  assumption
    that only gay people attend  gay  clubs.  Such  an  assumption  has  no
    foundation in the evidence before the FtT and no foundation in reality.



15. There is also a sustained attack by the appellant on a number of  other
    reasons provided by the FtT and Ms Jones responded to each of these  in
    turn.  I make no finding on those aspects of the decision because in my
    conclusion when taken cumulatively the issues I have  identified  above
    are such that this decision is unsustainable.

Notice of Decision

I conclude that the First-tier Tribunal's decision must be set aside.

The remaking of the decision  will  be  undertaken  afresh,  nothing  is  to
stand.  The parties concur in submitting that the appropriate course is  for
this matter to be remitted back to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  for  the
matter to be linked to the extant appeal in reference  PA/12638/2017,  which
is to be heard at Taylor House.


Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor                    Date

Mark O'Connor                                17 April 2019
