
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number PA/12366/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Heard at Field House   Decision and Reasons Promulgated
On 8th April 2019      On 30th April 2019


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PARKES


                                   Between

                                     M A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr S Wodehouse (Legal Representative, Hasan
Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Miss S Cunha (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant's application for asylum was refused by the Secretary of
    State. His appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge James at
    Birmingham on the 12th of June 2018 and dismissed in a decision
    promulgated on the 6th of July 2018. The basic facts were not in
    dispute and against that background the Judge found that the Appellant
    could return to Khartoum and was not in need of international
    protection.

 2. The Appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal on the
    grounds that the Judge had not applied the relevant country guidance.
    Refused permission by the First-tier Tribunal the renewed application
    was granted with the Judge noting that the First-tier Tribunal Judge
    had not taken account of the Appellant's age when he left Sudan,
    sufficiency of protection in his home area or Khartoum or the country
    guidance cases.

 3. At the hearing it was confirmed that the Home Office had not provided a
    rule 24 response and that the Home Office position was that there was
    no material error although section 55 had not been considered by the
    Judge. I observed that this was not a case where section 55 arose and
    that the credibility of events was not in question.

 4. For the Appellant it was argued that the Country Guidance cases had not
    been applied, it was accepted that the Appellant was a non-Arab
    Darfuri. There was no reference to alternative evidence such as the
    Danish report. The Judge referred to the case of IM & AI but neither
    were non-Arab Darfuris. The findings on risk on return were brief and
    the correct country guidance showed that the Appellant would be at risk
    if it was accepted that the Appellant would be detained.

 5. For the Home Office it was submitted that in paragraph 39 the evidence
    did not supplant IM & AI, in paragraph 80 there was reference to
    Norwegian report and from the report of Dr Bekalo there are non-Arab
    Darfuri officials, the court had dealt with non-Arab Darfuris but that
    was not reflected in the headnote. Return was considered on the
    personal profile and reasons were given. The Appellant had not said he
    was at risk for the other reasons given.

 6. IM & AI concerned, as the first paragraph made clear, that it concerned
    "Both appellants are citizens of Sudan whose appeals are being re-
    determined for the purposes of providing Country Guidance as to the
    risks faced by those returning to Sudan." There was nothing in the
    decision that excluded non-Arab Darfuris from the ambit of the decision
    and one of the Appellant's had been involved in demonstrations for
    peace in Darfur, the other had at one time claimed to be from the Berti
    tribe. In paragraph 80 of the decision evidence from individuals with
    links to Darfur including the Berti tribe was set out. Had the case not
    applied to non-Arab Darfuris given the nature of events in Sudan it
    would been explicit.

 7. The Appellant had not put forward claims of events that would bring him
    within the ambit of the guidance of those at risk on return. Given the
    contents of the discussion in the body of the decision and the evidence
    that included clear references to the circumstances in Darfur and
    Darfuris the Judge was entitled to proceed on the basis that the
    decision in IM&AI applied to non-Arab Darfuris as much as to any other
    Sudanese nationals seeking to resist return to Sudan.

 8. In applying the Appellant's account of events to the guidance in the
    case law the Judge was entitled to find that the Appellant could be
    expected to return to Sudan and that he could live in Khartoum. In the
    circumstances, when read fairly, as a whole and in the light of the
    full contents of the decision relied on by the Judge, the decision was
    open to the Judge for the reasons given and discloses no error of law.



CONCLUSIONS

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside the decision.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of the
Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005. I continue that
order (pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules
2008.)


Signed: [pic]

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge (IAC)
Date 25th April 2019




Fee Award

In dismissing this appeal I make no fee award.


Signed: [pic]

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge (IAC)
Dated: 25th April 2019

