
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12694/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 11th February 2019                         |On 18 March 2019              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                     J A
                         (ANONYMITY direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms F Allen (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Miss S S Cuhna (Senior HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against a determination of First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    R Sullivan, promulgated on 5th October 2018,  following  a  hearing  at
    Hatton Cross on 14th September 2018.  In the determination,  the  judge
    dismissed  the  appeal  of  the  Appellant,  whereupon  the   Appellant
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.





The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Sri Lanka, and was born  on  15th
    May 1985.  He appealed against the decision of the Respondent Secretary
    of State dated 25th November 2017, refusing his application for  asylum
    and for humanitarian protection, pursuant to paragraph 339C of HC  395.



The Appellant's Claim

 3. The Appellant claims a fear of the Sri Lankan  authorities  because  he
    has in the past worked for the LTTE in India, and was detained  in  Sri
    Lanka for six to eight months in 2009, having been arrested  on  return
    from India, whereupon he was detained for nine months  again  in  2016,
    having returned to Sri Lanka on that occasion from Europe.

 4. The Respondent stated that  the  Appellant's  claim  was  not  credible
    because he has twice visited Sri Lanka without any difficulty, arriving
    by air, and it was not accepted that he had worked  for  the  LTTE,  or
    that he had been detained in either 2009 or in 2016.

The Judge's Findings

 5. The issue before the judge revolved around the question of  the  weight
    to be attached to the expert report of  Dr  Martin,  who  assessed  the
    Appellant's scars and injuries, in relation to the  allegation  of  his
    having been detained in 2009 and 2016.  The judge held that, whilst  it
    was accepted that the Appellant had scars (as described at pages 28  to
    29 of his bundle), suggested that the Appellant had  been  tortured  in
    detention (paragraph 22), nevertheless, his evidence was  not  credible
    because of the inconsistency in the scarring.

Submissions

 6. At the hearing before me on 11th February 2019, Ms Allen, appearing  on
    behalf of the Appellant, submitted, that having  discussed  the  matter
    with Miss Cuhna, the Senior Home Office Presenting Officer, there was a
    degree of agreement between the two of them, that the judge did  indeed
    err below so that this appeal should be allowed and  remitted  back  to
    the First-tier Tribunal.  Ms Allen  submitted  that  there  were  three
    essential reasons why the judge's treatment of the expert report by  Dr
    Martin was deficient.

 7. First, the judge had erred in stating that there was a  discrepancy  in
    the doctor's description of scar five.   However,  there  was  no  such
    discrepancy.  There were seven areas of scarring, which were  shown  on
    the diagrams provided (at page 36)  and  the  only  error  lay  in  the
    doctor's numbering of the scarring at pages 28 to 29.  The  expert  had
    correctly identified them when addressing causation at pages 30 to  33.
    This was consistent with the diagrams and  the  descriptions  provided.
    The scarring was entirely consistent with the Appellant's  own  account
    (at paragraph 41  of  his  witness  statement).   The  judge,  however,
    ignored the scarring areas three and five, as they were  both  labelled
    five, despite the fact that it was clear from the rest  of  the  report
    that all of these areas of scarring were present.

 8. Second, the judge erred in her failure to have regard  to  Dr  Martin's
    report and his comments at paragraph 5.3 (which appear at pages  29  to
    30) in which he expressly noted that blunt force often does  not  cause
    wounds, and that indeed being beaten on a well-padded part of the  body
    is unlikely to do so, particularly where  the  skin  does  break.   The
    extent of the scarring that the applicant  had,  could  not  simply  be
    judged on the basis of the  wounds.   Yet  the  judge  noted  that  the
    applicant had not attributed any scarring from the many  2016  beatings
    with rod like objects or kickings and she expressly stated that she was
    taking that factor into account in her overall assessment.

 9. Third, the judge accepted that the Appellant had a number of  scars  as
    described and that their overall pattern must be taken into account (at
    paragraph 22).  Having then taken out  of  account  the  two  areas  of
    scarring (so one part being numerous scarring from cuts  with  a  sharp
    object on the left arm in 2016 and the other being a burn  with  a  hot
    metal object on the  right  arm  in  2009),  both  of  which  had  been
    considered by Dr Martin  to  be  highly  consistent  with  the  claimed
    causes, the judge gave no further consideration  to  the  report.   The
    report was capable of amounting to  independent  evidence  of  torture.
    The failure of the judge to approach the report in the right manner was
    an error.

10. To these submissions by Ms Allen, Miss Cuhna added that the  judge  had
    in fact failed  to  draw  attention  to  the  Istanbul  Protocol  which
    requires a lower standard of proof to be applied.

Decision

11. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside  the
    decision of the original Tribunal.  I remake the decision  as  follows.
    This  appeal  is  remitted  back  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  be
    determined by a judge other than Judge R Sullivan pursuant to  Practice
    Statement 7.2(v) given the degree of agreement between both Miss  Cuhna
    and Ms Allen.

12. An anonymity order is made.

13. This appeal is allowed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Dated

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 13th March 2019
