
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
pa/12780/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      | Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 24 April 2018                          | On 1 May 2018                    |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WARR

                                   Between

                                     au
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms S Nasim, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen  of  Pakistan  born  on  12  May  1991.   He
    arrived in the UK on 9 April 2012 with a student  visa  valid  from  16
    March 2012 to 12 July 2017.  He applied for  asylum  on  13  July  2017
    claiming that he would be at risk on return  in  Pakistan  due  to  his
    membership of Muthida Quami Movement (MQM).

2.   The application was refused on 21  November  2017.   While  noting  the
    evidence provided by the appellant, the respondent rejected  his  claim
    to be a MQM member and the claimed problems that had flowed from  that.
    The appellant had not claimed asylum  on  arrival  and  the  respondent
    considered that this behaviour fell within the scope of Section 8(2) of
    the Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of Claimants, etc.) Act 2004.

3.   The appellant appealed and his appeal came before  a  First-tier  Judge
    on 16 January 2018.  The appellant was represented by Ms  S  Nasim  who
    appears before me.  He gave oral evidence.  Ms Nasim referred the judge
    to various parts of the appellant's account  which  she  submitted  had
    been accepted by the Secretary of State and explained the circumstances
    which had led the appellant to delay making his claim for asylum.

4.   The decision of the First-tier Judge is criticised for its brevity  and
    want of reasoning. and it is convenient in the circumstances to set out
    his conclusions which are as follows:

         "27. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan who came to the  UK  in
             April 2012 with a valid student visa  running  from  16  March
             2017.  He was intending to study at Waltham Forest College  on
             a Level 3 course in business management - but according to his
             oral evidence he ceased his studies after 1-2  months  because
             he was not able to pay the balance of the fees.   He  has  not
             carried out any studies since that time, nor could he  provide
             any documentation regarding his studies.


         28.  The background to his claim for  asylum  is  set  out  in  his
             screening and asylum interviews and his witness statement.  He
             and his family came  from  an  ethnic  group  within  Pakistan
             called Mohajir, who are immigrants who migrated to  the  Sindh
             area of Pakistan following partition in 1947.  The  group  has
             struggled for representation in local and national  government
             and the MQM party was set up  to  promote  their  cause.   The
             discrimination has extended to jobs and education.


         29.  The appellant stated that his father, uncles, cousins and  his
             entire family had always been involved with the party,  either
             as supporters  or  as  member  workers.   He  stated  that  he
             followed his father to events and meetings from  a  young  age
             and by the time he was 16-17 he was  an  activist.   He  never
             received any membership card as everyone in  the  area  was  a
             member and in any event there  was  an  element  of  anonymity
             about the membership.  His duties involved office  duties  and
             campaigning at rallies.


         30.  The appellant states that workers were routinely captured  and
             tortured or killed by opponent parties.  He himself claims  to
             have been arrested by law enforcement agencies, but  was  held
             and tortured until he agreed  to  leave  the  party.   He  was
             injured and thereafter his family was concerned that he  would
             be killed.  This took place in December 2011.


         31.  The appellant then moved  to  another  part  of  the  country,
             namely Interior Sindh, but he stuck out due  to  his  language
             and looks and was soon picked  up  again  by  law  enforcement
             agencies and identified as Mohajir.


         32.  His family then paid for him to come to the  UK  in  order  to
             study in 2012.  He stated in oral evidence  that  the  funding
             for this came from a loan from his uncle and funding from  his
             father.  He was unable to continue those  studies  because  he
             was not able to afford the  balance  of  the  fees.   He  also
             stated in evidence that the family monies were used to pay for
             his father's medical treatment, as  he  suffered  from  health
             problems.  His father died on 14 May 2014  of  natural  causes
             but the appellant stated that his father had also  been  under
             stress from the government forces.


         33.  The appellant states that after he came  to  the  UK,  further
             visits to his family home took place over  2013-14.   He  also
             states that he was made head of the department when the leader
             of MQM, Altaf Hussain, founded a youth wing.  From 2016 he has
             been in charge of social media.  He also says that his cousin,
             Z., was killed by law enforcement agencies in 2016  and  there
             is an FIR against all the workers within MQM although  neither
             he nor other workers have been identified.


         34.  He has been a member of MQM in the UK since 2012 and  this  is
             set out in MQM's letter of 19 February 2017.   The  writer  of
             that letter, N, states that the appellant  had  been  actively
             associated with the party since 2012.  The letter states  that
             since September 2013, paramilitary rangers  have  launched  an
             operation against MQM and thousands of MQM workers  have  been
             arrested.  Since August 2016 the  atrocities  of  paramilitary
             rangers against MQM have intensified and  the  persecution  of
             Mohajir communities in Pakistan has reached a high level.


         35.  More recently I was referred to the news items confirming  the
             death of the deputy leader of MQM, Professor Dr  Hassan  Arif,
             on 14 January 2018.  Reports conflict as to  whether  Dr  Arif
             was tortured or shot depending on the source of the news item.
              No post mortem has yet been carried  out,  so  the  cause  of
             death is not yet known.


         36.  For many reasons I have found the appellant's  reasons  to  be
             wholly  lacking  in  credibility.   It  is  accepted  by   the
             respondent that he has been a member of MQM, but  it  is  also
             clear that he has been an extremely low level  member.   I  do
             not accept that  the  authorities  were  responsible  for  his
             father's death as the death certificate makes it clear that he
             died of natural causes.  The appellant was unable  to  provide
             any documentary evidence regarding the FIR which was  said  to
             be issued against him and other workers, nor  did  he  provide
             any evidence regarding the studies which he had  commenced  in
             the UK and then ceased.  The respondent accepted that  he  had
             been involved in political activities and accepted  that  some
             threats had been made to MQM workers generally.


         37.  However, for the reasons set out in the  refusal  letter,  the
             appellant's account  has  not  been  consistent,  nor  has  he
             provided sufficient detail of  his  alleged  risk  on  return.
             Above all, he did not claim asylum until June 2017, over  five
             years after he came to the UK.  If he  had  been  at  risk  in
             Pakistan before he came  to  the  UK,  and  he  refers  to  an
             incident in 2011, there is no reason why he  should  not  have
             claimed asylum immediately on arrival in the UK or at least at
             the earliest possible opportunity.  He failed  to  do  so  and
             this goes to his credibility  under  s.8  of  the  Asylum  and
             Immigration (Treatment of Claimants Etc) Act 2004.


         38.  Above all the  appellant  has  been  an  extremely  low  level
             worker, and is not well known to the authorities -  and  I  do
             not accept that he is at risk  on  return  to  Pakistan.   His
             claim for asylum therefore fails along with  the  claim  under
             Articles 2 and 3 ECHR.


         39.  For the same reasons his  claim  for  humanitarian  protection
             fails because  he  cannot  show  that  there  are  substantial
             grounds for believing that there is a  real  risk  of  serious
             harm on return to Pakistan.


         40.  The appellant also put forward a claim under Article 8 ECHR in
             respect of his family or private life.  I do not  accept  that
             he has a family membership within the MQM.  In respect of  any
             private life, it is not disproportionate for him to return  to
             Pakistan where I have concluded he is not at risk.   There  is
             no disproportionate breach of any Article 8 ECHR rights by his
             returning to Pakistan."

5.   Accordingly the judge dismissed the appeal on all grounds.

6.   Permission to appeal was granted by a First-tier  judge  on  the  basis
    that there was a lack of reasoning in the decision.  Ms Nasim  took  me
    through her grounds and submitted that the judge had  erred  in  taking
    all the respondent's reasons for  refusal  against  the  appellant  and
    using them as his own.  For example he had  followed  the  respondent's
    reasons for reliance upon the appellant's  behaviour  in  not  claiming
    asylum promptly and had not referred  to  the  appellant's  explanation
    which he had set out  in  paragraph  26  of  the  determination  -  the
    appellant had said he was young and did not have legal advice.

7.   She commented on the paragraphs of the  refusal  letter  which  showed,
    she submitted, that parts of the appellant's account had been accepted.
     I pointed out that it was difficult  to  reconcile  these  submissions
    with the wording of the decision itself and asked Mr Nath whether there
    had been any concessions made at  the  hearing.   He  referred  to  the
    Presenting Officer's note and submitted that there had  not  been.   It
    appeared that there had been an error in construction of  the  decision
    letter.  Counsel accepted  that  paragraph  34  of  the  decision  (the
    concluding paragraph in relation to MQM  membership)  reads,  "overall,
    your statements have been  considered  to  be  lacking  in  detail  and
    internally inconsistent.  Therefore,  this  aspect  of  your  claim  is
    rejected".

8.   Mr Nath submitted that there had been  no  concessions  made  regarding
    the MQM point.  The judge had found the appellant to be wholly  lacking
    in credibility and did not  arguably  err  in  cross-referring  to  the
    refusal letter.   No  documentary  evidence  about  the  FIR  had  been
    provided.  He had made  his  own  findings  and  had  given  sufficient
    reasons to support his decision.

9.   Ms Nasim in reply submitted that  the  judge  had  not  made  a  proper
    factual analysis and the determination was flawed.

10.  At the conclusion of the submissions I reserved my decision.  I can  of
    course only interfere with the decision of the First-tier judge  if  it
    was flawed in law.

11.  What appears to have led to the difficulty in this case is the  way  in
    which the decision itself is  set  out.   The  Secretary  of  State  in
    paragraph 22 refers to the documents submitted in support of the  claim
    which had been considered in the light of the guidance in Tanveer Ahmed
    [2002] UKIAT 00439.  The appellant's documents had not been  viewed  in
    isolation and had been considered as part  of  the  available  evidence
    that  they  related  to.   In  this  context  the  Secretary  of  State
    considered the appellant's claimed MQM membership and the problems that
    were said to have flowed from it and the documents adduced  in  support
    of the claim.  Mr Nath said that this was not  an  uncommon  method  of
    framing refusal decisions.

12.  While I accept that confusion appears to have occurred in this case  it
    is clear when the letter is  read  as  a  whole  that  the  appellant's
    claimed membership of the MQM had been rejected  -  paragraph  35,  for
    example reads:

         "Given that it has been rejected that you were a member of MQM,  it
         falls to  be  rejected  that  you  have  been  arrested,  detained,
         threatened and a subsequent FIR has been issued  for  your  arrest.
         However for the sake of completeness, this material  fact  will  be
         considered in full."

13.  To similar effect is paragraph 50:

         "Your  statements  are  considered  to  be   lacking   in   detail,
         implausible and inconsistent.  Given that it has been rejected that
         you are a MQM member, this aspect of your claim is also rejected."

14.   Finally,  under  the  heading  'Summary  of  Findings  of  Fact'   the
    respondent writes in paragraph 54 as follows:

         "Following facts are rejected:
           - MQM Membership
           - Arrest, threats and FIR."


15.  It  is  clear  from  the  determination  that  the  judge  records  the
    respondent's reliance on the refusal letter excluding paragraph  53  of
    it which is not relevant to this point.  It would  be  inconsistent  to
    rely  on  the  refusal  letter  and  accept  the  appellant's   claimed
    membership of MQM.  It appears that both Counsel  and  the  judge  read
    parts of the refusal decision in isolation and drew the conclusion that
    the appellant's membership of MQM  had  been  accepted,  albeit  as  an
    "extremely low-level member".

16.  However I am not satisfied that this factual error (which was an  error
    in favour of the appellant) is a  reason  for  disturbing  the  judge's
    conclusions.  Nor do I find that the judge's reasoning is deficient  as
    claimed.  The determination is a brief one but none the worse for that.
     I accept Mr Nath's submissions that the judge analysed the appellant's
    evidence properly and came to his own independent conclusion that  what
    the appellant said was wholly lacking in  credibility.   The  judge  is
    criticised for relying slavishly on the refusal decision but as I  have
    pointed out it was in effect misinterpreted in favour of the  appellant
    rather than the reverse.

17.  Counsel complains  that  the  judge  did  not  take  into  account  the
    appellant's reasons for the delay in making an  asylum  claim  but  she
    also refers me to paragraph 26 of the decision where the judge  records
    the explanation the appellant had given.  I  do  not  accept  that  the
    judge did not take into account what the appellant had said to  explain
    the delay, having set out the matter earlier on in the  decision.   The
    delay was a lengthy one and it was open to the judge to  find  that  it
    went to the appellant's credibility under Section 8 of  the  2004  Act.
    Reliance was also placed in the grounds and a skeleton argument  lodged
    shortly before the hearing on the judge's treatment of Article 8.  This
    point was not developed  at  the  hearing.   In  paragraph  26  of  the
    decision the judge records that the claim under Article 8 was based  on
    the point that the appellant was effectively "a family member of  MQM".
    In such circumstances it was not in my view a material error of law for
    the judge to deal with the Article 8 issues in a short compass  and  to
    conclude that removal of the appellant would not  be  disproportionate.
    It is not apparent that fuller treatment by reference to the Rules  and
    the statutory provisions could or might have led to a different result.

18.  For the  reasons  I  have  given  the  judge's  determination  was  not
    materially flawed in law and I direct that it shall stand.


Notice of Decision

19.  The appeal is dismissed on asylum, humanitarian  protection  and  human
    rights grounds.

20.  The judge made an anonymity order which I continue.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Fee Award

The judge made no fee award and I make none.





Signed                                  Date 30 April 2018


G Warr, Judge of the Upper Tribunal


















