
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12192/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 8 February 2019                            |On 28 February 2019           |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

                                   Between

                                     j H
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss G Thompson, Compass Immigration Law
For the Respondent:    Mr A Tan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS


1.   The appellant, a national of El Salvador, has permission  to  challenge
    the decision of Judge Parker of the First-tier Tribunal (FtT) sent on 3
    December 2018 dismissing her appeal against the decision  made  by  the
    respondent to refuse her protection claim and that of her dependants.

2.   The grounds are poorly drafted but assail two aspects  of  the  judge's
    decision:

    (1)  his adverse credibility finding; and


    (2)  his findings in the alternative  that  even  if  her  account  was
         accepted as true she would have available protection either in  her
         home area or in another part of the country.

3.    As  regards  (1),  I  am  persuaded  that  the  judge's  findings   on
    credibility are vitiated by  legal  error.   The  judge's  reasons  for
    rejecting credibility, are set out at paragraphs 22-24:

         "22. The respondent deals with the credibility of  the  appellant's
             claim to be at risk from gangs at paragraph 24, 25, 26 and 27.


         23.  They need not be repeated by me but they are persuasive.   For
             example, it is the appellants evidence that the result of  her
             actions several members of the gang came to her home with guns
             but the fact they came to no harm seems implausible given  the
             ruthlessness of the gangs as betrayed by the appellant.


         24.  I agree with paragraph  27  when  it  concludes  the  evidence
             demonstrates the willingness of criminal gangs in El  Salvador
             to use violence against those who do  not  comply  with  them.
             The appellants defied the gang over a long period  of  several
             months even though they knew where she lived.  This account is
             externally inconsistent with the background  evidence  and  in
             turn inconsistent with her claim that they have no  mercy  and
             respect for life."

4.   Leaving aside that the judge's reasons are cursory and  appear  largely
    to  be  a  mere  endorsement  of  the  respondent's,  they  are  simply
    inadequate.  There is no indication that the judge  considered  whether
    the appellant's account was or was not internally consistent  (save  in
    one respect) or demonstrated a sufficiency of detail. Although  of  the
    only two reasons  given  one  is  described  as  relating  to  external
    consistency, both were in fact considerations of plausibility only  and
    both are problematic.

5.   The fact that the appellant and her family said they came  to  no  harm
    despite visits by several members of the alleged  gang  carrying  guns,
    was certainly  a  consideration  capable  of  possessing  plausibility.
    However, on the appellant's account, although she had defied  the  gang
    members to the extent of not agreeing to hand over  her  son,  she  had
    paid the rent they demanded; indeed, under the weight of their  threats
    to take her son, she had doubled her payments.  Gang "protection" would
    lose its rationale if gangs members  killed  or  harmed  everyone  they
    threatened.  On the face of it their threats in relation to her son had
    achieved the purposes of increasing their protection income.  I  cannot
    see  that  any  of  the  background  evidence  before  the  judge   was
    "externally inconsistent" with this claim.  Nor  can  I  see  that  her
    account about this was  inconsistent  with  her  claim  that  the  gang
    members had no respect for life.  The judge's credibility findings were
    wholly inadequate.

6.   However, I am only entitled to set aside a  decision  if  satisfied  it
    discloses a material error of law and  in  this  case  the  judge  made
    alternative  findings  regarding  sufficiency  of  protection.  I  must
    therefore ask whether those alternative findings were sustainable.

7.   As regards the issue of protection in the home  area,  I  consider  the
    judge's approach was flawed.  The only two reasons  he  gave  concerned
    (i) the state of the evidence about general sufficiency of  protection;
    and (ii) the appellant's failure to approach the  authorities  on  more
    than one occasion:  In relation to (i), the background  evidence  cited
    by the judge, even if it lent  some  support  for  the  view  that  the
    authorities were  both  willing  and  able  to  provide  protection  to
    citizens in general, also bespoke the fact of very  significant  levels
    of police complicity with gang members.  That was something which in my
    view  the  judge  should  have  borne  in  mind  when  addressing   the
    appellant's own explanation for why she had only sought  help  for  the
    authorities on one occasion and had been fearful about doing so.  There
    is no rule that a person must exhaust all  protection  remedies  before
    leaving a country and in this case  the  judge  should  at  least  have
    considered the appellant's explanation  for  being  reluctant  to  seek
    police help.

8.   As regards internal protection, the judge's assessment is  set  out  at
    paragraph 36:

         "36.  The  appellant's  assertions  that  the  gang  members   have
             connections all over the country have not  been  found  to  be
             objectively  well-founded.   The  appellant  has   failed   to
             establish the gang members in their home area would  have  any
             motivation to seek her out if she  was  able  to  relocate  in
             another area of El Salvador such as San Miguel.  In short  the
             appellant has failed to demonstrate the power or influence  to
             locate the appellant throughout El  Salvador.   The  appellant
             has demonstrated considerable resourcefulness and adaptability
             in flying halfway round the world to  come  to  this  country.
             This country has an entirely different cultural background  to
             El Salvador.  The appellant is educated to  degree  level  and
             has run her own business.  Her husband has found employment in
             El Salvador.  All these factors will assist them on return.  I
             therefore find it would not  be  unreasonable  to  expect  the
             appellant to return to El Salvador and relocate."

9.   If  by  the  first  sentence  the  judge  meant  that  the  appellant's
    assertion  had  not  been  found  objectively   well-founded   by   the
    respondent, that did not explain on what basis he agreed.  If the judge
    meant as found by himself, then one looks in vain for the  reason  why.
    What was required was some identification of  the  background  evidence
    showing that gangs do not have significant  power  or  control  in  San
    Miguel or other specified areas.  Further, the appellant's evidence was
    that she had been threatened not  just  by  Gang  18  Surenos,  but  by
    "gangs" (plural) and she also said that she  and  her  family  had  not
    taken police advice about moving  elsewhere  because  there  are  gangs
    everywhere not just "18 gang and MS 13 gang".

10.   Accordingly,  I  am  not  persuaded  that  the  judge  identified  the
    "objective" basis for his stated conclusions either  on  protection  in
    the home area or protection in an alternative area.

11.  For the above reasons I conclude that the  decision  of  the  judge  is
    vitiated by material legal error and must  be  set  aside.   I  see  no
    alternative to a remittal to the FtT (not before Judge Parker).

12.  To summarise:

     The decision of the judge is set aside for material error of law.

     The case is remitted to the FtT.

     I would direct that the  respondent  produces  background  evidence  to
    support  its  position  regarding  internal  relocation  as  stated  at
    paragraph 51 (identifying San Miguel or La Paz as safe areas).


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed:

            [pic]                   Date: 25 February 2019
Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal


