
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12101/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 16th May 2019                     |On 13th August 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

                                     HMA
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. Bates, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr. Mohzam, Burton & Burton Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. An anonymity direction has previously been made by FtT Judge  Birk  and
    as the appeal concerns a claim for asylum and international protection,
    in my judgement, it is  appropriate  for  the  anonymity  order  to  be
    continued under Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
    Rules 2008.  HMA is granted anonymity throughout these proceedings.  No
    report of these proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify  him.
    This direction applies both to the appellant  and  to  the  respondent.
    Failure to comply with this direction could lead to  proceedings  being
    brought for contempt of court.


 2. The appellant in the appeal before me is the Secretary of State for the
    Home Department and the respondent to this appeal is HMA.  However, for
    ease of reference, in the course of this decision I adopt the  parties'
    status as it was before the FtT.  I refer to HMA as the appellant,  and
    the Secretary of State as the respondent.


 3. The appellant is an Iraqi national.  He is said to have  left  Iraq  on
    12th August 2017.  He claims to have entered the  UK  on  12th  October
    2017 and on that date, he claimed asylum.  His claim was refused by the
    respondent on 4th October 2018, and his appeal  against  that  decision
    was allowed on humanitarian protection grounds only, by FtT Judge  Birk
    for the reasons set out in a decision promulgated on 15th January 2019.




 4. A summary of the events that the appellant claims led to his  departure
    from Iraq are summarised at paragraph [5] of the  decision.   The  oral
    evidence given by the appellant is summarised at paragraphs [6] to  [8]
    of the decision. The Judge's findings and conclusions are  set  out  at
    paragraphs [16] to [28] of the decision. At paragraph [18],  the  Judge
    records that she did not find the appellant to be  a  credible  witness
    and she found that his account was inconsistent, vague and did not make
    sense. For the reasons identified at paragraphs [19] to [22],  the  FtT
    Judge rejected the core of his claim.  At  paragraph  [23],  the  Judge
    states:


         "I find that he has fabricated the core element of his claim. I  do
         not find that he has established  a  well-founded  fear  that  this
         group have had or would have  any  adverse  interest  in  him.  His
         claims that they can trace him lack substance since I do  not  find
         that they are adversely interested in him. I find that he does  not
         require the protection of the Refugee Convention and  there  is  no
         risk of a breach of Articles 2 or 3 which were argued on  the  same
         basis."


 5. Having rejected the claim for asylum and on human rights  grounds,  the
    Judge went on to consider the humanitarian protection claim.  She noted
    that it is accepted by the respondent that the appellant cannot  return
    to his home area, and that there is a need to internally  relocate.  At
    paragraph [26], the Judge concludes as follows:


         "The appellant concedes that he does have ID documentation which he
         says has been left behind in Iraq and may be with  his  mother.  He
         says that he also has a birth certificate in Iraq. He says that his
         passport has been retained by the agent. He states that he has  not
         been in contact with any member of his  family  since  he  left  in
         August 2017. I am satisfied that he does have family  in  Iraq  but
         that that he is not in contact with them. I am  satisfied  that  he
         does not have family in Baghdad or the IKR who  would  be  able  to
         assist him to obtain a CSID. His family had the financial means  to
         send him out of the country and so would have been able to  arrange
         funds for him within the country but since he is no longer able  to
         contact them I find that it would be unduly harsh  for  him  to  be
         returned to Baghdad and for him then to make his own way to IKR."


The appeal before me


 6. The respondent claims that the FtT Judge fails to give adequate reasons
    for her conclusion that the appellant will be unable to obtain a  CSID,
    reasonably soon after his arrival in Iraq. The respondent  claims  that
    having rejected the core of the appellant's  claim,  and  having  found
    that  the  appellant  has  fabricated  his  asylum  claim,  the   Judge
    irrationally and without any explanation, states that she is  satisfied
    that the appellant is not in contact with his family.


 7. Permission to appeal  was  granted  by  FtT  Judge  Hodgkinson  on  6th
    February 2019 and the matter comes before me to determine whether there
    is a material error of law in the decision of FtT Judge  Birk,  and  if
    so, to remake the decision.


 8. On behalf of the respondent, Mr Bates refers to the evidence  given  by
    the appellant, and recorded at  paragraph  [6]  of  the  decision.  The
    appellant confirmed that he has a national ID card which is in Iraq and
    was kept in the family home, and was  left  there  when  he  left.  The
    appellant claims that he has no contact with his  family,  but  as  the
    Judge noted,  at  [7],  he  has  his  father's  telephone  number.  The
    appellant offers no explanation  as  to  the  steps  taken  by  him  to
    establish contact with his family beyond his claim  that  he  has  been
    unable to speak to his family since leaving Iraq because he  has  tried
    to call his father on many occasions, and the phone  is  switched  off.
    Mr Bates submits that the decision is devoid of  any  reasons  for  the
    finding  that  the  appellant  is  not  in  contact  with  his  family,
    particularly in circumstances  where  the  FtT  Judge  found  that  the
    appellant has fabricated the  core  of  his  claim,  and  rejected  the
    appellant's account of the events that led him to leave Iraq.


 9. In reply, Mr Mohzam relied upon the skeleton argument  filed  with  the
    Tribunal.  He submits that having  referred  to  the  relevant  country
    guidance, it was open to the FtT Judge to find that  the  appellant  is
    not in contact with his family.  He submits  that  notwithstanding  the
    other adverse credibility findings made against the appellant,  it  was
    open to the FtT Judge to find that the appellant would be at risk  upon
    return such that he qualifies for humanitarian protection.


Error of Law


10. In considering the respondent's  appeal,  I  have  had  regard  to  the
    decision of the Upper Tribunal in Shizad (sufficiency of  reasons:  set
    aside) [2013] UKUT 00085 IAC where it was stated in the head note that:




         "Although there is a legal duty to give a brief explanation of  the
         conclusions on the central issue on which the appeal is determined,
         those reasons need not be extensive if  the  decision  as  a  whole
         makes sense, having regard to the material accepted by the judge."


11. I also  note  the  observations  made  by  Mr.  Justice  Hadon-Cave  in
    Budhathoki (reasons for decisions) [2014] UKUT 00341 (IAC);


         "It is generally unnecessary and unhelpful for First-tier  Tribunal
         judgments to rehearse every detail or issue raised in a case.  This
         leads to judgments becoming overly long and confused and is  not  a
         proportionate approach to deciding cases. It is, however, necessary
         for judges to identify and resolve key conflicts  in  the  evidence
         and explain in clear and brief terms their  reasons,  so  that  the
         parties can understand why they have won or lost."


12. The entire consideration of the question as to  whether  the  appellant
    can internally relocate, is dealt with very briefly in  paragraph  [26]
    of the decision of the FtT.  The FtT Judge had found that the appellant
    is  not  a  credible  witness  and  that  his  account  of  events   is
    inconsistent, vague and does not make sense. She rejected the  core  of
    his claim, but for reasons that are neither explained nor apparent,  at
    paragraph [26], the  Judge  states  that  she  is  satisfied  that  the
    appellant does have family in Iraq, but that he is not in contact  with
    them.  Having found the appellant not to be a credible witness,  it  is
    it difficult to understand what it was about the  appellant's  evidence
    regarding the lack of contact with his  family,  that  caused  the  FtT
    Judge to accept the appellant's evidence in that regard.  I accept that
    although the appellant was found  not  to  be  credible  regarding  the
    events that led to his departure from Iraq,  it  does  not  necessarily
    follow that he is not credible about  the  lack  of  contact  with  his
    family. However, the reader of the decision is entitled to know why the
    Judge considered that evidence to be credible in  light  of  the  other
    findings made.  The reader of the decision cannot in my  judgement,  be
    reassured from the content of paragraph [26] that  the  FtT  Judge  has
    properly considered whether  the  appellant  is  in  contact  with  his
    family, and the extent to which the appellant has taken  any  steps  to
    properly establish contact with them.


13. At the conclusion of the hearing before me, I informed the parties that
    I am satisfied that the decision of the FtT Judge involved  the  making
    of an error on a point of law, such that I set aside the decision,  and
    remake the decision.


Re-Making the decision


14. No Rule 15(2A) application has been made identifying the nature of  any
    further evidence to be adduced and explaining why it was not  submitted
    to the First-tier Tribunal.   No further witness statements or  hearing
    bundle has been prepared by the appellant's representatives.  There was
    no application to adduce further evidence.


15. The appellant does not challenge, or seek  to  go  behind  any  of  the
    findings previously made by FtT Judge  Birk  as  to  the  core  of  the
    appellant's account.  The FtT Judge rejected the appellant's account of
    the events that he claimed had occurred on 4th August  2017.   The  FtT
    Judge did not accept that the incident in which the  appellant  claimed
    that he had been shot at, or the subsequent raid of  the  family  home,
    had occurred.  The issue for me to determine is the  risk  upon  return
    now against that backdrop.


16. The parties agree that the appellant is from Dooz Khomato, a  contested
    area.  The Country Guidance now in place establishes that the intensity
    of the armed conflict in the so-called "contested areas", is such that,
    as a general matter, there are substantial grounds for  believing  that
    any civilian returned there, solely on account of his or  her  presence
    there, faces a real risk of being subjected to indiscriminate  violence
    amounting to serious harm within the scope  of  Article  15(c)  of  the
    Qualification Directive.  The parties agree that although the appellant
    may not be able to return to Dooz Khomato, there remains the  issue  of
    internal relocation to the IKR.


The evidence


17. In preparation for the hearing before the FtT previously, the appellant
    filed a bundle including a witness statement made by the appellant  and
    dated 26th November 2018.  In that statement the appellant claims  that
    he could not internally relocate because of his Kurdish ethnicity,  and
    he would be attacked regardless. He claims that he does  not  have  any
    proof of identity, and could not relocate to  the  Kurdish  area  (KRG)
    because he is not from there, and would not be accepted and allowed  to
    live there. He also claims that he could not relocate to the  KRG  area
    because of his father's previous involvement with the Baath  party.  He
    claims that he had his father's contact number and tried many times  to
    contact him, but the phone was switched off. He claims that  in  Derby,
    there is a Kurdish restaurant frequented by people  who  lived  in  the
    same town, and he has asked  them  if  they  know  any  member  of  the
    appellant's family. They have been  unable  to  provide  the  appellant
    within an update.  In making my decision, I have  carefully  considered
    all of the documents submitted by the parties, even  if  they  are  not
    specifically mentioned in this decision.


18. When the appellant  gave  evidence  before  the  FtT,  as  set  out  at
    paragraphs [6] to [8]  of  the  decision  of  the  FtT,  the  appellant
    confirmed that he has a national ID card that is in  Iraq.  He  claimed
    that he has never had it in his possession, and  it  was  kept  in  the
    family home, and it has been left there. The appellant maintained  that
    he has no contact with his family and  in  cross-examination,  he  said
    that he was not aware whether his uncle was still in  the  same  place,
    and he does not have his telephone number. He confirmed that he has his
    father's telephone number. He claimed that his passport was kept by the
    agent.


Findings and Conclusions


19. In reaching my decision, I remind myself that the burden of proof rests
    upon the appellant to show that at the date of the hearing  before  me,
    he has a well-founded fear of persecution within the meaning of article
    1A(2) of  the  Convention  and  Protocol  relating  to  the  Status  of
    Refugees.  It is for the appellant to show that there  are  substantial
    grounds  for  believing  that  he  meets  the   requirements   of   the
    Qualification Regulations and that he  is  entitled  to  protection  in
    accordance with paragraph 339C of the Immigration Rules.  That is to be
    determined objectively, in the light of the circumstances  existing  in
    Iraq.  The appellant must discharge the burden of proof  upon  him,  to
    the lower standard. This lower standard of proof can be expressed as  a
    'reasonable likelihood', 'a real risk' or a 'serious possibility'.


20. In reaching my decision, I have had  regard  to  the  relevant  country
    guidance.  AA (Article 15(c))  Iraq  CG  [2015]  UKUT  00544  (IAC)  as
    amended by the Court of Appeal  in  AA  (Iraq)  [2017]  EWCA  Civ  944,
    confirmed that there is a state of internal armed conflict  in  certain
    parts of  Iraq,  involving  government  security  forces,  militias  of
    various kinds, and the Islamist group known as ISIL. The  intensity  of
    this armed conflict in the so-called "contested areas", is  such  that,
    as a general matter, there are substantial grounds for  believing  that
    any civilian returned there, solely on account of his or  her  presence
    there, faces a real risk of being subjected to indiscriminate  violence
    amounting to serious harm within the scope  of  Article  15(c)  of  the
    Qualification Directive.


21. As I have set out previously, it is common ground between  the  parties
    that the issue for me to determine is the risk upon return now,  noting
    that the appellant is from a contested area.  Although  the  respondent
    accepts that the appellant may not be able to return to Dooz Khomato, I
    must consider whether the appellant can relocate elsewhere in Iraq.  To
    that end, insofar as is relevant, the Court of  Appeal  in  AA  (Iraq),
    provided the following guidance:


           "B. Documentation and Feasibility of Return (Excluding IKR)


           5. Return of former residents of the Iraqi Kurdish Region  (IKR)
           will be to the IKR and all other Iraqis will be to Baghdad.  The
           Iraqi authorities will allow an Iraqi national (P) in the United
           Kingdom to enter Iraq only if P is in possession of a current or
           expired Iraqi passport relating to P, or a laissez passer.


           6. No Iraqi national will be returnable to  Baghdad  if  not  in
           possession of one of these documents.


           7. In the light of the Court of Appeal's judgment in HF  (Iraq)
           and Others v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2013]
           EWCA Civ 1276, an  international  protection  claim  made  by  P
           cannot succeed by reference to any alleged risk of harm  arising
           from an absence of a current or  expired  Iraqi  passport  or  a
           laissez passer, if the Tribunal finds that  P's  return  is  not
           currently feasible  on  account  of  a  lack  of  any  of  those
           documents.


           8. Where P is returned to Iraq on a laissez  passer  or  expired
           passport, P will be at no risk of serious harm at the  point  of
           return by reason of not having a current passport.


           C. The CSID


           9. Regardless of the feasibility  of  P's  return,  it  will  be
           necessary to decide whether P has a CSID, or  will  be  able  to
           obtain one, reasonably soon after arrival in  Iraq.  A  CSID  is
           generally required in order for an  Iraqi  to  access  financial
           assistance from the authorities; employment; education; housing;
           and medical treatment. If P shows there are no family  or  other
           members likely to be able to provide means of support, P  is  in
           general likely to face a real risk of destitution, amounting  to
           serious harm, if, by the time any funds provided  to  P  by  the
           Secretary of State or her agents to assist P's return have  been
           exhausted, it is reasonably likely that P  will  still  have  no
           CSID.


           10. Where return is feasible but P  does  not  have  a  CSID,  P
           should as a general matter be able to obtain one from the  Civil
           Status Affairs Office for P's home Governorate, using  an  Iraqi
           passport (whether current or expired), if P has one. If  P  does
           not have such a passport, P's  ability  to  obtain  a  CSID  may
           depend on whether P knows the page and volume number of the book
           holding P's information (and that of P's family). P's ability to
           persuade the officials  that  P  is  the  person  named  on  the
           relevant page is likely  to  depend  on  whether  P  has  family
           members or other individuals who are prepared to vouch for P.


           11. P's ability to obtain  a  CSID  is  likely  to  be  severely
           hampered if P is unable to go to the Civil Status Affairs Office
           of P's Governorate because it is in an area where Article  15(c)
           serious  harm  is  occurring.  As  a  result  of  the  violence,
           alternative CSA Offices for Mosul,  Anbar  and  Saluhaddin  have
           been established in Baghdad and Kerbala. The evidence  does  not
           demonstrate that the "Central Archive", which exists in Baghdad,
           is in practice able to provide CSIDs to those in need  of  them.
           There is, however, a National Status Court in Baghdad, to  which
           P could apply for formal recognition of  identity.  The  precise
           operation of this court is, however, unclear.


           D. Internal Relocation Within Iraq (Other Than the IKR)


           14. As a general matter, it will not be unreasonable  or  unduly
           harsh for a person from a contested area to relocate to  Baghdad
           City or (subject to paragraph 2 above) the Baghdad Belts.


           15. In assessing whether it would be  unreasonable/unduly  harsh
           for P  to  relocate  to  Baghdad,  the  following  factors  are,
           however, likely to be relevant:


             (a) whether P has a CSID or will be able to  obtain  one  (see
         Part C above);


             (b) whether P can speak Arabic  (those  who  cannot  are  less
             likely to find employment);


             (c) whether P has family members or friends in Baghdad able to
             accommodate him;


             (d)  whether  P  is  a  lone  female   (women   face   greater
             difficulties than men in finding employment);


             (e) whether P can find a sponsor to access  a  hotel  room  or
             rent accommodation;


             (f) whether P is from a minority community;


             (g) whether there is support available for P bearing  in  mind
             there is some evidence that returned failed asylum seekers are
             provided with the support generally given to IDPs.


           16. There is not a real risk of an ordinary civilian  travelling
           from Baghdad airport to  the  southern  governorates,  suffering
           serious harm en route to such governorates so as engage  Article
           15(c)."


22. In AAH (Iraqi Kurds - internal relocation) Iraq CG [UKUT 212 (IAC), the
    Upper Tribunal supplemented Section C of  the  guidance  given  by  the
    Court of Appeal in AA (Iraq) with the following guidance:


         "1.  Whilst it remains possible for an Iraqi national returnee  (P)
             to obtain a new CSID whether P is able to  do  so,  or  do  so
             within a reasonable time frame, will depend on the  individual
             circumstances. Factors to be considered include:


               i)  Whether  P  has  any  other  form  of  documentation,  or
                  information about the location of his entry in  the  civil
                  register. An INC, passport, birth/marriage certificates or
                  an expired CSID would all be  of  substantial  assistance.
                  For  someone  in  possession  of  one  or  more  of  these
                  documents the process should be straightforward. A laissez-
                  passer should not be counted for these purposes: these can
                  be issued without any other form of  ID  being  available,
                  are not of any assistance in 'tracing back' to the  family
                  record and are confiscated upon arrival at Baghdad.


              ii) The location of the relevant civil registry office. If  it
                  is in an area held, or  formerly  held,  by  ISIL,  is  it
                  operational?


             iii) Are there male  family  members  who  would  be  able  and
                  willing to attend the civil registry with P?  Because  the
                  registration system is patrilineal it will be relevant  to
                  consider whether  the  relative  is  from  the  mother  or
                  father's side. A maternal uncle in possession of his  CSID
                  would be able to assist in locating the original place  of
                  registration of the individual's mother,  and  from  there
                  the trail would need to be followed to the place that  her
                  records were transferred upon marriage. It  must  also  be
                  borne in mind that a significant number of  IDPs  in  Iraq
                  are themselves undocumented; if that is  the  case  it  is
                  unlikely that  they  could  be  of  assistance.   A  woman
                  without a male relative to  assist  with  the  process  of
                  redocumentation would face very significant  obstacles  in
                  that officials may refuse to deal with her case at all."


23. Insofar as return to  the  IKR  is  concerned,  section  E  of  Country
    Guidance annexed to the Court of Appeal's decision  in  AA  (Iraq)  was
    replaced in AAH with the following guidance:


         "2.  There are currently no  international  flights  to  the  Iraqi
             Kurdish Region (IKR). All returns from the United Kingdom  are
             to Baghdad.


         3.   For an Iraqi  national  returnee  (P)  of  Kurdish  origin  in
             possession of a valid CSID or Iraqi passport, the journey from
             Baghdad to the IKR, whether by air or land, is affordable  and
             practical and can be made without a real risk of  P  suffering
             persecution, serious harm, Article 3 ill treatment  nor  would
             any difficulties on the journey make relocation unduly harsh.


         4.   P is unable to board a domestic flight between Baghdad and the
             IKR without either a CSID or a valid passport.


         5.   P will face considerable  difficulty  in  making  the  journey
             between Baghdad and the IKR by land without a  CSID  or  valid
             passport. There are numerous checkpoints en  route,  including
             two checkpoints in the immediate vicinity of the airport.   If
             P has neither a CSID nor a valid passport there is a real risk
             of P being detained at a checkpoint until  such  time  as  the
             security personnel are able to verify P's identity.  It is not
             reasonable to require P to travel between Baghdad and  IKR  by
             land absent the ability of P  to  verify  his  identity  at  a
             checkpoint. This normally requires the attendance  of  a  male
             family member and production of P's identity documents but may
             also be achieved by calling upon "connections"  higher  up  in
             the chain of command.


         6.   Once at the IKR border (land  or  air)  P  would  normally  be
             granted entry to the territory. Subject to security screening,
             and registering presence with the local mukhtar,  P  would  be
             permitted to enter and reside in the IKR with no further legal
             impediments  or  requirements.   There   is   no   sponsorship
             requirement for Kurds.


         7.   Whether P would be at particular risk of ill-treatment  during
             the security screening process must be assessed on a  case-by-
             case basis. Additional factors that may increase risk include:
             (i) coming from a family with a known association  with  ISIL,
             (ii) coming from an area associated with ISIL and (iii)  being
             a single male of fighting age. P  is  likely  to  be  able  to
             evidence the fact of recent arrival from the UK,  which  would
             dispel any suggestion of having  arrived  directly  from  ISIL
             territory.


         8.   If P has family members living in the IKR cultural norms would
             require that family to accommodate P. In such circumstances  P
             would, in general, have sufficient assistance from the  family
             so as to lead a 'relatively normal life', which would  not  be
             unduly harsh. It is nevertheless important for decision-makers
             to determine  the  extent  of  any  assistance  likely  to  be
             provided by P's family on a case by case basis.


         9.   For those without the assistance of  family  in  the  IKR  the
             accommodation options are limited:


               i) Absent special circumstances it is not  reasonably  likely
                  that P will be able to gain access to one of  the  refugee
                  camps in  the  IKR;  these  camps  are  already  extremely
                  overcrowded and are closed to newcomers. 64% of  IDPs  are
                  accommodated in private settings with  the  vast  majority
                  living with family members;


              ii) If P cannot live with a family  member,  apartments  in  a
                  modern block in a new neighbourhood are available for rent
                  at a cost of between $300 and $400 per month;


             iii) P could resort to a 'critical shelter arrangement', living
                  in  an  unfinished  or  abandoned   structure,   makeshift
                  shelter, tent, mosque, church or squatting in a government
                  building.  It would  be  unduly  harsh  to  require  P  to
                  relocate to the IKR if P will live in a  critical  housing
                  shelter without access to basic necessities such as  food,
                  clean water and clothing;


              iv) In considering whether P would be  able  to  access  basic
                  necessities, account must be taken of the fact that failed
                  asylum seekers are entitled to apply for a grant under the
                  Voluntary Returns Scheme, which could  give  P  access  to
                  �1500. Consideration should also be given to whether P can
                  obtain financial support from other sources  such  as  (a)
                  employment, (b) remittances from relatives abroad, (c) the
                  availability of ad hoc charity or by being able to  access
                  PDS rations.


         10.  Whether P is able to secure employment must be assessed  on  a
             case-by-case basis taking the following matters into account:


               i) Gender. Lone women are very unlikely to be able to  secure
                  legitimate employment;


              ii) The unemployment rate for Iraqi IDPs living in the IKR  is
                  70%;


             iii) P cannot work without a CSID;


              iv) Patronage and nepotism continue to be important factors in
                  securing employment. A returnee with family connections to
                  the region will have a significant advantage  in  that  he
                  would ordinarily be able to call upon  those  contacts  to
                  make introductions to prospective employers and  to  vouch
                  for him;


               v) Skills, education and experience. Unskilled workers are at
                  the  greatest  disadvantage,  with  the  decline  in   the
                  construction industry reducing  the  number  of  labouring
                  jobs available;


              vi) If P is from an area with a marked association with  ISIL,
                  that may deter prospective employers."


24. As someone who is not a former resident of  the  Iraqi  Kurdish  Region
    ("IKR"), the return of the appellant will be to Baghdad.   The  Country
    Guidance confirms that the Iraqi authorities will only allow  an  Iraqi
    national entry if they are  in  possession  of  a  current  or  expired
    passport or a laissez passer.  In his screening interview the appellant
    stated [Q.3.2] that he had been fingerprinted in Iraq when his passport
    was obtained.  He also stated [Q.1.8] that his passport is now with the
    agent.  That is consistent with the appellant's evidence before the FtT
    that his passport  was  kept  by  the  agent.  During  the  substantive
    interview [Q.23 -29], the appellant confirmed that he used in  his  own
    passport to travel to the UK and that the passport was taken  from  him
    in Turkey.  There is nothing to suggest that the appellant  is  himself
    in possession of a current or expired Iraqi passport, but in any event,
    in accordance with the Country Guidance as confirmed by  the  Court  of
    Appeal in AA Iraq, an international protection claim cannot succeed  by
    reference to any alleged risk of harm arising  from  an  absence  of  a
    current or expired Iraqi passport or a laissez  passer  simply  because
    return is not currently feasible on account of a lack of any  of  those
    documents.  The appellant has clearly been in possession of  a  genuine
    Iraqi passport previously.  There is no evidence before me of any steps
    taken by the appellant to obtain a further Iraqi passport, and I  find,
    on the evidence before me, that there is no reason  why  the  appellant
    should not be able to replace his passport.


25. The appellant is an Iraqi  national  of  Kurdish  origin,  and  I  must
    therefore consider whether the appellant has originals or copies of his
    Civil Status ID ("CSID"), or will be able  to  obtain  one,  reasonably
    soon after arrival in Iraq.  The appellant  accepted  in  his  evidence
    before the FtT that he does have a  national  ID  card  which  he  left
    behind in Iraq, and which may be with his mother. He also has  a  birth
    certificate in Iraq.  There is no evidence before me as  to  any  steps
    taken by  the  appellant  to  obtain  the  documents  from  either  the
    appellant's  family  or  from  official  sources,  such  as  the  Iraqi
    Consulate.


26. I reject the claim by the appellant that he is not in contact with  his
    family in Iraq.  In his asylum interview the appellant claimed  [Q.9  -
    10] that he has not spoken to his family since he left Iraq. He  claims
    that he has his father's phone number that he has tried  to  call  many
    times, but it is switched off.  The appellant has  fabricated  a  claim
    for international protection, and in my judgement, his  claim  that  he
    has  had  no  contact  with  his  family  since  leaving  in  Iraq,  is
    incredible. On any view of the evidence,  the  appellant's  father  and
    uncle made a concerted effort to facilitate the  appellant's  departure
    from Iraq, no doubt at considerable cost. They would no doubt have been
    anxious to know where the appellant is, and that he is safe. It  is  in
    my judgement incredible that the  appellant's  father  would  not  have
    answered any of the calls made by the appellant to  him.  There  is  no
    evidence of the appellant having taken any active  steps  to  establish
    contact with his family by other means, including via enquiries through
    the Red Cross. The appellant's evidence in this regard is simply vague,
    and does not make sense. I do not  accept  it,  and  I  find  that  the
    appellant is likely to be in contact with his family.


27. Having carefully considered the evidence before me, even on  the  lower
    standard of proof, the appellant has failed to establish that  he  does
    not have the CSID or that he would not be able to obtain  his  original
    identity documents from his mother, father or extended family  members,
    who remain in Iraq.


28. Should it be necessary for the appellant to obtain a new  CSID  because
    his previous one has expired, on the lower  standard,  I  am  satisfied
    that the appellant, at the very least, has an  expired  CSID,  and  the
    process should therefore be straightforward.


29. Having found that the appellant has a CSID or will be  able  to  obtain
    one, reasonably soon after arrival in Iraq, I turn to the  question  of
    internal relocation.   The  Country  Guidance  establishes  that  as  a
    general matter, it will not be  unreasonable  or  unduly  harsh  for  a
    person from a contested area to  relocate  to  Baghdad  City.   I  have
    already found that the appellant has a CSID or will be able  to  obtain
    one.  The appellant claims, and  I  accept,  that  he  does  not  speak
    Arabic. That would  not  be  implausible  for  an  Iraqi  Kurd  from  a
    contested area and he was not challenged about his inability  to  speak
    Arabic.  The Country Guidance establishes that those who  cannot  speak
    Arabic, are less likely to find employment.  The  appellant  has  never
    resided in Baghdad and there is no evidence linking him to  any  family
    contact in Baghdad.


30. The appellant is, as a Kurd, from a minority community, and is a  Sunni
    Muslim.  I accept the appellant is a Sunni Muslim,  and  that  enhances
    the risk that he would be exposed to, in Baghdad.  I am satisfied  that
    it would be unreasonable or unduly harsh to  expect  the  appellant  to
    relocate in Baghdad.


31. I do however find that it would be reasonable and not unduly harsh,  to
    expect the appellant to relocate in the IKR.  The Tribunal confirmed in
    AAH that for an Iraqi national of Kurdish origin  in  possession  of  a
    valid CSID or Iraqi passport, the journey  from  Baghdad  to  the  IKR,
    whether by air or land, is affordable and practical, and  can  be  made
    without a real risk of the individual suffering persecution, or serious
    harm.


32. I have rejected the appellant's  evidence  that  he  is  no  longer  in
    contact with his family in Iraq.  The appellant's  evidence  about  his
    contact with his father  is  vague  and  unconvincing.   It  is  simply
    incredible that the appellant would be unable to make any contact  with
    his family since leaving Iraq, because the only  number  that  he  has,
    that of his father, relates to a phone that is "switched  off".  It  is
    incredible that even if his father's  phone  was  "switched  off",  the
    appellant has done very little to find,  and  get  in  touch  with  his
    family.


33. I find that the appellant could obtain his CSID from  his  family.   In
    any event, if the appellant is unable to leave the UK with his CSID,  I
    am quite satisfied that the appellant's family members would bring  his
    existing CSID or a replacement to the appellant, upon  his  arrival  in
    Baghdad.  I find that the appellant has a  CSID  or  will  be  able  to
    obtain one, reasonably soon after arrival in Iraq so that he could make
    the journey from Baghdad to  the  IKR,  without  a  real  risk  of  him
    suffering persecution, serious harm, or Article 3 ill treatment.


34. Once at the IKR border, the appellant, as is normal, would  be  granted
    entry  to  the  territory,  and  subject  to  security  screening,  and
    registering his presence with the local mukhtar, the appellant would be
    permitted to enter  and  reside  in  the  IKR  with  no  further  legal
    impediments or requirements. There is nothing in  the  evidence  before
    me, or as  to  the  profile  of  the  appellant,  that  is  capable  of
    establishing that he would  be  at  particular  risk  of  ill-treatment
    during the security  screening  process.   I  remind  myself  that  the
    appellant's account of the events that led to his departure from  Iraq,
    were comprehensively rejected by FtT Judge  Birk  previously.   In  any
    event, he would to be able to evidence the fact of recent arrival  from
    the UK, which would dispel any suggestion of  having  arrived  directly
    from ISIL territory.  Cultural norms  would  require  that  the  family
    accommodate the appellant. The FtT Judge  found  that  the  appellant's
    family had the financial means to send him out of the  country  and  so
    would have been able to arrange funds for him within the country. I  am
    satisfied that the appellant will have sufficient assistance  from  the
    family so as to lead a 'relatively normal life',  which  would  not  be
    unduly harsh.


35. It follows that in my judgment, the appeal cannot succeed on the  basis
    of the Refugee Convention or on Humanitarian Protection grounds.


36.  I  therefore  dismiss  the  appeal  on  asylum  grounds,  humanitarian
    protection grounds and also on human rights grounds. (Articles 2 and  3
    of the European Convention on Human Rights).


NOTICE OF DECISION


37. The appellant's appeals on asylum grounds, humanitarian protection  and
    Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights are dismissed.


Signed   Date 21st June 2019




       Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia





FEE AWARD


I have dismissed the appeal.  In any event, as no fee is  paid  or  payable,
there can be no fee award.


Signed   Date 21st June 2019


    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia




