
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12218/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On: 24 April 2018                     |On: 26 April 2018                    |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                                 cebert [k]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Plowright, instructed by Perera & Co Solicitors

For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1.     The appellant is a citizen of Jamaica born on 28 February 1949. He
      has been given permission to appeal against the decision of First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Cohen dismissing his appeal  against  the  respondent's
      decision to refuse his asylum and human rights claim.

   2.     The appellant entered the United Kingdom on 21  March  2001  as  a
      visitor and remained in the UK without leave after the expiry  of  his
      visa. On 22 June 2006 he was encountered in an  immigration  operation
      and served with papers as an overstayer. He claimed asylum on  16  May
      2017 on the basis of a fear of gangs in Jamaica. His claim was refused
      in a decision dated 9 November 2017 and the respondent concluded  that
      his removal to Jamaica would not breach his human rights.


   3.     The appellant appealed against that decision. His appeal was heard
      on 21 December 2017 by First-tier Tribunal Judge Cohen. The  appellant
      withdrew the asylum aspect of his appeal before the judge and  pursued
      his appeal on Article 8 grounds only.


   4.     At the appeal hearing, the judge heard  from  the  appellant,  his
      brother and his grandson. The appellant's evidence  before  the  judge
      was that he had established a private and family life  in  the  UK  by
      virtue of his length of residence and his close family members  living
      here including his brother, his daughter and  his  grandchildren,  and
      that his children all lived outside  Jamaica.  His  brother  explained
      that he had cancer and  was  in  remission,  that  the  appellant  had
      assisted him a lot during his illness and that they  were  close.  His
      grandson gave evidence that the appellant was like a father-figure  to
      him and had played a vital role in  his  upbringing.  The  judge  also
      considered a statement from the appellant's granddaughter.  The  judge
      noted that the appellant could not meet the requirements  of  Appendix
      FM and paragraph 276ADE(1) on the basis of his private and family life
      and proceeded to consider Article 8 outside the immigration rules.  He
      did not accept that  the  appellant's  relationship  with  his  family
      members constituted family life and considered proportionality on  the
      basis of his private life. He concluded that the  appellant's  removal
      was not disproportionate and did not breach his Article 8  rights  and
      he dismissed the appeal. His decision was promulgated  on  17  January
      2018.

   5.     The  appellant  then  sought  permission  to  appeal  the  judge's
      decision on the grounds that it was irrational for the judge  to  find
      that his ties to his brother,  grandchildren  and  great-grandchildren
      did not go beyond the ordinary emotional ties between  family  members
      and that the judge had wrongly taken into account  section  8  of  the
      Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of Claimants, etc)  Act  2004  given
      that credibility was not in issue.


   6.     Permission was granted in the First-tier Tribunal on  24  February
      2018.

   7.     At the hearing both parties made submissions before me. I  advised
      them that, in my view, there were no errors  of  law  in  the  judge's
      decision requiring it to be set aside.


   8.     The judge plainly gave full consideration to the appellant's  ties
      with his family members in the UK, having heard from and recorded  the
      evidence  of  his  brother  and  grandson.  Mr   Plowright,   in   his
      submissions, criticised the judge for his lack of elaboration at  [20]
      with respect to his finding that the appellant's relationship with his
      family members did not extend beyond normal family ties  and  did  not
      constitute family life. However it seems to me that there  was  little
      more that the judge could have said, given the limited evidence before
      him, which comprised of no more than statements  from  the  appellant,
      his brother, his grandson, his granddaughter and  some  friends  (with
      nothing from his daughter), and the oral evidence. There  was  nothing
      in that evidence which, in my view, could have  led  to  a  conclusion
      that there was anything more than the  usual  emotional  ties  between
      family members, in terms of the guidance in Kugathas  v  Secretary  of
      State for the Home  Department  [2003]  EWCA  Civ  31.  There  was  no
      evidence of any particular dependency, physical or emotional. The only
      aspects of the appellant's family ties that could have  remotely  been
      considered as relevant to the question  of  dependency  were  in  fact
      fully considered by the judge at [20] where he  specifically  referred
      to the assistance the appellant provided to  his  brother  during  his
      illness and the length of time he had spent with his family in the UK.
      In the circumstances the judge properly concluded that Article  8  was
      not engaged in terms of family life  and  proceeded  to  consider  his
      family ties in the context of his private life. There is no  merit  in
      the grounds asserting that he ought to have done otherwise.

   9.     As for the second ground, I consider that nothing material  arises
      from this. The judge was perfectly entitled to  take  account  of  the
      appellant's   lengthy   period    of    overstaying    in    assessing
      proportionality. The fact that he made his findings in the context  of
      section 8 of the 2004 Act, when credibility had not been raised as  an
      issue, was neither here nor there and certainly had no material impact
      on his assessment. The judge  considered  all  relevant  matters  when
      assessing proportionality, including the appellant's family  ties  and
      his length of residence in the UK,  and  was  unarguably  entitled  to
      conclude that the respondent's decision was entirely proportionate.


  10.     For all of these reasons I find that the judge was fully  entitled
      to reach the conclusions that he did and to dismiss the appeal on  the
      basis that he did. I find no errors of law in the judge's decision.  I
      uphold the decision.

DECISION

  11.     The making of the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  not
      involve an error on a point of law. I do not set aside  the  decision.
      The decision to dismiss the appeal stands.


Signed   [pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede                           Dated:  24 April 2018
