
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
pa/12917/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 30 June 2017                          |  On 13 July 2017                   |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RAMSHAW

                                   Between

                                   mr h m
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms B Asigo, Solicitor instructed by R.O.C.K.
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal
    or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any
    form of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  the
    original Appellant. This direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  all
    parties. Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise  to
    contempt of court proceedings.

 2. The appellant is a national of Uganda who was born on  24  April  1988.
    He entered the United Kingdom on 29 September 2015 with  a  visit  visa
    valid until 9 March 2016.  He overstayed at the end of his visa  period
    and remaining in the United Kingdom unlawfully.  On 22  April  2016  he
    attended the Asylum Intake Unit and was given an appointment for 11 May
    2016 on which day he formally claimed asylum.  The  respondent  refused
    the appellant's claim for asylum on 9 November  2016.   The  respondent
    did not accept that the appellant was homosexual as claimed and did not
    accept the appellant's account as credible.  The respondent  considered
    that the appellant was not entitled to humanitarian protection and that
    the UK would not be in breach  of  the  European  Convention  on  Human
    Rights if he were to be returned to Uganda.

The appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 3. The appellant appealed against the respondent's decision to the  First-
    tier Tribunal.  In a decision promulgated on 6 February 2017 First-tier
    Tribunal Judge P-J S White dismissed the appellant's appeal.  The judge
    did not consider the appellant's claim to  be  credible.   He  did  not
    accept that the appellant was homosexual or that he had previously been
    arrested or is presently wanted on that account.  No  Article  8  claim
    was advanced before the First-tier Tribunal.  The judge found that  the
    appellant  could  not  satisfy  the  requirements  of  Appendix  FM  or
    paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules HC 395 (as amended) and  that
    there were no compelling  circumstances,  not  sufficiently  recognised
    under  the  Rules,  which  might  make   removal   of   the   appellant
    disproportionate.

 4. The appellant applied for permission to appeal against  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision.  On 19 May 2017 First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Grant-
    Hutchison granted the appellant permission to appeal.

The hearing before the Upper Tribunal

 5. The grounds for permission to appeal argue that the judge made an error
    of law in failing to adjourn the hearing.  The grounds assert that  the
    appellant had changed representative and that the  previous  solicitors
    were no longer instructed and that vital evidence had not been included
    in the documents before the  First-tier  Tribunal.  The  appellant  had
    indicated to the judge that he felt misrepresented, that he  could  not
    deal with the matter  on  his  own  and  that  he  had  instructed  new
    solicitors.  It is asserted that the appellant stated  at  the  hearing
    that his witness statement did not deal with the issues raised  by  the
    Home Office, that it was not read back to him and it  did  not  contain
    everything he wanted.

 6. The Secretary of State had served a Rule 24 response.  However, at  the
    commencement of the hearing  Mr  Bramble  indicated  that  he  was  not
    pursuing the reasons set out in the Rule 24 response.  Mr Bramble  very
    helpfully indicated that it was accepted by the Secretary of State that
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge had erred.  He submitted that it was  not
    accepted that then failure to adjourn amounted to an error of law.   He
    submitted  that  in  this  case   the   appellant   had   changed   his
    representative 48 hours before the hearing, a bundle of  documents  had
    been provided but the new representatives did not attend  the  hearing.
    The most significant issue he submitted  was  that  the  appellant  had
    raised  issues  regarding  the  lack  of  information  in  his  witness
    statement and that his witness statement was incorrect.  The  error  of
    law arose because the  judge  went  on  to  make  adverse  findings  in
    reliance on the appellant's witness statement, for example at paragraph
    23.  He submitted that if the witness statement had been identified  as
    problematic and not representative of what the appellant had  told  his
    former solicitors then the judge should not have relied on it  or  made
    adverse inferences on the basis of its contents.  He accepted that that
    was a material error of law.

 7. Ms Asigo submitted that the appellant had stated to the judge  that  he
    had no confidence in his solicitors.  The failure to adjourn to  enable
    the appellant to have a representative was an error of law as  in  this
    case the appellant had instructed a new representative  but  there  had
    not been time for them to prepare the case.

Discussion

 8. The First-tier Tribunal Judge in this case adopted a fairly  meticulous
    approach to consideration of the evidence  and  set  out  in  full  his
    findings and reasons for those findings.  The judge set out:

         "18. I ascertained that no one had attended the Tribunal from or on
             the instructions of R.O.C.K. Solicitors.  I  then  heard  from
             the appellant.  He explained that he  wanted  an  adjournment.
             The letter had set out four matters, which were that he is  an
             asylum seeker and not entitled to work, that he cannot  afford
             to pay for representation, that  he  had  instructed  his  new
             solicitors to act for him on legal aid, and that he said  that
             the witness statements submitted by  his  previous  solicitors
             did not deal with the issues raised by  the  Home  Office  for
             refusal of his claim.  The appellant told me  that  the  first
             witness statement was not  read  back  to  him  and  that  not
             everything he wanted included was in it, and therefore he felt
             misrepresented.  He said that he had been asked to  pay  money
             which he did not have and  thought  that  might  be  why  some
             issues were lacking.  He  explained  that  there  were  issues
             relating to paragraphs of the  refusal  letter  not  included,
             that he could not deal with the matter on his own, and that he
             was now a member of Out and Proud  African  LGBTI.   He  added
             that whenever he went to his previous  solicitors  they  would
             only be asking him for money.  I asked him whether he had made
             any complaint and he said that he had shown his statement to a
             friend who thought they would not be of any more help to him.

         ...

         20.  The appellant in reply said that he had  some  evidence  which
             had been left with his new  solicitors  which  would  help  to
             prove he was gay.  This evidence was photographic.  In  answer
             to a question from me he further  explained  that  these  were
             pictures taken the previous day and showing  him  involved  in
             activities with friends who are gay.

         21.  I refused the application to adjourn.  I  was  satisfied  that
             there had been ample time to prepare the appeal, which  turned
             on the single issue of whether or not the  appellant  is  gay.
             It  was  apparent  that  his  previous  solicitors  had   done
             considerable  work  to  prepare  the  case,  while   his   new
             solicitors had done nothing save to try  to  ensure  that  the
             appeal was adjourned, and had not even attended the hearing to
             support that  application  for  an  adjournment.   I  was  not
             satisfied that  the  absence  of  evidence,  in  the  form  of
             photographs taken the day  before  the  trial,  would  have  a
             material effect, and I noted the letter  from  the  solicitors
             did not refer,  as  a  reason  for  the  adjournment,  to  the
             presence of further evidence.  I was  further  satisfied  that
             the appellant would be perfectly well able to  explain  to  me
             what it was that had been omitted from his witness  statement.
             There was no indication of any actual complaint  made  to  the
             former solicitors and it seemed to me  that  this  was  little
             more than a device to put off the  day  at  which  the  appeal
             would be heard.  In  all  the  circumstances  it  was  not  in
             accordance with the interests of  justice  or  the  overriding
             objective to put the matter off to another day."

 9. On the facts of this case I consider that the First-tier Tribunal Judge
    was entitled to consider that proceeding without an  adjournment  would
    not result in unfairness to the appellant.  It is clear that the  judge
    considered that he would be able to deal  with  issues  raised  by  the
    appellant.

10. However, I do however accept the submissions made by Mr  Bramble  that,
    having proceeded to hear the appeal, the judge ought to have  exercised
    extreme caution in making any adverse findings  based  on  the  witness
    statement of the appellant.  At paragraph 23 the judge set out:

         "23. ...I note first that the witness statement  prepared  for  him
             and signed and adopted by him did  include  responses  to  the
             refusal letter, clearly indicating that his former  solicitors
             had gone through  it  with  him,  but  did  not  include  this
             challenge. ...I am in no doubt that  he  did  claim  that  his
             friend was sitting on Y's lap, and is now seeking  to  retract
             that evidence."

11. At paragraph  24  the  judge  set  out  in  detail  evidence  from  the
    appellant's interview and noting his concerns with the  evidence  about
    the incident in the shower at school.  At the end of that paragraph the
    judge records:

         "Again, none of this featured in the witness statement".

12. The judge has drawn adverse inferences from the appellant's failure  to
    respond to  or  challenge  the  respondent's  concerns  by  essentially
    finding there were omissions  in  the  appellant's  witness  statement.
    Given the appellant's concerns, as expressed at the commencement of the
    hearing  and  in  the  application  for  an  adjournment,   had   these
    shortcomings been remedied it could  have  made  a  difference  to  the
    outcome of  this  appeal.   On  the  facts  of  this  case  given  that
    credibility was core to the appellant's  claim  and  that  this  is  an
    asylum claim the interests of fairness  require  that  the  appellant's
    appeal is re-heard.

13. I find that there was  a  material  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision. I set aside  that  decision  pursuant  to  section
    12(2)(a) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 ('TCEA').

14. I remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal for the case to be heard de-
    novo before any judge other than Judge P-J S White pursuant to  section
    12(2)(b) and 12(3)(a) of the TCEA  be  listed  at  the  next  available
    opportunity at Hatton Cross.







Notice of Decision

15. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained a material  error  of
    law.  The case is remitted to be heard on the next  available  date  at
    Hatton Cross before any judge other than Judge P-J S White.





Signed   P M Ramshaw                         Date 11 July 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Ramshaw

