
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12415/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Cardiff Civil Justice Centre|Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|                                     |On 29 April 2021                     |
|Working Remotely By Skype            |                                     |
|On 8 April 2021                      |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                                    B S A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Bass, Duncan Lewis Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/2698) I  make  an  anonymity  order.   Unless  the  Upper
    Tribunal or court directs otherwise, no  report  of  these  proceedings
    shall directly or indirectly identify the  appellant.   This  direction
    applies to both the appellant and to the respondent and  a  failure  to
    comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Introduction

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Iraq who was born  on  4  February  1988.
    She arrived in the United Kingdom clandestinely in September 2017.  She
    claimed asylum on 28 September 2017 with her two  dependent  children.
    The basis of the appellant's claim  was  that  she  feared  an  'honour
    killing' in Iraq as a result of a relationship  that  her  husband  had
    with the wife of R, whom she claimed was influential within the KDP  as
    a result of his father's position within the KDP.   She  claimed  that,
    before leaving Iraq, she had been targeted by being shot  in  the  legs
    whilst in a car.

 3. On 4 December 2019, the Secretary  of  State  refused  her  claims  for
    asylum, humanitarian protection and under the ECHR.

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 4. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In a  determination
    sent on 6 November 2020, Judge C J Woolley dismissed her appeal on all
    grounds.  He made an  adverse  credibility  finding  and  rejected  the
    appellant's account, including that R had any connection with the  KDP,
    that she had been attacked by R in Iraq or that text  messages  between
    her husband and R showed any  motivation  to  commit  an  honour  crime
    against her.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 5. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal on  two
    grounds.  Ground 1 contends, in some detail, that the judge employed an
    unreasonably high threshold for  credibility  and  failed  properly  to
    assess the appellant's claim in the light of all the evidence.   Ground
    2 contends that the judge improperly failed to give weight to a medical
    report which diagnosed the appellant as  suffering  from  PTSD  on  the
    basis that the author (Dr Munro) was  a  General  Practitioner,  rather
    than a specialist in psychiatry.

 6. On 3 December 2020, the First-tier Tribunal (Judge  Ford)  granted  the
    appellant permission to appeal.  Judge Ford concluded that ground 1 was
    not arguable but that ground 2 was arguable.  In any event, Judge  Ford
    granted permission generally and it was accepted  before  me  that,  as
    Judge Ford had not specifically refused permission  on  ground  1,  the
    appellant was entitled to rely on both grounds in the  appeal  applying
    Safi and Others (permission to appeal decisions) [2018] UKUT 388 (IAC).



 7. The appeal was listed for hearing at the Cardiff Civil  Justice  Centre
    working remotely by Skype.  The appellant was represented  by  Mr  Bass
    and the respondent by Mr Avery, both of  whom  joined  the  hearing  by
    Skype.

The Submissions

 8. Mr Bass relied upon ground 2 in his oral argument.  He made no specific
    oral submissions in relation to ground 1 although he placed reliance on
    his skeleton argument in that regard.

 9. As regards ground 2, Mr Bass submitted that the judge had been wrong to
    give no weight to the medical report of Dr Munro  in  relation  to  the
    appellant's psychiatric health and, in particular, Dr Munro's diagnosis
    that  the  appellant  suffered  from  PTSD.   He  submitted  that   the
    criticisms of Dr Munro's expertise and experience at paras 50 and 51 of
    the judge's determination were wrong.  Although Dr Munro was a GP,  and
    Mr Bass accepted that different weight might be given to a GP's  report
    and one from a specialist psychiatrist, a GP such as Dr Munro was  able
    to diagnose and treat, albeit  at  a  different  level,  mental  health
    patients, including those suffering from PTSD.  Mr Bass relied upon  Dr
    Munro's experience and statement as to his training at  Appendix  B  of
    his report, including his statement that GPs were expected as  part  of
    the core curriculum of the Royal College of General Practitioners to be
    competent  in  the  diagnosis  and  management  in  primary   care   of
    depression, PTSD and anxiety and to be competent in the requisition  of
    more complex psychiatric conditions.

10. Mr Bass also submitted that the judge had been wrong  to  rely  on  the
    fact that Dr Munro had ceased practice in 2016 given that in Appendix B
    Dr Munro pointed out that he had  maintained  his  medical  skills  and
    knowledge,  giving  examples  and  had   taken   histories,   performed
    examinations and prepared  court  reports  on  applicants  for  refugee
    status.

11. Mr Bass also submitted that the judge had been  wrong  to  discount  Dr
    Munro's evidence on the basis that Dr  Munro  had  not  considered  the
    appellant's entire  history  and  account,  including  other  potential
    causes for her PTSD as a result of trauma she may have suffered, on the
    basis of her evidence, prior to arriving in the UK having left Iraq.

12. On behalf of the Secretary of State, Mr Avery submitted that the  judge
    was entitled to treat Dr Munro's evidence as less weighty than that  of
    a specialist in psychiatry.  However, Mr Avery submitted that any error
    in assessing Dr Munro's  evidence  was  not  material  to  the  judge's
    ultimate findings.  Mr Avery submitted that  the  judge  had  found  at
    paras 54-56 that R was not in any position with the KDP either  through
    his father's influence or his own making.  Further, at paras 57-61, the
    judge found that the appellant had not been targeted when she had  been
    shot and that the shooting was a "random shooting".  Finally, at  paras
    62-65, the judge had found that the text messages  between  R  and  the
    appellant's husband, which were relied upon, did not  show  that  there
    was any threat of an honour crime made against  the  appellant  or  her
    children by R.

13.  Mr  Avery  submitted  that  these  findings  were  unaffected  by  the
    vulnerability of the appellant - which the judge had  accepted  at  the
    outset of the hearing - and were unaffected by the  judge's  assessment
    of Dr Munro's evidence.

Discussion

14. Medical evidence, such as a diagnosis of PTSD by a medical expert,  may
    well be relevant to a number  of  issues  in  an  asylum  appeal.   The
    diagnosis, together with the expert's opinion as to its cause, may  add
    support to the credibility and cogency of an appellant's account.   The
    diagnosis  may  also  be  relevant  directly  in  a  claim  as  to  the
    circumstances which an individual may face  on  return  to  their  home
    country.

15. In this appeal, the evidence was relevant in both respects.  The judge,
    however, found, in relation to a claim based upon Art  3  of  the  ECHR
    that if the appellant suffered from depression and  PTSD  as  Dr  Munro
    concluded  the  appellant's  return  to  Iraq  would  not  breach   the
    appellant's  human  rights  (see  para  74).   That  finding   is   not
    challenged.

16. What is challenged is the judge's treatment of Dr Munro's  evidence  in
    assessing the credibility of the appellant's claim.   In  that  regard,
    the judge said this at paras 49-51:

         "49.     Dr Munro made a mental examination.  He records  that  the
             appellant had not discussed her mental  health  with  her  GP.
             His examination was done remotely.  The appellant had  a  good
             understanding of his questions and did not  show  evidence  of
             anxiety.  She however gave a clear description of her  chronic
             anxiety.   There  was  no  evidence   of   circumlocution   or
             delusions.  She has never self-harmed.  Dr Munro comments that
             if her sons were to die the risk of  her  committing  acts  of
             self-harm may arise.  It is not  clear  whether  this  is  the
             appellant's account or Dr Munro's  conclusion.   He  concludes
             (paras 122 and following) that she is moderately  to  severely
             anxious.  She is  mildly  to  moderately  depressed.   She  is
             positive for PTSD.  He does not rate  her  as  having  complex
             PTSD (para 126).  She also has  moderate  severe  anxiety  and
             mild to moderate depression which are often found to accompany
             PTSD.  If she returned to  Iraq  her  mental  health  symptoms
             would be exacerbated.

         50.  I take the report of Dr Munro into account when assessing  all
             the evidence, but have to say at this stage that I  find  that
             there remain doubts over his qualifications and expertise when
             assessing the appellant's mental  condition.   He  is  not  an
             expert in psychiatry and he has only ever had experience as  a
             GP of mental health assessments.  That experience is now  very
             dated as he has been retired since 2016.   An  expert  can  be
             expected to engage with the claim and to challenge an  account
             where appropriate in light  of  the  evidence.   There  is  no
             attempt made by Dr Munro to  explore  alternative  causes  for
             PTSD (such as the experience of being abandoned by  a  husband
             in favour of another woman, or the appellant's  own  traumatic
             experiences on a journey to the UK).  She says for instance in
             her interviews (5.4  of  Screening  Interview)  that  she  was
             tortured in Romania but this is  nowhere  referred  to  by  Dr
             Munro.  She also describes her very lengthy journey to the  UK
             and the harsh conditions in the camp in  France.   Neither  of
             these factors are discussed.  Some explanation for this indeed
             is given at para 131 of the report, where he recounts that the
             appellant explicitly denied to him any other  life-threatening
             experiences than he records.  This may in turn reflect on  her
             overall credibility, but her denial does not detract from  the
             expert's duty to undertake a comprehensive review of the facts
             (see below).

         51.  In approaching the expert report of Dr Munro I have regard  to
             the guidance in JL  (China)  [2013]  UKUT  00145  (IAC)  which
             cautions against an expert seeking to reach a conclusion about
             the  appellant's  overall  credibility.   I  also   note   the
             authority of AAW (expert evidence  -  weight)  Somalia  [2015]
             UKUT 00673 as to the weight I can  place  on  expert  evidence
             that is 'unsupported by a demonstration of the objectivity and
             comprehensive review of material facts required of an expert'.
              Such evidence 'is likely to be afforded little weight by  the
             Tribunal'.  In AAW it was said that an expert witness who does
             not engage with material facts or issues  that  might  detract
             from the view being  expressed  risks  being  regarded  as  an
             informed advocate for the case of one of the  parties  to  the
             proceedings rather than an independent  expert  witness.   AAW
             referred to the guidance given  by  the  President  in  MOJ  &
             Others [2014] UKUT 442 (IAC) which summarised the duties of an
             expert including: being objective and  unbiased,  to  consider
             all material facts, to avoid trespass into  advocacy,  and  to
             provide information and  express  opinions  independently.   I
             find that the failure to undertake a comprehensive  review  of
             the facts lessens the weight I can attach to the report of  Dr
             Munro (in  respect  of  the  psychiatric  assessment)  in  the
             holistic assessment of the claim."

17. That latter reference to attaching  less  weight  "in  respect  of  the
    psychiatric assessment"  is  because  the  judge  accepted  Dr  Munro's
    evidence concerning  the  physical  injuries  that  the  appellant  had
    suffered in the form of scarring (see paras 47 and 48).

18. As I have said, Mr Bass accepts that the evidence of a GP - who is  not
    a psychiatric specialist - may be given less  weight  than  that  of  a
    specialist psychiatrist.  That was recognised by the Court of Appeal in
    HH (Ethiopia) v SSHD [2007] EWCA Civ 306 where, at [3], Keene LJ  (with
    whom Pill and Moore-Bick LJJ agreed) said this:

         "Next the appellant criticises the AIT for saying that Dr Hiley was
         not a psychiatrist or someone  with  other  specialist  psychiatric
         training and yet not mentioning that, according to  her  curriculum
         vitae, her experience included psychiatry.  However, all  that  the
         AIT was doing was upholding the Immigration Judge's entitlement  to
         attach little weight to Dr Hiley's diagnosis of PTSD because of her
         lack of a specialist psychiatric  qualification.   Mr  Bazini  says
         that the judge was wrong to attach little weight to that  diagnosis
         of PTSD and wrong to say that the  doctor  should  have  considered
         other possible causes of the appellant's depression.   I  disagree.
         He was  entitled  to  comment  as  he  did,  especially  since  the
         diagnosis was very largely dependent on assuming that  the  account
         given by the appellant was to be believed.  I could see no error of
         law here."

19. In that case, Dr Hiley, who produced the medical report, was a  General
    Practitioner in a specialist practice for asylum  seekers.   (See  para
    [6]).

20. Consequently, if in this appeal had Judge Woolley restricted himself to
    taking into account Dr Munro's  evidence  but  giving  it  less  weight
    because  he  lacked  the  specialist  qualification  or   post   as   a
    psychiatrist, it would be difficult, as Mr Avery submitted, to conclude
    that the judge had fallen into  error.   However,  Judge  Woolley  went
    further and did  not  simply  give  Dr  Munro's  assessment  "less"  or
    "little" weight  but  rather  rejected  it  as  being,  in  his  words,
    supportive of the appellant's claim.  At para 69,  Judge  Woolley  said
    this:

         "Given  the  reservations  I  have  made  about   the   psychiatric
         assessment of Dr Munro I do not accept  that  his  report  on  this
         issue can be viewed as supportive of the appellant's claim  (albeit
         I have accepted his physical assessment).  He must be  regarded  on
         the psychiatric assessment as merely an informed advocate."

21. In that regard, Judge Woolley, in my judgment, fell into error.  As  Mr
    Bass submitted, Dr Munro in Appendix B set out his experience as a  GP,
    including  training  required  by  the  RCGP  of  GPs  in   psychiatric
    assessments, including PTSD.  Judge Woolley made no reference  to  that
    relevant experience and training in assessing  what  weight  should  be
    given (in the end giving it no weight) to  Dr  Munro's  report  on  the
    psychiatric assessment.

22. It is not clear to me why the judge  regarded  Dr  Munro's  psychiatric
    assessment as that of  "merely  an  informed  advocate".   That  is  to
    suggest that Dr Munro's report was not balanced and  objective  in  its
    assessment of the appellant's circumstances.   It  may  be  that  Judge
    Woolley derived that phrase from the case of AAW which he  referred  to
    in para 51 of his determination.  That  case  was,  however,  concerned
    with an entirely different situation where a country expert  maintained
    a view about country conditions in Somalia  in  the  face  of  contrary
    findings in a relevant Country Guidance case.  Whatever  the  expertise
    and experience of Dr Munro, having  read  his  report  in  full  I  see
    nothing that could properly characterise him, or the  contents  of  his
    report, as amounting to "advocacy" on behalf  of  the  appellant.   The
    judge's  characterisation  was,  in  my   judgment,   unfortunate   and
    potentially affected his view as to what, if any, weight he should give
    Dr Munro's report in relation to the psychiatric assessment.

23. Further, if that characterisation is based upon a view  that  Dr  Munro
    failed properly to assess the  appellant's  circumstances  as  a  whole
    before reaching his diagnosis, Mr Avery accepted that  the  appellant's
    history was set out by the judge at para 50 of  his  determination  and
    that history is recorded by Dr Munro in  paras  54-56  in  his  report,
    including her arrest and imprisonment in "very unpleasant surroundings"
    in Romania where she was treated cruelly by the guards and her (and her
    children's) subsequent treatment in a camp near Dunkirk.  It cannot  be
    said that Dr Munro was,  therefore,  oblivious  to  the  whole  of  the
    appellant's circumstances.  Indeed, at para 130 of his report, Dr Munro
    makes reference to  the  appellant's  "history  of  having  experienced
    relevant stressors" in his recounting of her whole history  and  cannot
    lead to the conclusion that he failed to consider all  her  history  in
    reaching his diagnosis.  In any event, that would  not,  in  truth,  be
    necessarily determinative  of  his  diagnosis  of  PTSD,  rather  than,
    perhaps, its cause.  The diagnosis was, therefore, a matter  which  the
    judge should  have  given  some  weight  to,  rather  than  discounting
    altogether as he did in para 68 of his  determination,  when  assessing
    the credibility of the appellant's account.

24. Mr Avery submits that in effect the judge made a  number  of  findings,
    independent of the appellant's credibility,  which  led  to  her  claim
    failing.  This contention is not without some  attraction.   It  is  an
    argument about materiality of the error.  However, I am  not  persuaded
    that the judge would necessarily have reached the same  conclusions  in
    relation to the specific incidents relied on by  the  appellant  -  for
    example the shootings, texts, etc. -  if  he  had  taken  into  account
    evidence  potentially  supportive  of  the  appellant's  account.   The
    evidence of Dr Munro was, and I put it no higher than this, potentially
    supportive of her account.  It could have provided support for  a  link
    between her mental health (as diagnosed by Dr Munro) and the events she
    claimed  occurred  in  Iraq.   That  may  have  affected  the   judge's
    assessment of the evidence that led him to conclude that the  appellant
    had only established a "random shooting" and that, on the basis of  the
    text messages alone, had not established that there was any  threat  of
    an honour crime made against her or her children by R.

25. Mr Avery's argument is one of materiality of any error in assessing  Dr
    Munro's evidence.  It may be that a judge could reach the same findings
    that Judge Woolley did  but,  I  am  unpersuaded  that  a  judge  would
    necessarily do so and that therefore the error in assessing Dr  Munro's
    evidence was material to the judge's ultimate adverse findings that led
    him to dismiss the appellant's international protection claim.

26. For these reasons, therefore, I am satisfied that ground 2  establishes
    a material error of  law  in  the  judge's  decision  and  findings  in
    relation  to  the  appellant's  international  protection  claim.   His
    findings and decision in that regard cannot be sustained.

27. In the light of this, it is unnecessary to express any view on ground 1
    which, as I noted above, Mr Bass made no oral submissions on other than
    to state that he relied on his skeleton argument.

Decision

28. For the above reasons, the decision of the First-tier  to  dismiss  the
    appellant's appeal involved the  making  of  an  error  of  law.   That
    decision cannot stand and is set aside.

29. As a consequence, the appellant's international protection  claim  must
    be remade de novo.  Although the grounds do not directly challenge  the
    judge's decision to dismiss the appellant's appeal  under  Art  8,  the
    relevance  of  Dr  Munro's  report,  and  the  appellant's  psychiatric
    condition, would be relevant under Art 8 and, although this  issue  was
    not canvassed at the hearing, I consider that the  First-tier  Tribunal
    should also remake the decision in relation to Art 8 for that reason.

30. Accordingly, and having regard to the nature and extent of fact-finding
    required and para 7.2 of the Senior President's Practice Statement, the
    proper disposal of this  appeal  is  to  remit  it  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for a de novo rehearing on all grounds before  a  judge  other
    than Judge C J Woolley.  No findings are preserved.


                                                                      Signed

                                                                Andrew Grubb

                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                                               21 April 2021

