
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12225/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 14 May 2019                       |On 30 May 2019                       |
|                                             |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE APPLEYARD


                                   Between

                                  Mr b m h
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs S Rogers, Legal Representative.
For the Respondent:    Mrs R Petterson, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is  a  citizen  of  Iraq.  He  made  an  application  for
    international protection. It was refused and he appealed and  following
    a hearing, and in a decision promulgated on 11 December 2018, Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal R L Walker dismissed his appeal.

 2. The Appellant sought permission to appeal. It was granted by  Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal S H Smith on 10 January 2019. His  reasons  for
    so granting were:-

         "1.  The Appellant seeks permission to appeal, (in time), against a
         Decision of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge RL  Walker)  who,  in  a
         Decision and Reasons promulgated  on  11  December,  dismissed  his
         appeal against the Secretary of  State's  decision  to  reject  his
         asylum claim.

         2.   The grounds assert  that  the  Judge  erred  by  applying  the
         balance of probabilities standard of proof, rather than  the  lower
         standard of reasonable likelihood applicable to protection cases.

         3.   There is an  arguable  material  error  of  law.  The  Judge's
         reference at [11] to the balance of probabilities standard applying
         in "immigration cases" may have been a reference to any  Article  8
         aspects of the appellant's case. In the  preceding  paragraph,  the
         Judge had correctly summarised the  lower  standard  applicable  to
         protection cases. However, at [26], when conducting  his  operative
         analysis of the appellant's credibility, the Judge again cited  the
         balance of probabilities standard. Throughout his discussion of the
         appellant's core case, the Judge made no further references to  the
         applicable standard of proof. At [45J, the Judge merely referred in
         generic terms to "the burden of proof", without specifying what  it
         was. Arguably, the Judge's analysis of  the  appellant's  case  was
         conducted pursuant to the balance of probabilities standard,  which
         is arguably a material error of law."

 3. Thus, the appeal came before me today.

 4. Mrs Rogers relied on  the  grounds  seeking  permission  to  appeal  as
    highlighted in the decision granting permission recorded above.

 5. Mrs Petterson whilst acknowledging at paragraph 26 of the decision  the
    Judge applied the  civil  standard  of  proof  rather  than  the  lower
    standard. She emphasised that it was apparent that  on  the  individual
    finding within that paragraph it had been in favour of  the  Appellant.
    However, she conceded that on a reading of the decision as a whole  the
    Judge may have materially erred  in  applying  the  wrong  standard  of
    proof.

 6. I find that to be the position.  The  Judge  has  materially  erred  by
    applying the balance of probability standard of proof, rather than  the
    lower  standard  of  reasonable  likelihood  applicable  to  protection
    claims. Whilst  the  reference  to  the  balance  of  probabilities  in
    paragraph 11 of his decision may have been to the standard applying  in
    "immigration cases" the difficulty arises out  of  paragraph  26  where
    once more there is reference  to  the  balance  of  probabilities  when
    dealing with an issue relating to the protection claim.

 7. The Judge has accordingly materially erred.



Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making
of an error on a point of law. The decision is  set  aside.  The  appeal  is
remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be  dealt  with  afresh  pursuant  to
Section 12(2)(b)(i) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement  Act  2007  and
Practice Direction 7(b) before any Judge aside from Judge R L Walker.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.




Signed
                                Date:    28 May 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard



