
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12142/2019
                                                                         (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 10 November 2020                           |On 4 February 2021            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE TROWLER


                                   Between

                                     M D
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Y Din, Counsel instructed by Charles Simmons
                    Immigration Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms S Cunha, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Albania.  Her date of birth is 1  October
    1992.

 2. We have anonymised the Appellant properly applying the  Upper  Tribunal
    Immigration and Asylum Chamber  Guidance  Note  2013  No  1:  Anonymity
    Orders.

 3. On 7 March 2018, the Appellant was referred to  the  National  Referral
    Mechanism (NRM) for the competent authority to decide whether she was a
    victim of trafficking (VOT).  On 10 February 2019, the NRM decided that
    the Appellant was a victim of modern slavery.

 4. The Appellant made an application  for  protection  under  the  Refugee
    Convention.  This application was refused by the Secretary of State  on
    2 December 2019.  She appealed against the decision of the Secretary of
    State.  Her appeal was dismissed by the First-tier Tribunal (First-tier
    Tribunal Judge O'Garro).

 5. Following a remote error of law hearing, I set aside  the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge O'Garro to dismiss the Appellant's appeal  in
    a decision dated 23 September 2020, following a hearing on 22 September
    2020.

 6. I found that the First-tier Tribunal made a material error  of  law.  I
    set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.  The  error  of  law
    decision reads as follows:

         "17. The judge did not adequately reason the finding at  [43]  that
             there was no evidence that D was in a  position  to  influence
             the authorities in Albania in the light  of  the  evidence  of
             corruption as found by the Upper Tribunal in TD and  the  CPIN
             of 2019 (set out in the Appellant's skeleton argument that was
             before the First-tier Tribunal).  It was accepted that D was a
             trafficker.  This is a material error of law.  The  assessment
             of risk on return to the Appellant's home area is flawed.

         18.  CPIN relied on by the  judge  postdates  TD.   The  judge  was
             unarguably entitled to attach weight to it.  However,  it  was
             incumbent on the judge to adequately reason the decision.   It
             was accepted by the Respondent that TD  applied.   It  is  not
             clear how the Appellant's circumstances, properly assessed  by
             the judge at [34] and  [35],  fed  into  the  risk  assessment
             properly applying TD.  While the CPIN is arguably  capable  of
             supporting an improvement in the position of  those  returning
             to Albania, the judge had to assess the  reliability  of  that
             evidence  and  consider  it  in  the  light  of  TD  and   the
             Appellant's personal circumstances.  The decision discloses an
             absence of such an assessment.

         19.  The judge said that the Appellant would not be at  risk  based
             on the  "objective"  evidence  from  the  CPIN.   The  judge's
             conclusion that the "objective" evidence shows  protection  is
             available is not  adequately  reasoned.   The  judge  did  not
             engage with the limitations of being accommodated in a shelter
             as found by the Upper Tribunal in TD or the generality of  the
             CPIN.  I accept Ms Isherwood's submission  that  at  [47]  the
             judge  said   that   the   Appellant   with   her   particular
             circumstances  will  be  able  to  return  safely  and  access
             protection and support, but it is not made clear  applying  TD
             in  the  Appellant's  circumstances  how  she   reached   this
             conclusion.

         20.  I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal to dismiss
             the Appellant's appeal.  The appeal will be  heard  afresh  in
             the Upper Tribunal.

         21.  No reason was drawn to my  attention  to  justify  interfering
             with the assessment of the Appellant's personal  circumstances
             by the First-tier Tribunal (see [34] and [35]).  The Appellant
             submitted a medical report at the error of law hearing.  I was
             told that this was served  on  the  Respondent.   It  was  not
             material to the error of law but may be to  the  determination
             of her appeal."

 7. The matter came before us on 10th November to  decide  the  Appellant's
    appeal.  There was an Appellant's bundle (the bundle before the  First-
    tier Tribunal) comprising 173  pages.  This  includes  the  Appellant's
    first witness statement, A's witness statement and  letters  concerning
    the Appellant's health.  There was a second bundle including a  further
    witness statement from the Appellant and a psychiatric report  prepared
    by Dr Sultan.

 8. The matter was originally listed for a face- to- face hearing. However,
    shortly before the hearing  the  Tribunal  was  informed  that  Mr  Din
    representing  the  Appellant  had  tested  positive  for  COVID-19  and
    requested a remote hearing.   With  the  parties'  agreement  a  hybrid
    hearing took place.  Ms  Cunha  representing  the  Secretary  of  State
    attended the Tribunal in person and Mr Din and the  Appellant  attended
    remotely. All were content to proceed on this basis.

 9. Ms Cunha indicated to us at the start of the  hearing  that  she  would
    wish to cross-examine the Appellant on issues  contained  in  her  most
    recent witness statement.  However, technical difficulties arose during
    the hearing. Ms Cunha was not able to project her voice to  enable  the
    Appellant and Mr  Din  to  clearly  hear  her  despite  the  use  of  a
    microphone.  She  asked  the  Appellant  several  questions  in  cross-
    examination and we repeated those questions to  the  Appellant.    Once
    the Appellant had given evidence the parties  agreed  that  the  matter
    should be adjourned for written submissions.

10. Accordingly, we made directions as follows:-

      i) The Secretary of State is to file and serve written submissions  by
         24 November.

     ii) The Appellant  was  to  serve  and  file  written  submissions,  in
         response, by 8 December.

    iii) Should  there  be  any  delay  or  problems  arising  so  that  the
         directions are not complied with it is incumbent on the parties  to
         notify the Tribunal.

11. The Secretary of  State  failed  to  comply  with  the  directions.  We
    received Mr Din's written submissions on   21 December 2020. The  delay
    was as a result of the failure of the Secretary of State to comply with
    directions.

The Appellant's Evidence

12. The Appellant's evidence is contained in her witness statements  of  19
    December 2019 and 2 November 2020. She gave oral  evidence  before  the
    Upper Tribunal.  Her evidence can be summarised.

13. The Appellant grew up with her parents and siblings in Tirana, Albania.
     The family was close.  She finished high school  in  Albania  and  was
    looking forward to going to university` to study English.  In  November
    2013 she met D.  They started a relationship.  The  Appellant's  family
    did not approve of the relationship.  The family are traditional. It is
    tradition for the Appellant's father to find her  a  suitable  partner.
    Her father was very angry and told her that he would disown her if  she
    continued her relationship with D.  She continued to see D  behind  her
    father's back.  He found out and prevented her from leaving the  house.
    In April 2014, the Appellant then moved in with D and from then on, her
    family disassociated themselves with her  and  she  lost  contact  with
    them.

14. D and the Appellant resided together in  a  bedsit.   However,  shortly
    after moving in together D's behaviour changed.  He pimped her  out  to
    his friends.  He took away her mobile phone and told her that  she  was
    now his property.  The  Appellant  was  frightened  of  him.   She  was
    sexually exploited by D. He received money from this.  He  was  violent
    towards her.  The Appellant  had  no-one  to  turn  to.   The  Albanian
    justice system is corrupt. She had no  faith  in  the  police.  In  any
    event, she feared that if she told the police D would kill her family.

15. On one occasion D took her to a bar and there she realised  that  there
    were many women being exploited by D and his gang.  In  May  2014,  the
    Appellant was beaten by D.  She was advised to go to  hospital,  but  D
    would not allow her to.  On 4 June 2014 D took the Appellant to  Italy.
    D took the Appellant's passport from her once  they  arrived  in  Rome.
    They travelled to an area near Milan called Pavia.  There the Appellant
    stayed in a hostel with other women who were also  sexually  exploited.
    They were from different countries.  D  and  his  friends  would  bring
    clients to the hostel. The Appellant was petrified but  felt  that  she
    did not have any other option but to  comply.   The  women  were  given
    drugs and abused.

16. The Appellant lived in the hostel until April 2015 when she and  a  few
    other women were taken by D and his group to the UK.  They travelled in
    the back of a lorry.  It was a horrifying ordeal.  When in the UK  they
    were driven to a house.

17. The Appellant realised that she was pregnant and that she had no option
    other than to escape.  She knew that if her  pregnancy  was  known  she
    would be forced to have an abortion.  The Appellant describes  how  she
    was able to escape  at  [16]  of  her  first  witness  statement.   She
    descried a chance meeting with an individual "T",  a  British  citizen.
    She ended up living with T's sister ("A")  in  London.   Her  pregnancy
    was confirmed by a GP in around July 2015.

18. T and his sister were kind to  the  Appellant.   T  and  the  Appellant
    started a relationship. However, A was not  happy  about  this  because
    they were not married.  The Appellant married T and  he  said  that  he
    would support her and the baby. However when she had her son, "AD" on 4
    November 2015, T disappeared.  He could not cope  with  the  situation.
    He moved  back  into  his  mother's  house.   He  has  numerous  health
    problems.  He is bipolar  and  suffers  from  severe  depression.   The
    Appellant continued to live with A who continues to  offer  support  to
    the Appellant and AD.

19. The Appellant does not have any contact with D. She  still  fears  him.
    She fears that should she return to Albania he would know  immediately,
    and he would do anything to harm and her and her son.  He is  not  able
    to locate her in the UK.  The Appellant is not in fear  of  her  father
    but of D and gang members.  Her case is that police in Albania  do  not
    provide protection because they are corrupt.

20. The Appellant could not relocate in Albania.  She would  be  found  and
    killed.  The Appellant found out that she was pregnant  with  a  second
    child on 27 July 2020.  She  has  given  birth  to  another  son  "AV,"
    following a one- night stand with his father.  She did not disclose her
    pregnancy earlier because she was distressed because she is  not  in  a
    relationship with the child's father.  Although the father wanted to be
    named as the child's father on the birth certificate,  he does not want
    a relationship with the Appellant and does not want to be part  of  the
    child's life.

21. The Appellant is a victim of  sex  trafficking  and  has  continued  to
    suffer mentally and psychologically as  a  result.   She  suffers  from
    anxiety and depression.  She has nightmares. She cannot cope  with  the
    fear of returning  to  Albania.   She  was  receiving  counselling  and
    support however, because of COVID-19, she has not received face to face
    interaction and counselling that she requires.

22. The Appellant is now a single mother of two children who are  dependent
    on her to look after them.  She finds this difficult.  She is not  able
    to permanently reside with A and A's husband.

23. The Appellant confirmed in oral evidence that she has not  had  contact
    with her family and that she does not have contact with the  father  of
    her youngest child.  She confirmed that she is  educated  to  secondary
    school level only.

The Medical Evidence

24. The Appellant relied on  her  medical  report  prepared  by  Dr  Javaid
    Sultan.  Dr Sultan  is  a  consultant  psychiatrist  in  general  adult
    psychiatry.  He met with the Appellant for an hour  and  a  half  on  7
    March 2020.  He did not have access to the Appellant's GP's records  or
    any other documentation relating to her appeal.  The Appellant told him
    that she had not had contact with psychiatric services  in  the  UK  or
    Albania. She said that she had been seen by her GP when she gave  birth
    to her eldest son and since then had had regular check-ups.

25. The Appellant told Dr Sultan that she started to feel anxious, low, and
    tearful after moving in with D.  She told him that she  had  low  mood,
    felt anxious and frightened.  She suffered from tearfulness and reduced
    concentration, lack of sleep, decreased energy levels and low  appetite
    which had worsened in the last six to eight months.  She  has  negative
    and fleeting thoughts of self-harm with hopelessness and  helplessness.
    The thought of going back to  Albania  terrifies  the  Appellant.   She
    cried throughout the assessment and was very concerned about her  son's
    safety.

26. The Appellant was diagnosed with hepatitis B which she believes is  due
    to having unprotected sex while being forced to act as  a  sex  worker.
    She did not have previous mental  illness  before  2014.  There  is  no
    family history of mental illness.

27. In Section 3 of the report  Dr  Sultan  engages  with  the  psychiatric
    diagnosis and prognosis. In his opinion the Appellant's presentation is
    characterised by persistent low mood, anhedonia, lack of energy  levels
    causing  exhaustion,  reduced  concentration,  late  insomnia,  reduced
    appetite, and some reluctance in facing  the  community  leading  to  a
    decline in social functioning.  The Appellant meets  the  criteria  for
    diagnosis of mild to moderate depressive illness, anxiety symptoms  and
    PTSD-like symptoms (anxiety, sweating,  nightmares,  startled  reaction
    and reliving experiences).  If her mental illness is left untreated she
    is at high risk of further deterioration of her mental health and  that
    of self-neglect  and  causing  serious  harm  to  herself  through  her
    negative emotions.  She requires urgent treatment  for  her  depressive
    illness and anxiety.  She is currently receiving medical treatment  and
    would benefit from starting on an antidepressant with hypnotic  benefit
    (Mirtazapine 15 milligrams daily).  Without such treatment there  is  a
    risk of further worsening of her mental state  and  increased  risk  of
    deliberate self-harm and suicide.

28.  The  Appellant  would  benefit  from  psychological  therapy  such  as
    cognitive behavioural therapy for depression and anxiety  symptoms  and
    trauma counselling for her  traumatic  experience  having  been  a  sex
    worker with  a  history  of  physical  and  emotional  abuse.   She  is
    currently not receiving treatment but needs to be on medication for six
    to  twelve  months  along  with   psychological   interventions.    The
    consultant recommends a referral by  her  GP  to  the  local  community
    mental health team for assessment and initiation of pharmacological and
    psychological interventions. The Appellant's  depressive  illness  with
    anxiety and panic attacks are likely to deteriorate if she  returns  to
    Albania.  She is vulnerable to exploitation  and  isolation  which  can
    increase if her mental health symptoms get worse.  The deterioration in
    mental health will have a negative impact on her child's overall care.

29. The Appellant reported a worsening of symptoms  of  depression  in  the
    last few months and increasing levels of  anxiety  and  stress  due  to
    escalation of concerns about her and her son's safety.  Her family  has
    already disowned her and this has a negative impact on her self-esteem,
    confidence  and  feelings  of  worthlessness.   She  reported  fleeting
    thoughts of suicide and concerns about her ability to  cope  living  on
    her own in her home country without any personal, emotional support and
    with the possibility of threats.

30. The Appellant suffers from mild to  moderate  depressive  illness  with
    anxiety and PTS like symptoms.  Without appropriate  treatment  she  is
    likely to suffer further worsening of her symptoms, which  put  her  at
    risk of self-neglect.  It is highly likely that her depressive  illness
    and lack of personal support in her home  country  will  have  negative
    implications on her physical and  mental  health.    Without  treatment
    there is a risk of  further  worsening  of  her  mental  state  and  an
    increased risk of deliberate self-harm and suicide.

TD and AD (Trafficked women) CG [2016] UKUT 00092

31. The headnote of the current country guidance decision reads as  follows:
-

         "Much of the guidance given in AM & BM (Trafficked  women)  Albania
         CG [2010] UKUT 00080 (IAC) is maintained. Where that  guidance  has
         been  amended  or  supplemented  by  this  decision  it  has   been
         highlighted in bold:


         "a)  It is not possible to set out a typical profile of  trafficked
             women from Albania:  trafficked women come from all  areas  of
             the country and from varied social backgrounds.

         b)   Much of Albanian society is  governed  by  a  strict  code  of
             honour which not only means that trafficked women  would  have
             very considerable difficulty in reintegrating into their  home
             areas on return but also will affect their ability to relocate
             internally.  Those who  have  children  outside  marriage  are
             particularly vulnerable.  In extreme cases the close relatives
             of the trafficked woman may  refuse  to  have  the  trafficked
             woman's child return with her and could force her  to  abandon
             the child.


         c)   Some women are lured to leave Albania with false  promises  of
             relationships or work. Others  may  seek  out  traffickers  in
             order to facilitate their departure  from  Albania  and  their
             establishment in  prostitution  abroad.  Although  such  women
             cannot be said to have left Albania against their will,  where
             they have fallen under the  control  of  traffickers  for  the
             purpose of exploitation there is  likely  to  be  considerable
             violence within the relationships and a lack of freedom:  such
             women are victims of trafficking.


         d)   In the  past  few  years  the  Albanian  government  has  made
             significant efforts to improve its  response  to  trafficking.
             This includes widening the scope  of  legislation,  publishing
             the Standard Operating Procedures, implementing  an  effective
             National Referral Mechanism, appointing a new Anti-trafficking
             Co-ordinator,  and  providing  training  to  law   enforcement
             officials.  There is in general a Horvath-standard sufficiency
             of protection, but it will not be  effective  in  every  case.
             When considering whether or not  there  is  a  sufficiency  of
             protection  for  a  victim  of  trafficking   her   particular
             circumstances must be considered.


         e)   There is now in place a reception and reintegration  programme
             for victims of trafficking. Returning victims  of  trafficking
             are able to stay in a shelter on arrival, and in 'heavy cases'
             may be able to stay there for  up  to  2  years.  During  this
             initial  period  after  return  victims  of  trafficking   are
             supported and protected. Unless the individual has  particular
             vulnerabilities such as physical or mental health issues, this
             option cannot generally be said to be unreasonable; whether it
             is must be determined on a case by case basis.


         f)   Once asked to leave the shelter a victim  of  trafficking  can
             live on her  own.  In  doing  so  she  will  face  significant
             challenges including, but not limited to,  stigma,  isolation,
             financial  hardship  and  uncertainty,  a  sense  of  physical
             insecurity and the subjective fear of being  found  either  by
             their families or former traffickers.  Some  women  will  have
             the capacity  to  negotiate  these  challenges  without  undue
             hardship. There will however be victims  of  trafficking  with
             characteristics,  such  as  mental  illness  or  psychological
             scarring, for whom living alone in these  circumstances  would
             not be reasonable.  Whether a particular appellant falls  into
             that category will call for a careful assessment  of  all  the
             circumstances.


         g)   Re-trafficking is a reality. Whether that risk exists  for  an
             individual claimant will turn in part on the factors that  led
             to the initial trafficking, and on her personal circumstances,
             including her background, age, and her willingness and ability
             to seek help from the authorities. For a proportion of victims
             of trafficking,  their  situations  may  mean  that  they  are
             especially vulnerable to re-trafficking, or being forced  into
             other exploitative situations.

         h)   Trafficked women  from  Albania  may  well  be  members  of  a
             particular social group on that account  alone.  Whether  they
             are at risk of persecution on account of such  membership  and
             whether they will be able to access sufficiency of  protection
             from  the  authorities  will  depend  upon  their   individual
             circumstances including but not limited to the following:


                      1) The social status and  economic  standing  of  her
                         family
                      2)  The  level  of  education  of   the   victim   of
                         trafficking or her family
                      3) The  victim  of  trafficking's  state  of  health,
                         particularly her mental health
                      4) The presence of an illegitimate child
                      5) The area of origin
                      6) Age
                      7) What support network will be available."

The Country Policy and Information Note: Trafficking  of  Women  for  Sexual
Exploitation, Albania, June 2020 ("2020 CPIN")

32. The  Secretary  of  State  chose  not  to  make  submissions.  We  have
    considered in some detail the 2020  CPIN.  From  it  we  summarise  the
    following general points: -



      a) Trafficking remains a problem in Albania.




      b) The percentage of those referred to shelters and  re-trafficked  is
         no longer 18% the figure has decreased and now stands at 4% to 5%.




      c) The evidence does not support that there are  very  strong  grounds
         supported by cogent evidence to support "not  taking  into  account
         the findings in TD and AD"




      d) There have been judicial reforms in Albania.




      e) The shelters  provide  free  healthcare  and  there  is  usually  a
         psychiatrist.   Every  person  leaving  a  shelter   must   receive
         financial benefits.




      f) The state will pay for childcare for single women.




      g) Albania has made significant efforts to  improve  its  response  to
         trafficking in general the authorities  are  willing  and  able  to
         protect victims, but this may not be sufficient in every case.




      h) There are difficulties faced by those  relocating.   The  situation
         has improved since TD and AD, but stigma is still a concern.




      i) It is possible for women to live alone in Tirana however those with
         children are particularly vulnerable.  Women can relocate to Tirana
         however it is harder to relocate to a rural area.




      j) NGOs reported an improved co-operation  with  law  enforcement  and
         prosecutors.




      k) Various sources have expressed concern to the Home Office FFM about
         police response to VOT.




      l)  The  USSD  TiP  Report  2019  states  "Law  enforcement  did   not
         consistently offer sufficient security and support and victims  and
         families received threats during court proceedings."




      m) The Home Office FFM were told that there is no protection programme
         available for VOT whilst a trial is pending  and  victims  are  too
         scared to denounce traffickers.




      n) The USSD TiP Report 2019 states that the government of Albania does
         not meet minimum standards for the elimination of  trafficking  but
         is making significant efforts  to.   The  same  report  noted  that
         official complicity and corruption were significant concerns.   The
         National Coalition of Anti-Trafficking Services (NCATS) was  formed
         in 2007.  There are five shelters, they support VOT, they provide a
         number of services listed at 9.1.3  of  the  CPIN.    There  is   a
         psychiatrist available in a shelter, there is  sufficient  capacity
         to meet the demand.  Funding has steadily increased but  there  are
         financial constraints and shelters are still under funded.




      o) There are  rehabilitation  services  and  a  limited  reintegration
         package including long-term monitoring.   The  integration  package
         includes support for independent living typically up to a year.  On
         leaving the shelter the VOT is given assistance finding  employment
         and to integrate into the labour market.




      p) There is support to pay for kindergarten in  Tirana  however  state
         support for women with children is basic.




      q) There is normally a psychiatrist in a shelter.   Priority  care  is
         limited and there are "few chances for long-term support for really
         serious cases".




      r) The government tries to help women become independent,  but  it  is
         difficult for those with children.   The  social  services  in  the
         municipality of Tirana monitor all adult cases every six to  twelve
         months.  There is societal stigma and discrimination faced by  VOT.
         Albania is a patriarchal  society  where  victims  of  gender-based
         violence are often blamed.  There is prejudice against  people  who
         have  been  in  shelters  although  this  has  decreased   however,
         potential employees would not be told of  a  person's  history.   A
         woman can live  alone  in  Tirana  and  internally  relocate  there
         however, in rural areas this would be very difficult without family
         or social support.  Even if a woman has economic means it would  be
         "very scary" to live alone because of psychological pressure.




The Appellant's Submissions

33. Mr Din's submissions are very lengthy.  We summarise  the  main  points
    made therein.

34. There is no justification to depart from  the  decision  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal in TD and AD (trafficked women) [2016] UKUT 00092.

35. Corruption still exists in Albania (see paragraphs 93  and  94  TD  and
    AD).

36. The Country Policy and  Information  Note:  Trafficking  of  Women  for
    Sexual Exploitation, Albania, June 2020 ("2020 CPIN")  makes  reference
    to the USSD TiP Report 2019 and the following is relied on:-

      a) "Articles 110(a) and 128(b) of the Criminal Code  criminalised  sex
         trafficking and labour  trafficking  and  prescribed  penalties  of
         eight to  fifteen  years'  imprisonment  for  trafficking  offences
         involving an adult victim, and ten to  twenty  years'  imprisonment
         for an offence involving a child victim."   (Paragraph  4.1.1  page
         22).

      b) "The USSD TiP Report 2019 noted that,

             "The Albanian state police (ASP) investigated  38  trafficking
             cases with 51 suspects [in 2018] (69 cases with 80 suspects in
             2017); nine of these  suspects  were  investigated  for  child
             trafficking (22 in 2017) and 42 for adult trafficking  (58  in
             2017).  The ASP also investigated three suspects for knowingly
             soliciting or patronising a sex trafficking victim to  perform
             a commercial sex act (none in 2017)"."  (Paragraph  5.1,  page
             24).

      c) "The USSD TiP Report 2019 further noted,

             "Experts reported police did not participate  consistently  in
             the mobile  victim  identification  units  despite  signing  a
             memorandum   of   understanding    that    formalised    their
             participation.  Law enforcement rarely  initiated  cases  when
             civil society identified a potential  victim,  but  ASP  noted
             definitional  differences   with   civil   society   on   what
             constituted trafficking caused obstacles in  identification"."
             (Paragraph 5.16, page 25).

      d) "In the Albanian 2019 Report, the European Commission  stated  that
         Albania should strengthen its criminal justice system".  It further
         stated,

             "The  prosecutor's   office   registered   30   new   criminal
             proceedings for trafficking in 2017 and 21 in 2018.   Most  of
             the  referrals  involved  adults.    The   number   of   final
             convictions remained very low  (nine  in  2017  and  three  in
             2018).  In a report published  in  March  2020,  the  European
             Commission  stated  that  in  2019,  25  new  cases  of  human
             trafficking were referred to the prosecution.  It  noted  that
             there were five final convictions in 2019." (Paragraph  6.1.1,
             page 26).

      e) "The Home Office FFT were  told  that  UN  agencies  have  invested
         considerably in the training of the judiciary which is arguably the
         weakest part of the system.  Traffickers have been able  to  escape
         justice due to its  corruption  or  inefficiency.   This  makes  it
         difficult for the victims to trust in and  seek  redress  from  the
         justice system.  There is hope that the ongoing justice reform  and
         the vetting process of the judges and prosecutors will improve  the
         judicial system."  (Paragraph 6.1.1, page 27).

      f) The USSD TiP Report 2019 stated:

             "The government of Albania does not  fully  meet  the  minimum
             standards for the elimination of  trafficking  but  is  making
             significant efforts to do  so.   The  government  demonstrated
             overall increasing efforts compared to the previous  reporting
             period; therefore, Albania remained on Tier 2 [this  indicates
             that  the  government  does  not   fully   meet   the   TVPA's
             (Trafficking Victims Protection Acts)] standards but is making
             significant efforts to bring itself into compliance with those
             standards."  (Paragraph 7.1, page 31).

             It  should  be  noted  that  the  minimum  standards  for  the
             elimination of trafficking which are referred to are  set  out
             in Section 108 Victims of Trafficking and Violence  Protection
             Act 2000 which states;

               1) The government of the country should prohibit severe forms
                  of  trafficking  in  persons  and  punish  acts  of   such
                  trafficking.

               2) For the knowing commission of any act of  sex  trafficking
                  involving force, fraud, coercion, or in which  the  victim
                  of  sex  trafficking  is  a  child  incapable  of   giving
                  meaningful consent, or of trafficking which includes  rape
                  or kidnapping or which causes a death, the  government  of
                  the country should prescribe punishment commensurate  with
                  that for grave crimes, such as forcible sexual assault.

               3) For the knowing commission of any act of a severe form  of
                  trafficking in persons,  the  government  of  the  country
                  should prescribe punishment that is sufficiently stringent
                  to deter and that adequately reflects the  heinous  nature
                  of the offence.

               4) The government of the  country  should  make  serious  and
                  sustained efforts to eliminate severe forms of trafficking
                  in person".

             The 2000 Act was not considered by the Upper  Tribunal  in  TD
             and AD but is of relevance given that the 2020 CPIN refers  to
             the 2019 USSD TiP Report which in turn uses the  2000  Act  as
             the benchmark for determining compliance.

          g) "In the Albania 2019 Report, the  European  Commission  stated
             that  Albania  should  (step  up  efforts  to  prevent   human
             trafficking)."  (Paragraph 7.1.3, page 32).

          h) "The USSD TiP Report  2019  noted,  "The  government  did  not
             report any  investigations,  prosecutions  or  convictions  of
             government  employees  complicit  in   trafficking   offences;
             however, official complicity and corruption  were  significant
             concerns"." (paragraph 7.5.1, page 35).

37. At page 61 of the USSD Tip 2019 report the following is stated:

         "However, the government did not  meet  the  minimum  standards  in
         several  key  areas.   The  government  continued  to  investigate,
         prosecute and convict fewer cases, leading to the lowest  level  of
         reported law enforcement actions in four years.  Additionally,  the
         government  lacked  proactive  identification   efforts   and   law
         enforcement, in particular, did  not  consistently  participate  in
         mobile  victim  identification   units   or   consistently   screen
         vulnerable populations.  The government continued to delay  funding
         for NGO run shelters and did not consistently apply victim  centred
         approaches to investigations and prosecutions".

38. The following is stated at page 62:

         "Unlike some previous  years,  the  government  did  not  knowingly
         penalise victims but may have penalised  some  trafficking  victims
         due to inadequate identification efforts.  Five victims co-operated
         with law enforcement in  investigations  and  prosecutions  (23  in
         2017); however, the government did not consistently apply a  victim
         centred  approach  to   investigations   and   prosecutions.    Law
         enforcement did not  consistently  offer  sufficient  security  and
         support, and victims and their  families  received  threats  during
         court proceedings."

39. The Appellant seeks to rely on the 2017 CPIN.  It is stated  that  this
    remains on the government website it refers to a USSD 2016 Human Rights
    Practices Report this report was updated in 2019.  However, it  is  not
    referred to in the 2020 CPIN.  From the 2019 USSD Report the  Appellant
    makes the following points:

      a) At paragraph 9.2.2, page 12 of  the  2017  CPIN  the  following  is
         stated "The US State Department 2016 Human Rights Practices  Report
         noted: "Police did not always  enforce  the  law  equitably".   The
         updated 2019 Report notes at  page  16,  "While  prosecutions  made
         significant process in pursuing low level public corruption  cases,
         including corrupt prosecutors and  judges,  prosecution  of  higher
         level crimes remain rare due to investigators' fear of retribution,
         a general  lack of resources, and corruption within  the  judiciary
         itself "... police corruption remained a problem ... police did not
         always enforce the law equitably".

      b) Paragraph 11.1.6, page 24 of the 2017  CPIN  notes  "The  US  State
         Department's 2016 Human Rights Practices  Report  noted:  "The  law
         provides criminal penalties for corruption by public officials, but
         the government did not implement the law effectively and  officials
         frequently  engaged  in  corrupt  practices  with  impunity".   The
         updated USSD 2019 report at page  15  notes  "Officials  frequently
         engaged in corrupt practices with impunity"."

      c) Paragraph 11.1.7, page 25 of the 2017 CPIN  notes  "The  same  USSD
         Report  noted:  "Corruption  was  pervasive  in  all  branches   of
         government".  The updated US State Department's 2019  Human  Rights
         Practices Report at page 15  notes  "Pervasive  corruption  in  all
         branches of government and municipal institutions"."

40. The Appellant relies on the commission staff, working document  Albania
    2020 Report accompanying the communication from the Commission  to  the
    European Parliament, the Council,  the  European  Economic  and  Social
    Committee and the Committee of the Regions 2020,  communication  on  EU
    enlargement policy, 6th October 2020.  Given its age, it does not  form
    part of the 2020 country  information.   It  supports  that  corruption
    remains widespread.

41. D is in a position of influence.  He is part of a larger  organisation.
    He acted in concert with others.  There is widespread corruption and  a
    low chance that he will be convicted.  While  there  is  in  general  a
    sufficiency of protection, relying on TD and AD, this would not be  the
    case for the Appellant.  She relies on a report from  the  Home  Office
    Fact-Finding Mission (FFM) published in 2018 to  support  that  Albania
    cannot provide protection for all.

42. The Appellant could be offered a place in a guarded shelter,  but  once
    she leaves, she will be at risk of being re-trafficked.  The CPIN  2020
    supports that stigma and discrimination persist.  It says that 4% to 5%
    are at risk of being re-trafficked.  In this case there is  a  risk  of
    being re-trafficked.  The package offered (2020 CPIN 10.2.1)  will  not
    reduce the risk to this Appellant.   There  is  insufficient  financial
    support  to  live  independently.   There  is   a   narrow   scope   of
    employability  arising  from  the  economic  situation,   stigma   (the
    Appellant will be labelled a "kurva") and  societal  exclusion.   These
    factors will push the Appellant into the grey  economy.   In  addition,
    her employment opportunities are  further  narrowed  by  mental  health
    issues.  Although the packages that have been put  in  place  with  the
    integration of a VOT back into society builds upon position of  TD  and
    AD (paragraphs 85 to 86).  These packages and measures  do  not  reduce
    the risk of a VOT being placed in a position of vulnerability.

43. The view of TD and AD is that the Albanian state does and  can  provide
    shelter for a period of two years for a returning VOT and that they are
    at risk of being re-trafficked subject to the factors which led to  the
    initial trafficking as well as the personal circumstances of the VOT.

44. There is no specific funded mental  health  provision  available  after
    leaving the shelter.  The Appellant joins the same  system  as  others.
    Given the stigma and societal views, this  will  add  a  layer  to  the
    complexities of gaining treatment.  The report of the Home Office  FFM,
    February 2018, page 93 states that there is "Limited support for  long-
    term mental health issues".

45. The 2020 CPIN at paragraph 11.3.1 notes that  there  is  a  move  to  a
    community-based system of mental  health  but  "Community  centres  are
    always full.  Some religious organisations also have spaces, but  these
    are always full.  There are very few chances for long-term support  for
    really serious cases."  Given that the  applicant  is  a  VOT,  she  is
    likely to be stigmatised and even if  she  was  able  to  sidestep  the
    stigma the lack of care available would further impact on  her  ability
    to access the grey economy to support her  own  family  unit  therefore
    increasing vulnerabilities.

46. Where a VOT is rejected this does not just restrict the  socio-economic
    pathway when it comes to employment, it restricts the ability of a  VOT
    to relocate as a VOT cannot return to the area of  their  origins,  she
    would have to lay roots elsewhere which would require the creation of a
    false narrative.  The integration programme does not seek to create new
    identities or background.

47. Societal views have not fundamentally altered in the  period  since  TD
    and AD.  Societal exclusion of the Appellant and  her  children  render
    her more vulnerable.  The CPIN 2020 highlights that there is additional
    support mechanism in place for VOT leaving shelters however support  is
    patchy and haphazard.

48. The USSD TiP  Report  2019  noted  Albania  ought  to  "Create  funding
    mechanisms that allocate adequate funding and resources on a consistent
    and regular basis to the  government  run  and  NGO  run  shelters  for
    trafficking victims" (see page 62).  The report notes that funding  has
    steadily increased over the past four years;  however,  funding  delays
    persist  which  hinder  shelter  operations.   The   support   is   not
    universally available.

49. The Appellant is now aged 28 having moved from Albania when she was 21,
    she has never worked, she has limited education and she has  no  family
    interaction.  She suffers from mild  to  moderate  depressive  illness,
    anxiety symptoms and PTSD like symptoms.  In Dr  Sultan's  opinion  she
    has depressive illness with anxiety and panic attacks which are  likely
    to deteriorate if she should return.  She expressed  fleeting  thoughts
    of suicide and concerns about her ability to cope living on her own  in
    Albania

50. The Appellant may well be regarded as a  "heavy  case"  (see  paragraph
    110(e) TD and AD) and be allowed to remain in any shelter for a  longer
    period, but she will have to eventually leave and given the attitude of
    Albanian society which has not changed, what is said at  paragraph  171
    of TD and AD is still relevant when considering the  effects  upon  the
    Appellant.

51. The 2020 CPIN (paragraph 10.7.2, page 56) states that "Support  workers
    advise people who have experienced trafficking not  to  share  personal
    information with others so they, and their children, could avoid  being
    stigmatised."

52.  Particular  vulnerabilities  of  the  Appellant  include  having   two
    children, mental health issues and a lack of formal vocational skills.

53.  It is submitted that there  are  very  significant  obstacles  in  the
    context of  paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)  of  the  Immigration  Rules  with
    reference to Kamara v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2016]
    EWCA Civ 813.

Findings and reasons

54. The judge of the First-tier Tribunal made several  findings  that  have
    been maintained.  The judge found that the Appellant was  credible  and
    accepted that she was a victim  of  trafficking.   She  said  that  the
    Appellant had lived in Tirana prior to leaving Albania and that she has
    family there but has no contact with them because they  disapproved  of
    her relationship with D.  The judge accepted  her  evidence  about  the
    estrangement from the Appellant's family following their disapproval of
    D.  She accepted that the Appellant had an illegitimate child and  that
    she was educated up to secondary school but that there was no  evidence
    that she has vocational skills which she could use to find  employment.
    The judge summarised at paragraph 37 of the decision that the Appellant
    would be returning to Albania as a VOT with an illegitimate  child  and
    no family support.  These findings are the starting point (  save  that
    the Appellant now has two illegitimate children) for our assessment.

55. In response to our directions made on  10  November  2020,  Mr  Din  on
    behalf of the Appellant submitted  lengthy  written  submissions  along
    with further background evidence.  The Secretary  of  State  failed  to
    comply with the directions. Regrettably, we have not been  assisted  by
    the Secretary of State as far as this appeal is concerned.

56. Having heard the evidence we agree with the First-tier Tribunal in that
    the Appellant is a credible witness.

57. We accept the Appellant's submissions in relation  to  D.   Should  the
    Appellant return to Tirana we find that she would be at  risk  from  D.
    Notwithstanding the passage of time and that the Appellant has not  had
    contact with D since she was trafficked, we find that it is  reasonably
    likely that D is part of a human trafficking organisation which traffic
    women from Albania into other countries[1].

58. We apply the country guidance case of TD and  AD.   We  have  not  been
    asked by the Secretary of State to depart from it. The 2020  CPIN  says
    that the findings in TD and AD should be taken into account.  There  is
    no cogent reason not to apply the current  country  guidance.  In  some
    respects the situation in Albania may have improved, but as far as this
    appeal is concerned there  are  no  material  changes  brought  to  out
    attention.

59. The Albanian government have an effective NRM in  place.  There  is  in
    place general Horvath standard (Horvath v Secretary of  State  for  the
    Home Department [2000]  UKHL  37)  sufficiency  of  protection.  It  is
    generally  available  to  victims  of  trafficking.  Whether  there  is
    sufficiency of protection in  this  case  depends  on  the  Appellant's
    ability to access this. This  in  turn  properly  applying  TD  and  AD
    depends on her individual circumstances.

60. Before looking at the Appellant's circumstances. We take  into  account
    the observations made by the Upper Tribunal's findings about corruption
    because this is material to the Appellant's perception of whether there
    is sufficiency of protection: -


         93.  There is however consistent evidence in respect of corruption.
          The Needs Assessment records that  the  majority  of  reports  and
         respondents to that research cited corruption  -  in  the  form  of
         complicity between local police/officials and traffickers  -  as  a
         "major barrier" to combating trafficking.  Mr Chenciner  refers  to
         the report by the Institute for Democracy and Mediation  concerning
         the  pervasive  and  persistent  problem  of  "a  high  level"   of
         corruption in Albanian society. That 2015 report found that 36%  of
         public respondents admitted to bribing  the  police  "very  often".
         Professor Haxhiymeri offered her anecdotal  evidence  that  in  her
         experience over the years she has  come  across  several  cases  of
         police  officers  collaborating  with  perpetrators   of   domestic
         violence. The only prosecutions she was aware of took place in  the
         early part of 2015 when  two  police  officers  were  arrested  for
         working with traffickers. This accords with the findings in  the  -
         earlier - TIP report  that  although  corruption  continues  to  be
         highlighted as an issue, there were no investigations of government
         officials complicit in trafficking offenses between 2013 and  2014.
         The TIP also acknowledges that in 2014 the  continuing  problem  of
         corruption has "hampered the efficacy of training".


         94.  Corruption is, by its very nature, hidden and not  susceptible
         to audit. The fact that two officers have been recently  prosecuted
         is a positive sign that whilst corruption is apparently  widespread
         it is not so  endemic  that  prosecutions  cannot  be  successfully
         brought.  It does however remain a serious problem,  not  least  in
         the minds of the Albanian public who after many decades  of  living
         with bribery as a way of life may find  it  difficult  to  see  any
         change. In this regard we accept the evidence that  for  many  VOTs
         there is a fear that they will have to pay  the  police  off  -with
         either money or sexual favours. That subjective fear, whether it is
         well founded in respect of an individual officer or not, can impact
         upon personal decisions about whether to enter the NRM.  We  accept
         that there may be a number of officers who  remain  susceptible  to
         bribery. We accept that there may be some individual  officers  who
         hold "traditional" and misogynistic views about  how  women  should
         behave. In the absence of any hard data we are  however  unable  to
         find that this is a general,  objective  real  risk  to  all  women
         entering the NRM.

61. We also take into account Mr Din's written submissions (most  of  which
    concern sufficiency of protection) and the CPIN 2020 that corruption in
    Albania is significant[2]. We accept that there is corruption and there
    are significant shortcomings in  the  system.   The  problem  for  this
    Appellant is that she has a genuine fear of D on her return and a total
    distrust in the police to protect her. She  has  several  risk  factors
    that  properly  applying  TD  and  AD  would  prevent   her   accessing
    sufficiency of protection. She has no support from her family, she is a
    victim of trafficking with  two  illegitimate  children  from  separate
    fathers. She has no education that is likely to lead  to  independence.
    She has not social standing or status. For reasons we will  explain  in
    due course she has poor mental health.

62. We do not believe that in this case sufficiency of protection would  be
    available to the Appellant taking into account her  individual  factors
    and her fear of the authorities because of the prevalence of corruption
    in Albania.

63. In any event, if the Appellant were to access a shelter, at some  stage
    she would be expected to leave it.  At 9.7.2 of the CPIN it is recorded
    that the Ministry of Interior said that there is no time limit  on  the
    length of time a person can stay in a shelter.  The original source  is
    from a person from the Albanian Ministry of  Interior  to  the  FFM  in
    2017.[3]  There  is  no  evidence  brought  to  our  attention  of  any
    individual staying in a shelter for more than 2 years, the  time  given
    to "heavy cases.[4]" Thus, there is a level of  uncertainty  concerning
    how long she could remain  in  a  shelter  undermining  sufficiency  of
    protection in this case.

64. A further complication is that this Appellant is from Tirana.  Even  if
    she accesses a shelter, the time she can stay there is not certain. The
    Appellant could not remain in Tirana once she is living  outside  of  a
    shelter,  because she is at risk from D.

65. She would have to relocate outside the capital. In Secretary  of  State
    for the Home Department v AH (Sudan) [2007] UKHL 49 the House of  Lords
    make clear that the question of whether internal flight is "reasonable"
    is not to be equated with the test  under  Article  3  ECHR.[5]  At  20
    Baroness Hale cites with approval the  UNHCR  view  that  the  test  is
    whether the individual will be able to live a "relatively  normal  life
    without  undue  hardship",  itself  a  formulation  approved  by  their
    Lordships in Januzi[6]:

66. The background evidence paints a very bleak picture for a single woman,
    victim of trafficking with two illegitimate  children,  living  outside
    Tirana[7].  Properly applying the law,  we  find  that  expecting  this
    Appellant to relocate outside Tirana would not be reasonable.

67. There are additional factors that  make  relocation  unreasonable.  The
    Appellant has limited education and two  young  illegitimate  children.
    She is a single mother with no family support.   Certainly,  she  would
    gain skills in the shelter to  assist  her  to  make  it  on  her  own.
    However, we find that this Appellant would need  significant  long-term
    support to put any acquired skills into practice, in the light  of  her
    personal circumstances.  She has limited education and no  skills.  She
    has never worked in the lawful economy.  We cannot be sure what support
    this Appellant would receive considering  her  complex  needs  and  the
    financial constraints upon the  shelters.   There  are  funding  issues
    which we find make matters more precarious[8].

68. We find that this Appellant does not have what could be categorised  as
    very  serious  mental  health  issues.  She  has  mild-  to-   moderate
    depression and symptoms of post-traumatic stress disorder. However,  we
    accept that her mental health is poor  and  likely  to  deteriorate  on
    return to Albania. We attach weight the evidence of the expert, in  the
    absence of challenge or any obvious  reason  not  to  do  so.   We  are
    satisfied  that  the  Appellant  has  by  any  account  been   severely
    traumatised by her experiences. We accept that there is some  treatment
    available on return; however, she is genuinely frightened of  returning
    to Albania and very vulnerable.   This  we  find  will  make  her  less
    resilient.  We note what the Upper Tribunal said in TD and AD:-


             "109. For less resilient or adaptable women however,  the  path
             to  financial  independence   is   not   so   straightforward.
             Professor Haxhiymeri describes the assistance offered  by  the
             shelters, the Albanian government or the IOM as  "superficial"
             and stressed that such training packages rarely help women  in
             the long run. The problem she  identifies  is  that  women  in
             Albania tend to find work in the low-skilled, informal  sector
             where employment is not secure or protected, and  where  wages
             rarely keep up with the costs of living:  this  is  the  "grey
             economy" discussed in AM & BM[9]. All of the evidence supports
             a finding that the financial constraints make survival in  the
             cities difficult: we accept Professor Haxhiymeri's evidence of
             her personal experience of trying to  find  accommodation  for
             survivors of domestic violence. Workers at her  NGO  typically
             find that the cost of basic accommodation in Tirana,  even  in
             the outskirts, is E200 per month whereas a  woman  working  in
             those conditions will typically earn no more  than  E150.  The
             respondents to the research consistently reported that  it  is
             "very difficult"  to  live  alone  because  of  the  financial
             constraints women face, in particular in staying in employment
             and in paying rent.  The UNP report confirms that there is  no
             provision for VOTs to have access to social housing, and  that
             they are therefore forced to rent in the private  sector.  The
             high unemployment rate means that people are  forced  to  take
             "any kind of job". The Needs Assessment succinctly  summarises
             this situation: "most victims are returning to the same place,
             facing the same  problems  that  they  had  before  they  were
             trafficked". The difference now being that they must face such
             daily grind whilst living with the physical, psychological and
             social consequences of that experience.


         110. At paragraphs 147-151 of AM & BM, the Tribunal considered  the
             evidence of Dr Agnew-Davies in respect  of  the  psychological
             effects of  trafficking.  We  adopt  and  underline  the  view
             expressed in that case that in all claims it is  important  to
             consider the circumstances of the  individual,  including  her
             strength, age, and psychological make-up. For  VOTs  who  have
             been through extreme traumatic experiences it is not difficult
             to  see  how  they  are   likely   to   suffer   psychological
             consequences such  as  complex  PTSD.    The  VOT  may  suffer
             lasting physical damage as a result of her experiences.  These
             are important factors which must be considered when  assessing
             whether internal flight is reasonable for any individual  VOT.
             Whilst the evidence relating to psychological support services
             for VOTs once  they  have  left  the  shelters  suggests  some
             availability, that it is undoubtedly patchy and in many  cases
             wholly inadequate as we have observed  above.  An  individual,
             because of her condition, may have difficulty in accessing  or
             engaging with  such  services  that  do  exist.   She  may  be
             required  to  pay  for  mental  health  care,  increasing  her
             financial burden.  These  are  all  matters  relevant  to  the
             consideration  of  whether  internal  flight   is   reasonably
             available.

69. The Appellant's poor mental health is another significant factor  which
    will undermine her ability to access sufficiency of protection.  It  is
    also another weighty factor undermining internal flight as a reasonable
    option.  To summarise we conclude that in the absence of sufficiency of
    protection this Appellant is at risk on return. Internal relocation  is
    not a reasonable option for her.  Thus,  she  is  refugee  in  need  of
    international protection.  Her appeal is allowed.



Notice of Decision


The appeal is allowed on protection grounds.

The appeal is allowed under Article 3 European Convention on Human Rights.

The appeal is allowed on humanitarian grounds.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed            Joanna McWilliam                    Date 22 January 2021

Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam

-----------------------
[1] See 2020 CPIN paragraph 3.3
[2] See CPIN 2020 paragraph 7.5.1

[3] Report of a Home Office Fact Finding Mission (FFM) Albania published
February 2018

[4] paragraph 110 (e ) TD and AD (Trafficked women) CG [2016] UKUT 00092


[5] Lord Bingham refers [at 5] to his own guidance in Januzi v Secretary  of
State for the Home Department [2006] UKHL 5:

    "In paragraph 21 of my opinion  in  Januzi  I  summarised  the  correct
    approach to the problem of internal relocation in terms with which  all
    my noble and learned friends agreed:


       'The decision-maker, taking account  of  all  relevant  circumstances
       pertaining to the claimant and his country  of  origin,  must  decide
       whether it is reasonable  to  expect  the  claimant  to  relocate  or
       whether it would be unduly harsh to expect him to do so....There  is,
       as Simon Brown LJ aptly observed in Svazas v Secretary of  State  for
       the Home Department, [2002] 1 WLR 1891, para 55, a spectrum of cases.
        The decision-maker must do his best to decide, on such  material  as
       is available, where on the spectrum the particular case falls...  All
       must depend on a fair assessment of the relevant facts'.


    Although specifically directed to a secondary issue in the case,  these
    observations are plainly of general application.  It is not easy to see
    how the rule could be more simply or  clearly  expressed.   It  is,  or
    should be, evidence that the enquiry must be directed to the  situation
    of the particular applicant, whose  age,  gender,  experience,  health,
    skills and family ties may all be very relevant.  There is  no  warrant
    for excluding, or giving priority to, consideration of the  applicant's
    way of life in the place of  persecution.   There  is  no  warrant  for
    excluding, or giving priority to consideration of conditions  generally
    prevailing in the home country.  I do not underestimate the  difficulty
    of making decisions in some cases.  But the difficulty lies in applying
    the test, not in expressing it.  The humanitarian object of the Refugee
    Convention is to secure a reasonable measure of  protection  for  those
    with a well-founded fear of persecution in their home country  or  some
    part of it; it is not to  procure  a  general  levelling-up  of  living
    standards around the world, desirable though of course that is."

[6] "As the UNHCR put it in their very helpful intervention in this case:


       '...the correct approach when considering the reasonableness  of  IRA
       [internal relocation alternative] is to assess all the  circumstances
       of the individual's case holistically and with specific reference  to
       the individual's personal circumstances (including  past  persecution
       or fear thereof,  psychological  and  health  condition,  family  and
       social situation, and survival capacities).  This assessment is to be
       made in the context of the conditions  in  the  place  of  relocation
       (including basic human rights,  security  conditions,  socio-economic
       conditions, accommodation, access  to  health  care  facilities),  in
       order to determine the impact on that individual of settling  in  the
       proposed place of relocation and whether the individual could live  a
       relatively normal life without undue hardship'.


    I do not understand there to be any difference  between  this  approach
    and that commended by Lord Bingham in paragraph 5 of his opinion.  Very
    little, apart from the conditions in the country to which the  claimant
    has fled, is ruled out."

[7] 2020 CPIN paragraph 2.5.2
[8] See 2020 CPIN paragraph 9.


