
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
PA/12598/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|Oral decision given following hearing     |On 4 October 2017                 |
|On 26 September 2017                      |                                  |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG

                                   Between

                                     LK
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms K Reid, Counsel instructed by Marsh & Partners
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen of Albania who was born  in  February  2001,
    and is accordingly still only  16  years  old.   He  travelled  through
    various countries before eventually arriving in  the  UK  on  18  April
    2016.  He claimed asylum on 18  May  2018  when  attending  the  Asylum
    Intake Unit.

 2. His asylum claim is founded on his fear that on return  he  would  face
    persecution/mistreatment by reason of a blood feud which his family was
    involved with, with another family.  His family were the  social  group
    relied upon for the purposes of his asylum claim.

 3. The appellant's asylum claim  was  refused,  although  he  was  granted
    discretionary leave as a minor, until he came of age.

 4. The appellant  appealed  against  this  decision  but  his  appeal  was
    dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Sweet, in a decision and reasons
    promulgated on 14 June 2017 following a hearing  at  Taylor  House  one
    week earlier, on 7 June.  (Judge Sweet's decision records  the  Hearing
    as having been at Hatton Cross, but that was a mistake.)  The appellant
    now appeals with leave granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Lambert  on
    10 July 2017.

 5. Before this Tribunal, on behalf of the respondent, Mr Jarvis stated  as
    follows:

         "I accept that the judge  has  materially  erred,  partly  for  the
         reasons given within the grounds, but also it seems to  me  that  a
         more obvious point is that the judge has not seemingly  taken  into
         account the peace and reconciliation letter  of  27  October  2016,
         which, whether or not it is reliable, does assert that  there  have
         been threats and attacks.

         My view is that the failure to make any findings in respect of that
         materially relevant document does amount to  a  material  error  of
         law, with the effect that if this Tribunal agrees,  the  respondent
         would accept that the adverse credibility findings  made  by  Judge
         Sweet will have to be set aside, and the case would have to be  re-
         decided in its entirety."

 6. Having considered the file carefully, I agree that the failure to  have
    regard to this letter, and in particular  to  make  any  findings  with
    regard to it, was indeed a material error of law,  the  consequence  of
    which is that the adverse credibility findings have to be set aside and
    the case will have to be re-decided.

 7. Both parties were agreed that in these  circumstances  the  appropriate
    course was for this appeal  to  be  remitted  back  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal sitting at Hatton Cross, for a fresh hearing, with no findings
    reserved, and I will so order.

Notice of Decision

The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Sweet, in which he  had  dismissed
the appellant's appeal, is set aside and  no  findings  are  retained.   The
appeal will be remitted for re-hearing to the First-tier  Tribunal,  sitting
at Taylor House, to be re-heard by any judge other than Judge Sweet.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed:

                 [pic]

Upper                 Tribunal                  Judge                  Craig
    Date: 29 September 2017




























