
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
PA/12046/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Liverpool                        |   Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 27 March 2018                          |   On 11 April 2018              |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

                                     FH
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Moksud, Legal Representative, Dar & Co
Solicitors Ltd
     trading as International Immigration Advisory Services
For the Respondent:    Mr David Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant has been  granted  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal - on Article 8 ECHR grounds only - from the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal  (Judge  Bannerman  sitting  at  Manchester  on  18
    September 2017) dismissing her appeal against the decision made  on  19
    October 2016 to refuse her protection and human rights claims.





The Reasons for the Limited Grant of Permission to Appeal

 2. On 13 December 2017, Judge Michael Keane gave his reasons for  granting
    the appellant permission to appeal from the decision of the  First-tier
    Tribunal on Article 8 ECHR grounds only.

 3. In so far as the grounds were directed to Judge Bannerman's decision on
    the asylum appeal, they amounted to no more than  a  disagreement  with
    the findings of the Judge, and they did not suggest an  arguable  error
    of law but for  which  the  outcome  of  the  appeal  might  have  been
    different.

 4. However as regards the appeal on Article 8 ECHR grounds:

         "The Judge arguably did not arrive at findings of fact when  it  is
         incumbent upon the Judge to do so.  The Judge did not  consider  or
         resolve the Article 8 appeal  observing  that  structured  approach
         suggested by Lord Bingham of Cornhill  at  paragraph  [17]  of  his
         judgment in R (Razgar) -v- the Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
         Department [2004] INLR 349, HL  and  the  Judge  arguably  did  not
         bestow any or any adequate consideration  on  the  extent  of  that
         private life under Article 8 which the appellant  had  established.
         The Judge arguably did not arrive at findings of  fact  as  to  the
         severity and consequences to the appellant upon  her  removal  from
         the United Kingdom and the Judge arguably did not arrive at any  or
         any adequate findings as  to  whether  the  decision  under  appeal
         entailed the disproportionate interference of the appellant's right
         to respect for private life.  To this extent only, the  application
         for permission is granted."

The Rule 24 Response

 5. On 24 January 2018 Chris Avery of the Specialist Appeals Team settled a
    Rule 24 response in which he stated that the respondent did not  oppose
    the appellant's application for permission to appeal  with  respect  to
    her Article 8 claim.  He invited the Tribunal to determine  the  appeal
    with a  fresh  oral  (continuance)  hearing  to  consider  whether  the
    decision of the Secretary of State breached her Article 8 rights.

Relevant Background

 6. The appellant is a national of Nigeria, whose accepted date of birth is
    5 June 1968.  She was first encountered by the  UK  authorities  on  31
    January 2009.  She was stopped by police in Dagenham with regard  to  a
    suspected traffic  offence.   When  questioned  about  her  immigration
    status, she stated that she had entered the UK 11 years ago and she did
    not have her passport.  She was arrested on suspicion of illegal entry,
    and taken to the Dagenham Police  Station  where  she  was  interviewed
    under caution.

 7. She said in interview that she entered  the  UK  in  1996  at  Heathrow
    Airport with her boyfriend, who held her passport, tickets  and  money.
    She knew that the passport she had travelled on was  not  in  her  true
    identity, but she did not see whose name was in the passport.  On their
    arrival in the UK, they had seen an Immigration Officer who  had  asked
    them questions.  It was her boyfriend who answered all the questions.

 8. She initially said that she had come to the UK for a holiday,  and  had
    then split up with her boyfriend.  But she later said that  she  had  a
    child in Nigeria, and she agreed that she had come to the UK  in  order
    to work and send money back to her child in Nigeria.

 9. She said that she had remained in the UK since 1996.  She had never had
    a permanent address and she had slept on friends' sofas.  She  had  not
    had a proper job in the UK, but she had been doing  child  minding  and
    cleaning for the GGIC International Church in Dagenham for the past  10
    years.  She did not have a Nigerian  passport,  as  the  Nigerian  High
    Commission had asked her for money to give her a new passport, and  she
    could not afford to pay.  The Interviewer asked her  how  she  came  to
    have acrylic nails  and  gold  earrings  if  she  could  not  afford  a
    passport.  She was recorded as laughing and not  giving  an  answer  to
    this.  She said that any money she had earned had  been  sent  back  to
    Nigeria to pay for her daughter's education.

10. According to the Home Office database, the appellant  was  served  with
    various notices, including an IS96 notice, and was required  to  report
    to Beckett House.  A condition of her temporary release  was  that  she
    resided at [                   ], and she was  required  to  report  to
    Beckett House from Wednesday, 4  February  2009,  and  every  Wednesday
    thereafter. The appellant failed to report, and was  thereafter  listed
    as an absconder.

11. On 9 March 2012 the appellant was encountered by Essex Police outside a
    property in Leyton.  After  checks  were  made,  she  was  arrested  on
    suspicion of illegal entry and conveyed to Harlow Police Station.   She
    gave a false name and date  of  birth,  but  later  admitted  her  true
    identity.  She was  granted  temporary  release  with  instructions  to
    report  to  Beckett  House.   The   appellant   complied   with   these
    instructions.

12. On 10 September 2012,  she  was  detained  on  reporting,  pending  her
    removal to  Nigeria.  An  interview  was  conducted  at  the  point  of
    detention.  The appellant said that she was in a  relationship  with  a
    British national.  She also said that she had a  daughter  aged  22  in
    Nigeria from a previous relationship.

13.  On  17  September  2012,  the  appellant  applied  through  Kingscourt
    Solicitors for leave to remain on family and private life grounds.  The
    solicitors said that their client had arrived in the UK in 1996 and had
    remained in  the  UK  illegally  ever  since.   She  was  currently  in
    relationship with a British national.

14. On 16 October 2013, the respondent gave her reasons  for  refusing  the
    application.  The appellant had a spent conviction which she had failed
    to disclose in her application.  Thus, she did not meet the suitability
    requirements of Appendix FM as details of the spent conviction were not
    disclosed.  She might have a genuine and subsisting  relationship  with
    her settled partner, but her application fell  for  refusal  under  the
    suitability requirements of the Rules.  She claimed to have entered the
    UK in 1996.  Therefore, she had not lived continuously in the UK for at
    least 20 years, and so she could not  meet  the  requirements  of  Rule
    276ADE(1)(iii).

15. On 6 May 2014 the appellant made  a  fresh  application  for  leave  to
    remain on the basis of her marriage to  another  settled  person.   The
    application was refused on 30 June 2014.

16. The appellant claimed asylum at ASU Croydon on 21 April 2016.   At  her
    screening interview, she said that she had fled persecution in Nigeria,
    and for this purpose she had sold herself to the agent who had  brought
    her to the UK.  They had arrived  by  direct  flight  from  Nigeria  at
    Heathrow Airport in 1996. The agent took  her  to  Oxford.   When  they
    arrived there, he told her that he needed to get his  money  back,  and
    the way for that was for her to go into prostitution.   She  agreed  to
    this, and she worked as a prostitute from  Monday  to  Sunday  for  six
    months.  After six months, he kicked her out.

17. She was asked whether she had ever been accused  of  or  committed  any
    offence of which she had been or could have been convicted.   She  said
    that she had taken her friend's car in 2009, which she should not  have
    done, and then Immigration had detained her for 24 hours.

18. In a letter to the Home Office  dated  17  May  2016,  the  appellant's
    current solicitors provided a very detailed account of the  appellant's
    immigration history since her alleged arrival in  the  UK  in  February
    1996.  The appellant had begun to become physically unwell from her sex
    work, resulting in the swelling of her genitals and bleeding from  this
    area.  As a result, she refused to continue working for the  agent,  Mr
    J, and he kicked her out of the house.  She began sleeping inside phone
    booths, or on buses and at bus stations.  She then met a pastor, the R,
    who took her to a church in Tottenham, London, and  provided  her  with
    food and a place to live.  In September 1996, RS moved  to  Manchester,
    and she informed the appellant that she would return for her  when  she
    had settled down in Manchester.  In 1997, RS  returned  to  London  and
    took the appellant with her to her church in Manchester  at  434  Aston
    Old Road.  The appellant became a volunteer for  the  church,  and  she
    lived there until she met 'MO', who was part of the congregation.  They
    became partners, and she decided to follow MO back to  London  so  that
    they could spend the rest  of  their  lives  together.   The  appellant
    became pregnant by MO on two occasions, and on both occasions he forced
    her to attend an  abortion  centre  in  2002  and  2004  to  abort  the
    pregnancies.

19. The appellant left MO in 2004, and was taken in by a church friend  who
    took her to Birmingham, where  she  lived  until  2006.   In  2006  she
    returned to London to stay with a church member until  2008.   She  was
    staying with another friend in 2009 when she was arrested by the police
    for a traffic offence in Dagenham.  RS heard about the  struggles  that
    the appellant had faced, and took her back to her church in Manchester.

20. The appellant attended a substantive asylum  interview  on  25  October
    2016.  At the time of the interview, she was residing at an address  in
    Manchester.  She feared mistreatment on return to Nigeria, because  she
    had converted from Islam to Christianity, and because she had  reported
    her husband to the police for domestic violence.

21. She said that she had been brought up as a Muslim, and all  her  family
    were Muslims.  But when she was aged somewhere between 24 and  27,  she
    started  following  the  Christian   faith   and   had   converted   to
    Christianity.  The appellant was presented with the choice of  marrying
    an Iman and converting back to Islam, or they would  kill  her.   Also,
    Muslims from an Islamic group in her own area beat her up.   She  tried
    to relocate internally, but without success. So she decided to come  to
    the UK with the help of an agent.  In  March  2015,  she  reported  her
    husband to the police for domestic violence, and he was arrested  on  2
    March 2015.  Soon after his arrest, she received a telephone call  from
    his family in Nigeria, threatening her that if she  went  to  Court  to
    testify  against  him  they  would  kill  her  on  return  to  Nigeria.
    Accordingly, she had decided not to testify against him.

22. On 19 October 2016, the respondent gave her reasons  for  refusing  the
    appellant's protection and human rights claims.  It was  accepted  that
    she was a Christian, but it was not accepted  that  she  was  born  and
    raised as a Muslim.

23. She claimed that she had been forced to work as a prostitute whilst  in
    the UK to repay the agent for the costs of him bringing her here.   She
    had provided an internally  consistent  account  with  regard  to  this
    aspect of her claim, and it  was  also  consistent  with  the  Nigerian
    country guidance information on the trafficking of women.  Accordingly,
    it was accepted that she was a victim of trafficking whilst in the  UK.



24. Home Office records supported her  claim  that  she  had  reported  her
    husband for domestic abuse, and it  was  accepted  that  her  husband's
    family in Nigeria had made threats to her life if she went to Court  to
    testify against her husband.

25. However, although aspects of  her  claim  were  accepted,  it  was  not
    accepted that she had a well-founded fear of persecution on  return  to
    Nigeria, either because she was a past victim of trafficking or because
    her husband's family in Nigeria had threatened to kill her in the past.
     She had not had any further contact with her husband's family or  with
    her husband since  his  arrest  in  March  2016.   Also,  she  had  not
    testified in Court against him.

The Hearing before, and the Decision of, the First-tier Tribunal

26. Judge Bannerman received oral evidence from the appellant, RS, and  TF.
    RS gave evidence that she first met the appellant in the UK  in  August
    1996.  Mr TF said that he had first met the appellant in the  Old  Kent
    Road in London in 1997.

27. In his subsequent decision, the Judge's findings of fact were  set  out
    at paragraphs [70] to [87].  At paragraphs [70] to [84], the Judge gave
    his reasons for dismissing the appellant's appeal against  the  refusal
    of her protection claim.

28. The Judge addressed the appellant's Article 8 claim at paragraphs  [85]
    to [87].  He found that the appellant had flitted about, and that there
    was no great evidence regarding friends or social networks, other  than
    attending a church, of which the pastor had  given  evidence  that  was
    "not wholly convincing".

29. Looking at the matter outside the Rules, he did not consider  that  the
    appellant's lack of criminal convictions - against  the  background  of
    someone who had fled from the UK authorities and who had  come  to  the
    country on a  false  passport  -  outweighed  the  need  for  effective
    immigration controls.

30. At paragraph [87], the Judge said that the last area  to  look  at  was
    Rule 276ADE.  He was not convinced to the appropriate standard that the
    appellant had been in the UK for 20 years.  It was  "irreverent"  (sic)
    to see that she arrived in 1996.  She had cast significant  doubt  upon
    the evidence produced by Kingscourt Solicitors. She had denied that the
    documents that  they  had  provided  were  correct,  which  might  have
    bolstered her claim to have been in the UK between the  year  2000  and
    2006.  She was effectively not being tracked with her movements, and he
    did not accept that she had been in the UK for 20 years.  TF said  that
    he had met her in 1997, but his  evidence  was  somewhat  inconsistent.
    The pastor said that she met her in 1996, "but  her  evidence  was  not
    entirely credible."

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

31. For the purposes of the hearing before  me,  the  solicitors  served  a
    skeleton argument prepared by Mr Chaudhry  of  Counsel.   He  submitted
    that two independent witnesses had provided corroboration for the claim
    that the appellant had resided in the UK for the  past  20  years,  and
    that Judge Bannerman had rejected their  evidence  "arbitrarily".   The
    pastor had no axe  to  grind,  and  no  reason  to  tell  lies.   Judge
    Bannerman had erred when he branded her wholly  credible  testimony  as
    being not wholly convincing.

32. At the outset of the hearing, I raised with Mr Mills  the  question  of
    what findings of fact (if any) should be preserved for the purposes  of
    the re-making of the Article 8 claim.  He  accepted  that  the  Judge's
    findings of fact on Rule 276ADE(1)(iii) should not  be  preserved,  and
    that the issue of whether the appellant had resided in the  UK  for  20
    years should be considered afresh.

33. The appellant was called as a witness, and she adopted as her  evidence
    in chief her witness statement that she had adopted before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.  She was extensively cross-examined by Mr Mills, and she
    also answered questions for  clarification  purposes  from  me.   After
    hearing closing submissions from both representatives,  I  reserved  my
    decision on re-making.

Reasons for Finding an Error of Law in  the  Disposal  of  the  Claim  under
Article 8 ECHR

34. The First-tier Tribunal Judge erred in law in  his  assessment  of  the
    Article 8 claim for the reasons given  by  Judge  Keane  when  granting
    permission, and for the following additional reasons.

35. Not only did the Judge fail to follow and apply the  five-point  Razgar
    test, but he purported to consider the  Article  8  claim  outside  the
    Rules before he had  given  proper  consideration  as  to  whether  the
    appellant qualified for leave to remain on private life  grounds  under
    the Rules.  It was an error of  law  for  the  Judge  to  consider  the
    application of Rule 276ADE(1)(iii) as an  after-thought.   Furthermore,
    the Judge did not make clear findings of fact on two important  issues:
    namely (a) whether the appellant had shown that she had  first  entered
    the UK at least 20 years before the date of application; and (b) if so,
    whether, on the balance of probabilities, she had remained  in  the  UK
    continuously for 20 years.

The Re-making of the Decision

36. If the issue of the appellant's date of entry rested solely on her  own
    evidence, I would be unable to find that the appellant  had  discharged
    the burden of proof.  Although she has been consistent  in  maintaining
    that she entered the UK in early 1996 (and hence  more  than  20  years
    prior to  her  claiming  asylum  on  21  April  2016),  she  has  given
    contradictory and inconsistent accounts of the circumstances  in  which
    she entered the UK and also where, and with whom, she has lived in  the
    UK since 1996.

37. The account given in her  witness  statement  is  fairly  detailed  and
    internally coherent, largely mirroring the even more  detailed  account
    given in her solicitors' letter of May  2016.   However,  she  deviated
    from this account in her oral evidence.

38. The fact that the appellant is not shown to be credible on  matters  in
    respect  of  which  she  has  given  contradictory  and  uncorroborated
    evidence, does not mean that she cannot be found credible on  a  matter
    about which she has been consistent and in respect of which  there  is,
    in my view, independent corroborative evidence.  I  consider  that  the
    evidence of RS is independent.  As a pastor,  she  can  be  trusted  to
    provide truthful evidence.

39. In her signed witness statement in support of the appellant's  referral
    to the Competent Authority as a victim of trafficking, RS said that she
    came across the appellant in 1996 when the appellant was destitute. The
    appellant had told her what had happened to her in the UK as  a  victim
    of trafficking, and she had  taken  the  appellant  to  her  church  in
    Tottenham.  In the same year, she had to go to Manchester, and when she
    returned to London in late 1997, she took the appellant to  her  church
    in Manchester.

40. As RS moved from her church in Tottenham to a new church in  Manchester
    in 1996, it is unlikely that she is confused about the  year  in  which
    she first encountered the  appellant  in  London.   Rs'  relocation  to
    Manchester in September 1996 (which will be  a  matter  of  documentary
    record) will have given RS a clear reference  point  against  which  to
    check her recollections of when she first  encountered  the  appellant,
    and also when she brought the appellant back with her to Manchester.

41. I did not have the benefit of receiving oral evidence from  RS,  unlike
    Judge Bannerman.  But having carefully considered his  record  of  RS's
    evidence in his decision, I do  not  consider  that  he  gave  adequate
    reasons for rejecting her  evidence  as  to  when  she  first  met  the
    appellant, and indeed it is not clear that the Judge did in fact reject
    her evidence on this issue. For the evidence of  RS  covered  not  only
    when she first  encountered  the  appellant,  but  also  various  other
    matters which are not directly relevant to the issue of  the  longevity
    of the appellant's residence.

42. In her closing submissions on behalf of the respondent, the  Presenting
    Officer invited Judge Bannerman not to "rely" on RS's evidence  because
    the appellant had withheld information  from  RS  about  her  religious
    problems in Nigeria, and  also  because  RS  had  been  harbouring  the
    appellant in the UK knowing that she was here illegally.   Furthermore,
    the Presenting Officer invited the Judge to  attach  little  weight  to
    RS's evidence that her written  reference  to  the  appellant  being  a
    responsible mother was referring to her being a good mother  figure  to
    the children that she minded in the church, and not a reference to  her
    being a good mother to her daughter, of whose existence  she  said  she
    was unaware.

43. Against this background, it is reasonable to infer that when the  Judge
    said later in his decision that he did not find  RS's  evidence  to  be
    wholly convincing, he was referring to those aspects of  RS's  evidence
    which had been commented on by the Presenting Officer  in  her  closing
    submissions.

44. In any event, I am not bound by the findings of the First-tier Tribunal
    Judge; and, upon a fresh appraisal of the evidence,  I  find  that  the
    appellant has discharged the burden  of  proving,  on  the  balance  of
    probabilities, that she entered the UK on 1 February 1996.

45. It does not of course follow  that  the  appellant  has  remained  here
    continuously for over 20 years.  There  is  some  force  in  Mr  Mills'
    submission that if the appellant was able to enter the UK illegally  on
    one occasion, there is no reason to suppose that  she  could  not  have
    exited and re-entered the UK illegally on a subsequent occasion.

46. However, a key consideration is that the respondent  accepts  that  the
    appellant was trafficked into prostitution in  order  to  pay  for  her
    illegal entry to the UK.  Although this concession does not  in  itself
    import an acceptance that the appellant  entered  the  UK  in  February
    1996, as opposed to some 10 years later, it is  more  likely  that  the
    appellant was trafficked into prostitution when she was in her 20s; and
    it is also likely that, having ceased to be a sex worker, the appellant
    would have remained in the  UK  as  an  economic  migrant  rather  than
    returning  voluntarily  to  the  country  from  which  she   had   been
    trafficked.

47. Accordingly, I am persuaded on the balance of  probabilities  that  the
    appellant has resided continuously in the UK for a period of  20  years
    from her date of entry on 1  February  1996,  and  that  she  therefore
    qualifies for leave to remain under Rule 276ADE(1)(iii).


Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal dismissing  the  appellant's  appeal
against the refusal of her protection claim did  not  contain  an  error  of
law, and accordingly that part of the decision stands.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal dismissing  the  appellant's  appeal
against the  refusal  of  her  human  rights  claim  under  Article  8  ECHR
contained an error of law, and accordingly the decision  is  set  aside  and
the following decision is substituted:

The appellant's appeal on human rights grounds is allowed  under  Article  8
ECHR by reference to Rule 276ADE(1)(iii).


Signed                              Date 9 April 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson



Direction Regarding Anonymity - rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appellant's appeal on Article 8 grounds, I have  given
consideration as to whether to make a fee award in respect of any fee  which
has been paid or is payable, and I have decided to make no fee award as  the
appellant failed in her appeal against the refusal of her protection  claim,
and she needed to bring forward further evidence by way of appeal  in  order
to succeed in her appeal against the refusal of her claim  under  Article  8
ECHR.


Signed                              Date 9 April 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson
