


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)           Appeal Number: PA/12859/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 12 October 2018             |On 12 November 2018             |
|                                |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JM HOLMES


                                   Between

                                    W. J.
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Rogers, Immigration Advice Centre
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

        1. The Appellant, a citizen of Iraq,  entered  the  United  Kingdom
           illegally in 2008 and claimed asylum. That  claim  was  refused,
           and his appeal rights against that refusal were exhausted on  23
           June 2010.
        2. The Appellant lodged a further protection claim on 17  September
           2013, which was refused on 15 November 2017. An  appeal  against
           the decision to refuse  this  protection  claim  was  heard  and
           dismissed by First Tier  Tribunal  Judge  Moran  in  a  decision
           promulgated on 5 February 2018. The Appellant did not attend the
           hearing.
        3. In the course of his decision the Judge noted the absence of any
           explanation for the Appellant's non-attendance, and lack of  any
           request for an adjournment. He records the enquiries he made  to
           satisfy himself that the Appellant had been served,  and  having
           concluded that he had been served, he recorded why he decided to
           proceed to hear and determine  the  appeal  in  the  Appellant's
           absence.
        4. Permission to appeal was refused by First  tier  Tribunal  Judge
           Mailer on 5 March 2018. The Appellant renewed his application to
           the Upper Tribunal, where it was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge
           Finch on 23 April 2018 on the single issue that it was  arguable
           the Appellant  had  not  been  on  notice  that  the  Respondent
           proposed to argue that he could  avoid  the  risks  of  harm  he
           relied upon by relocation to the KRG.
        5. A Rule 24 Notice has been lodged in response  to  the  grant  of
           permission to appeal, dated 24 May 2018. The Respondent  pointed
           out that the Appellant had been  properly  served  at  the  only
           address he had ever provided for service, and, that the issue of
           internal relocation to the KRG had been properly raised  in  the
           reasons given for the refusal of the protection claim.
        6. Neither party has applied pursuant to Rule 15(2A) for permission
           to rely upon further evidence.
        7. Thus the matter came before me.


      The hearing
        8. When the appeal was called on for hearing Ms Rogers, who did not
           appear below, accepted that a Notice  of  Hearing  was  properly
           served by the Tribunal on the only address for service  provided
           by the Appellant. He has never  provided  the  Tribunal  with  a
           contact mobile telephone number. That address was 135 Norton Rd,
           Stockton. It appears to be  common  ground  that  the  Appellant
           never lived there. Ms Rogers invited me to consider the  content
           of the letter dated 5 April 2018 from "Justice First" a charity,
           based at 135 Norton Rd, who had been assisting the Appellant.
        9. That letter confirms that the charity had agreed  to  allow  the
           Appellant to use  their  address  for  correspondence  with  the
           Tribunal. It goes on to state that whenever anything is received
           by them for the Appellant, he is contacted by phone, and  visits
           the office to pick up the mail  and  to  deal  with  any  issues
           arising from the content.
       10. There is no  evidence  from  the  Appellant  to  contradict  the
           content of the letter of 5 April 2018, or to explain why he  did
           not attend the hearing. No request has been made to allow him to
           provide evidence pursuant to Rule 15(2A). As Ms Rogers  accepted
           before me, the content of the letter of 5 April  2018  does  not
           support the  proposition  that  the  Appellant  may  never  have
           received the Notice of Hearing. On  the  contrary,  it  provides
           evidence to suggest that he did.
       11. In addition, Ms Rogers accepted that the reasons given  for  the
           refusal of  the  protection  claim  did  expressly  contain  the
           argument that the Appellant could relocate to the KRG  in  order
           to avoid any risk of harm that he claimed to face in  the  event
           he returned to Kirkuk.
       12. Accordingly, and notwithstanding the terms in  which  permission
           to appeal was granted to the  Respondent  the  grounds  fail  to
           disclose any arguable error of law in the approach taken by  the
           Judge to the appeal.



   DECISION


   The Determination of the First Tier Tribunal which was promulgated on  5
   February 2018 contained no error of law in the decision to  dismiss  the
   Appellant's appeal which requires that decision  to  be  set  aside  and
   remade, and it is accordingly confirmed.



Direction regarding anonymity - Rule 14 Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008
      Unless and until the Tribunal  directs  otherwise  the  Appellant  is
        granted anonymity throughout these proceedings. No report of  these
        proceedings  shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  him.   This
        direction applies both to the  Appellant  and  to  the  Respondent.
        Failure to comply with this direction  could  lead  to  proceedings
        being brought for contempt of court.


   Signed




Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes

Dated 12 October 2018
