
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)             Appeal Number: PA/12694/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 8 June 2017                    |On 18 July 2017               |
|                                  |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between

                                   mr t j
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms. S. Jegarajah, counsel instructed by Greater
London Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E. Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. The Appellant is a national of Sri Lanka, of Tamil origin, born on 23
February 1983. He arrived in the United Kingdom on 10 October 2008 and
claimed asylum on 13 October 2008, on which day he underwent a screening
interview. His asylum application was refused and his appeal against that
decision was dismissed with the result that he became appeal rights
exhausted on 16 August 2010. The Appellant remained in the United Kingdom
and made further representations in support of a fresh claim on 18 February
2016 and 25 February 2016, which were refused by the Respondent in a
decision dated 7 November 2016, against which he appealed.

2. The appeal came before First tier Tribunal Judge Walters for hearing on
19 December 2016. He noted that a report from a Clinical Psychologist dated
14 December 2016 opined that the Appellant was not fit to instruct legal
representatives and that, although no application had been made to the
Court, his brother was effectively acting as his litigation friend. The
Judge proceeded to hear submissions from the parties and in a decision
promulgated on 16 January 2017 he dismissed the appeal.

3. An application for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was made
in time, which asserted that the Judge erred materially in law:

(i) in making perverse credibility findings at [44] with regard to mistakes
in the Appellant's screening interview, given that the interpreter was
Malaysian and bearing in mind the expert evidence of Dr Halari confirming
that the Appellant was not fit to give evidence or instruct
representatives;

(ii) the Judge failed to make any or any additional findings in respect of
evidence provided by the Appellant's Sri Lankan authorities, which related
to an outstanding arrest warrant cf. PJ (Sri Lanka) [2014] EWCA Civ 1011
per Fulford LJ at [41]

(iii) in his findings at [76] regarding the medical evidence of Dr Arnold
as to the Appellant's scarring.

4. In a decision dated 18 April 2017, Judge of the First tier Tribunal
Baker granted permission to appeal on the basis that:

(i) it is arguable that the judge materially erred as he did not identify
why he placed no reliance on the scarring alleged to have been caused by
cigarette burns from the police on the appellant's hands, which was stated
by Dr Arnold to be diagnostic of torture;

(ii) the new evidence of the arrest warrant was addressed at [30] in
respect of background evidence only and there was an absence of findings by
the Judge specifically as to the weight to be attached to the warrant and
the evidence of the attorney;

(iii) in that the adverse credibility points made between the
contradictions between the screening interview and evidence to the judge in
the form of the current witness statement may arguably be flawed in light
of the psychiatric evidence as to the worsening mental health condition of
the Appellant.
5. A rule 24 response lodged by the Respondent dated 10 May 2017 opposed
the appeal on the basis that the Judge conducted a thorough and
comprehensive analysis of the medical report; that there were multiple
serious issues with the Appellant's evidence and the Judge's approach to
the arrest warrant was appropriate in the context of his overall
credibility findings.

Hearing

6. At the hearing before me, Ms Jegarajah submitted that in respect of the
2010 decision by the First tier Tribunal the Appellant had been found not
to be credible but no medical evidence had been submitted at that time
except for a GP letter and this was a matter commented on by Kate Markus QC
sitting as  a Deputy High Court Judge in granting permission to apply for
judicial review in respect of the fresh claim. The Appellant had new
solicitors for his fresh claim, who wrote to the Sri Lankan attorney, Mr
Karikalan, asking him to get the court file. There is a letter of
instruction by his new solicitors and the relevant extract from PJ was
cited, the significance of which is that it was a lawyer to lawyer
communication and thus completely uninfected by the family or third
parties. In light of this evidence and the medical evidence the Respondent
settled the application for judicial review and the Appellant had an in-
country right of appeal. The additional evidence before the Tribunal was an
addendum report from Dr Halari, in light of the asylum interview. All of
this was submitted with the aim of showing that the credibility assessment
should be re-assessed. Whilst the Judge could of course have regard to 2010
findings he needed to look at the new evidence and that evidence could not
be adduced earlier as the Appellant did not have insight into his medical
condition and this impacted on his ability to give instructions and provide
a comprehensive case.

7. Ms Jegarajah sought to rely upon [14] of the Joint Presidential Guidance
Note No.2 of 2010 in respect of child, vulnerable adult and sensitive
appellants. She submitted that the Judge in this case has rejected the
reports from Dr Halari and that constituted a material error in relation to
that guidance, in that once you classify someone as a vulnerable witness,
there is a different approach to credibility and it is necessary to
consider the degree to which the mental health problems account for that.
She submitted that it was still necessary to apply the guidance even though
the Appellant did not give evidence because credibility has to be assessed
in light of what has been said in interview and that the guidance came into
being a result of the Equalities Act because a person with a mental health
disorder would otherwise be discriminated against.

8. Mr Tufan submitted on behalf of the Respondent that the Judge does not
specifically state whether the evidence from the Sri Lankan lawyer can be
accepted but he does make adverse credibility findings against the
Appellant based on what he stated earlier. He submitted that there was
enough there by implication to justify his findings. In respect of the
medical reports, the Judge has gone into them and given reasons for not
placing weight on those documents thus the issue is whether those reasons
are rational, which is a high test and his submission is that the Judge has
looked at them rationally and his conclusions were open to him. He
submitted that it was not clear at what stage the Appellant's condition
became worse and thus at what stage he became a vulnerable witness. Mr
Tufan concluded that there was no material error in the Judge's decision.

9. Ms Jegarajah in response drew my attention to page 123 of the judicial
review bundle and also page 109 which are the lawyer to lawyer letters. She
submitted that the Judge did not address the fact that Mr Karikalan was
instructed by a UK lawyer, which is important as it shows that it was not
tainted by eg family members. If Mr Karikalan is a lawyer and is able to
apply to the Court, given that it is clear from the COIS report that an
accused cannot obtain a copy of his own documents and there has to be a
formal application to the Registrar who will reproduce as a certified copy
and it is thus a very specific process, the question is whether Mr
Karikalan is a lawyer, did he make an application, did he produce those
records? If he did, unless the Judge is saying he is not this person, then
the copy of the Court file and the fact that an arrest warrant has been
issued are genuine.

10. Ms Jegarajah also sought to rely on [51] of the grounds of appeal which
cite PJ [2014] EWCA Civ 1011 per Fulford LJ at [41] where he held: "once it
was established that the documents in question originated from a Sri Lankan
court, a sufficient justification was required for the conclusion that the
appellant does not have a well-founded fear of persecution."

11. Ms Jegarajah drew my attention to [55] of the decision of the First
tier Tribunal Judge and his conclusion that the court record is silent as
to whether or not the Appellant attended the hearing on 1.12.06. She
submitted that the Judge may have been confused about that as the Court
records are US style ie the month precedes the day and it is clear from
page 116 of the judicial review bundle that the Appellant was present on
1.12.06 and 15.12.06 and that the Court order was to keep him for
investigations to conclude: page 117. It is also clear from page 115 that
although the Court was the Magistrates court in Trincomalee, the Appellant
was being kept at Boossa camp which is high security.

12. Ms Jegarajah submitted that both reports from Dr Halari set out a
detailed narrative and Appendix 2 to the report shows in the supplementary
report she had his medical reports and is being prescribed medication. This
coincides with his brother's evidence that he realized the Appellant was
not doing anything about his case and that he went to see his GP at the end
of 2015. It is consistent not inconsistent that he was seen by medical
experts after he went to GP. The first Dr Halari report was sent to the GP
and that prompted everything that followed.


Decision on error of law

13. I informed the parties that I was satisfied that there was a material
error in the decision of First tier Tribunal Walters, for the reasons set
out in the second and third grounds and the submissions of Ms Jegarajah, in
particular, the manner in which the Judge had analysed and reached
conclusions in respect of the evidence obtained from Mr Karikalan, an
Attorney in Sri Lanka and the medical evidence. I indicated that I would
proceed to re-make the decision, having established that both parties were
in a position to make submissions on the substantive issues.

Submissions

14. I heard first from Mr Tufan who stated that his submissions would rely
on the reasons for refusal letter and the Judge's reasoning but if I
concluded that the contents of the court file were genuine and the
consequence of lawyer to lawyer communication and that there is an arrest
warrant, then the Appellant would be on a stop list and would be at risk
pursuant to the CG decision in GJ (post-civil war: returnees) Sri Lanka CG
[2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC).  Mr Tufan submitted that the Appellant's scars
alone would not put him at risk and that he was a low level person.

15. Ms Jegarajah submitted that in respect of the purported discrepancies,
most of these are in the Screening Interview and this is biodata. Ms
Jegarajah drew my attention to the judicial review bundle and page 217 for
the substantive asylum interview at which time the Appellant was
represented by different solicitors. She stated that the Appellant is from
Point Pedro in the North and at page 222 there are 13 photos of the
Appellant showing injuries, which were taken after his arrival in the UK.
At page 229 the Appellant describes how he becomes involved with the LTTE
and at pages 230-231 he talks about the end period when he was forced to go
on to the front line. At page 234 he is being asked to go to India by boat
from the North, which leads to him staying in a relative's house and not
registering [page 235 Q40]. At page 237 Q44 he states that the reason why
he was of suspicion in the first place was because he had scarring on his
elbow and this can only appear on those who have taken training and it is
the end of the war. Ms Jegarajah submitted that this was the trigger and
the whole reason he is placed in detention and tortured is to secure an
admission from him that he is an LTTE member. He refuses to sign. There are
cigarette burns on his left hand: page 239 and Q51 his nail was removed. In
response to Q60 page 242 the Appellant finally signs because he has been
tortured to secure that confession and see Q64 page 243. The Appellant is
released on bail: Q69 and Q81 at page 248 and Mr Karihalan is his lawyer.
There is reference to his home area at page 256. At page 258 in response to
Q. 127 he states that he delivered weapons to the LTTE.

16. Ms Jegarjah drew attention to the fact that the current COIS report
does state that those who handled weapons are of significant profile: page
7 at [2.4.12] which is based on the fact that the Home Office had a fact
finding mission in June 2016. The Appellant admitted his involvement; he
has delivered weapons; he has made an admission of involvement with the
LTTE and was transferred to a high security prison ie. Boussa. The
Appendices to GJ and the summary of the evidence of Rohan Gunratna, who is
the Government of Sri Lanka intelligence expert, says that LTTE members
were either rehabilitated or prosecuted. The Appellant was not
rehabilitated he was held in a prison and only those believed to have
serious involvement with the LTTE are held in prison. The Appellant has
given his account in his interview and it is all consistent.

17. Ms Jegarajah submitted that this is a straightforward case seen in the
context of 2008 and 2009 and the structures in place and that the Appellant
falls into paragraph 356(7) of GJ ie. there is an  arrest warrant and thus
the appeal should be allowed. She also submitted that Dr Arnold makes
specific reference to scarring on the elbows; that he is an expert and says
it is there and it is consistent. She also sought to rely on the passage on
weapons in the COIS at page 7 and the fact that the Home Office find this
gives significant profil and the section on returnees, given that the
Government of Sri Lanka are interested in historical membership of the LTTE
and being out of Sri Lanka a long time is a trigger; returnees are
questioned and they would take into account the Appellant's presentation
which if questioned may well be seen as suspicious.

18. I reserved my decision, which I now give with my reasons.

Decision and reasons

19. The appeal essentially turns on whether or not the documents obtained
by the Appellant's solicitors in the United Kingdom from Mr Karikalan, his
Attorney in Sri Lanka, are genuine. The correspondence between the parties
is included in the bundle in support of the judicial review application
regarding the Appellant's fresh claim. The letter from Greater London
solicitors dated 12 November 2015 at page 123 is by way of a follow-up to a
telephone conversation with Mr Karikalan and requests further information
about the Appellant's case, in particular his arrest on 30 November 2006
and bail on 10 July 2008 in respect of which he was represented by Mr
Karikalan. The letter requests that Mr Karikalan obtain the Appellant's
file from court and provide them with a certified copy. Mr Karikalan's
response is at page 109 of the bundle and is dated 4 December 2015. He
confirms that he represented the Appellant at his bail hearing at
Trincomalee Magistrates Court on 10 July 2008 and attaches a complete
certified copy of the Appellant's Court file with an English translation.

20. The contents of the Court file comprise: (i) information to the
Magistrate, which is essentially the charge of aiding and abetting
terrorism activities and being a member of the LTTE and further details
provided by the police dated 1.12.06; (ii) an Order from the Magistrate
dated 1.12.06 to detain the Appellant in custody at the police station
until 5.12.06; (iii) a further Order from the Magistrate dated 15.12.06
ordering that the Appellant be detained at Trincomalee prison until
enquiries are completed; (iv) an Order from the Magistrate dated 10.7.08
granting bail to 20.11.08 and (v) and Order dated 20.11.08 ordering an
arrest warrant due to the Appellant's failure to appear. There is also a
copy of the arrest warrant signed by the magistrate dated 20.11.08

21. I have carefully considered the lawyer to lawyer correspondence and the
certified copy of the Court file. I take judicial notice of the fact that
Mr Karikalan is included in the list of lawyers registered with the Bar
Association of Sri Lanka and that the details included therein are
identical to those on his letter at page 109 of the bundle. In light of the
fact that no challenge was brought to this evidence, which is consistent
with the Appellant's account as set out in interview and that Mr Karikalan
is clearly a practising Attorney who represented the Appellant at his bail
hearing on 10 July 2008, I accept that the documents submitted from the
Appellant's court file are genuine.

22. Paragraph 356(7)(d) of the CG decision in GJ and Others (post-civil
war: returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC) provides:

      "(7) The current categories of persons at real risk of persecution or
      serious harm on return to Sri Lanka, whether in detention or
otherwise, are:
      (d) A person whose name appears on a computerised "stop" list
accessible at the airport, comprising a list of those against whom  there
is an extant court order or arrest warrant. Individuals whose       name
appears on a "stop" list will be stopped at the airport and   handed over
to the appropriate Sri Lankan authorities, in pursuance  of such order or
warrant."

23. In light of the judgment of Lord Justice Fulford in PJ [2014] EWCA Civ
1011 at [41] [10 above refers] and given Mr Tufan's frank acceptance [14
above] that if the documents and arrest warrant are genuine the Appellant
will be on a stop list and thus fall into a category of person found by the
Upper Tribunal to be at risk in GJ, I allow the appeal with reference to
paragraph 356(7)(d) on the basis that the Appellant has a well-founded fear
of persecution if returned to Sri Lanka. The medical evidence and scarring
report simply confirm that the Appellant is a victim of torture following
his detention from 1.12.06 to 10.7.08.

Decision

24. The appeal is allowed on refugee protection grounds.

Rebecca Chapman

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman                      17 July 2017
Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed      Rebecca Chapman             Date 17 July 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman

