
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12725/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 17th May 2019                     |On 19th July 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

                                     SA
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss G Patel, instructed by Parker Rhodes Hickmotts
                    Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Tan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The First-tier Tribunal ("FtT) has made an anonymity order and for the
      avoidance of any doubt, that order continues.  SA is granted anonymity
      throughout these proceedings.  No report of these proceedings shall
      directly or indirectly identify him.  This direction applies both to
      the appellant and to the respondent. Failure to comply with this
      direction could lead to proceedings being brought for contempt of
      court.


   2. This is an appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal ("FtT")
      Judge Mitchell promulgated on 28th January 2019.  The FtT Judge
      dismissed the appellant's appeal against the decision of the
      respondent dated 21st October 2018, to refuse his claim for
      international protection.


   3. The appellant is a national of Iran. He was born on 1st June 1994 in
      Quolti, a village in the Sardasht County, Iran.  Prior to his
      departure from Iran in or about June 2015, he lived there with his
      parents, a sister and a brother.  The background to the claim for
      international protection and the events that the appellant claims lead
      to his departure from Iran, are summarised at paragraph [13] of the
      decision of the FtT Judge and I do not repeat the claim in this
      decision.


   4. It is common ground that the appellant is a Kurdish Iranian.  Beyond
      that, the respondent did not consider the appellant's claim to be a
      credible one.  The findings and conclusions of the FtT Judge are set
      out at paragraphs [15] to [37] of the decision.  Again, I do not set
      out in any detail the findings that were made by the Tribunal.  It is
      sufficient for present purposes to simply note that the FtT Judge
      comprehensively rejected the account of events relied upon by the
      appellant. In support of the appeal, the appellant had relied upon an
      arrest warrant that he claimed was issued on 25th May 2015, for his
      arrest.  He claimed that the warrant had been sent to Sardasht, and by
      coincidence, an officer in the relevant Sardasht office knew the
      appellants father and informed him of the arrest warrant. The
      appellant's father paid some money and arranged for the appellant's
      departure from Iran.  Having considered the account of events advanced
      by the appellant, the FtT Judge summarised his findings, at [32], as
      follows:


           "Having considered the evidence the most that can be said about
           the appellant's claim is that he has been away from the country
           for a significant period of time (three years, four months) and
           that he may well have left the country illegally. I do not
           accept any of the other appellant's claim that he has been
           associated with PJAK or that there is a warrant in existence for
           his arrest for that association. The appellant may well have
           travelled through the IKR (Kurdish Autonomous Area); he did not
           live there but maybe passed through and was therefore (sic) a
           maximum of 14 days. He cannot be described as having lived in
           that area."


   5. The FtT Judge referred to the country guidance decision of SSH and HR
      (illegal exit: failed asylum seeker) Iran CG [2016] UKUT 00306 (IAC),
      and found, at [34], that the appellant would be able to demonstrate
      his identity and nationality by simply contacting his family to obtain
      documentation, or being interviewed by the Iranian authorities.


   6. The FtT Judge also referred to the country guidance set out in HB
      (Kurds) Iran CG [2018] UKUT 00430 (IAC).  At paragraph [36], the FtT
      Judge concludes as follows:


           "I do not consider that any of the material produced by the
           appellant's representatives undermines the country guidance
           cases. The appellant does not appear to have any elements which
           would actually create a risk to him apart from his ethnicity and
           his time out of, and his illegal entry (sic) from the (sic)
           Iran. He has not undertaken any political activities. There are
           no outstanding matters against the appellant in Iran. I consider
           the appellants claim has been fabricated and it is without
           foundation. I therefore dismiss the appellant's appeal under the
           Refugee Convention. His claim for humanitarian protection is
           based on the same facts as a consequence must be dismissed..."


The appeal before me


   7. Although set out as three grounds of appeal, the appellant criticises
      the Judge's assessment of the risk that the appellant claims to face,
      upon return as a young Kurdish male, without documents, in light of
      the Country Guidance decision in HB (Kurds) Iran CG.  It is said that
      the FtT Judge failed to consider whether the appellant would be at
      risk on return as an undocumented returnee. It is said that the
      appellant will be questioned on return at the airport, and he will be
      detained. It is said that he cannot be expected to lie about his basis
      for claiming asylum in the UK, and that the appellant will be
      perceived as an individual involved in assisting PJAK members,
      irrespective of whether the appellant's account has been found by the
      Tribunal, to be credible. The appellant claims that having accepted,
      at [32], that the appellant has been away from Iraq for a significant
      period of time, that he may have left legally, and he may have
      travelled through the IKR, the FtT Judge failed to address the risk
      upon return that the appellant is exposed to, in light of the country
      guidance.


   8. Permission to appeal was granted by FtT Judge Foudy on 18th March
      2019.  The matter comes before me to consider whether the decision of
      the FtT involved the making of a material error of law, and if so, to
      remake the decision.


   9. Miss Patel submits that regardless of the findings made by the FtT
      Judge, the issue is the risk that the appellant is exposed to, upon
      return as an Iranian national, of Kurdish ethnicity, who left Iran
      illegally. She submits that the FtT Judge found, at [32], that "...
      the most that can be said about the appellant's claim is that he has
      been away from the country for a significant period time... and that
      he may well have left the country illegally.... The appellant may well
      have travelled through the IKR...", and that those factors alone,
      place the appellant at risk upon return. She submits that as an
      undocumented returnee, the appellant will undoubtably be questioned,
      and the fact that he travelled through the IKR, is reasonably likely
      to result in additional questioning by the authorities on return. She
      submits that it is the perception of the appellant in the eyes of the
      Iranians authorities that is important, and the country guidance
      establishes that the authorities demonstrate what could be described
      as a 'hair-trigger' approach, to those suspected or perceived to be
      involved in Kurdish political activities or support for Kurdish
      rights.


Discussion


  10. At paragraph [13] of his decision, the FtT Judge carefully records the
      appellant's account of the events leading to his departure from Iran.
      The findings and conclusions of the Judge are set out at paragraphs
      [15] to [36] of the decision. The FtT Judge rejected the appellant's
      account of the events that he claimed occurred, and the findings
      reached by the Judge are not challenged.  The Judge had the benefit of
      hearing from the appellant, and of having his evidence tested in cross-
      examination.  It was for the appellant to establish that there is a
      reasonable degree of likelihood that he faces a risk upon return, and
      it was for the Judge to make his findings on whether, and to what
      extent, the appellant's account is credible. The adverse credibility
      findings made by the Judge were plainly open to the Judge, and cannot
      be said to be perverse, irrational or unreasonable, or findings that
      were wholly unsupported by the evidence.  The FtT Judge rejected the
      appellant's claim that he has been associated with PJAK, and his claim
      that there is a warrant in existence for his arrest, for that
      association.


  11. The focus of the appellant's grounds of appeal and the submissions
      made before me by Miss Patel, relate to the Judge's assessment of the
      risk upon return, and rests upon three feature of the appellant's
      case.  First, he has been away from the country for a significant
      period of time. Second, he left the country illegally and third, he
      may well have travelled through the IKR.


  12. At paragraphs [33] and [34] of his decision, the FtT Judge refers to
      the headnotes from the country guidance decisions in SSH and HR
      (illegal exit: failed asylum seeker) Iran CG [2016] UKUT 00308 and HB
      (Kurds) Iran CG [2018] UKUT 00430.


  13. The appellant is an Iranian male and even without a passport, is
      returnable to Iran on a laisser passer.  The FtT Judge found, at [34],
      that the appellant would be to demonstrate his identity and
      nationality by simply contacting his family to obtain documentation or
      by being interviewed by the Iranian authorities.  As to what would
      happen to a failed asylum seeker who had left Iran illegally, in SSH
      and HR (illegal exit: failed asylum seeker) Iran CG, the Tribunal
      stated, at [23]:


           "In our view the evidence does not establish that a failed
           asylum seeker who had left Iran illegally would be subjected on
           return to a period of detention or questioning such that there
           is a real risk of Article 3 ill-treatment.  The evidence in our
           view shows no more than that they will be questioned, and that
           if there are any particular concerns arising from their previous
           activities either in Iran or in the United Kingdom or whichever
           country they are returned from, then there would be a risk of
           further questioning, detention and potential ill-treatment.  In
           this regard it is relevant to return to Dr Kakhki's evidence in
           re-examination where he said that the treatment they would
           receive would depend on their individual case.  If they co-
           operated and accepted that they left illegally and claimed
           asylum abroad then there would be no reason for ill-treatment,
           and questioning would be for a fairly brief period.  That seems
           to us to sum up the position well, and as a consequence we
           conclude that a person with no history other than that of being
           a failed asylum seeker who had exited illegally and who could be
           expected to tell the truth when questioned would not face a real
           risk of ill-treatment during the period of questioning at the
           airport...."


  14. The Country guidance establishes that a returnee without a passport is
      likely to be questioned on return.  The treatment the appellant would
      receive will depend on his individual case.  In SSH and HR, the
      Tribunal concluded that if the returnee "... co-operated and accepted
      that they left illegally and claimed asylum abroad then there would be
      no reason for ill-treatment, and questioning would be for a fairly
      brief period..." The Tribunal concluded that a person with no history
      other than that of being a failed asylum seeker who had exited
      illegally, and who could be expected to tell the truth when
      questioned, would not face a real risk of ill-treatment during the
      period of questioning at the airport.  The appellant is, as Miss Patel
      accepts, a failed asylum seeker.  His claim has been found not to be
      credible and if he tells the truth when questioned, his profile is
      that of an individual with no history, other than that of being a
      failed asylum seeker who had exited illegally.


  15. In HB (Kurds) Iran CG, the Tribunal concluded that the mere fact of
      being a returnee of Kurdish ethnicity, with or without a valid
      passport, and even if combined with illegal exit, does not create a
      risk of persecution or Article 3 ill-treatment.  The Tribunal
      identified, at paragraphs [6] to [9] of the headnote to the country
      guidance, 'other factors' which, when combined with the individual's
      Kurdish ethnicity, may create a real risk of persecution or Article 3
      ill-treatment.


  16. Having carefully considered the appellant's claim, the FtT Judge found
      that the appellant has not undertaken any political activities, and
      there are no outstanding matters against the appellant in Iran.  The
      Judge found that the appellant's claim has been fabricated and is
      without foundation.  Having made his findings, the task of the FtT
      Judge was to consider what would happen to the appellant on return, in
      light of those findings.


  17. Having properly referred to the relevant country guidance, it was in
      my judgement open to the FtT Judge to conclude that the appellant does
      not appear to have any elements which would actually create a real
      risk to him apart from his ethnicity, his time out of Iran, and his
      illegal exit from Iran.  Although the threshold for suspicion is low,
      the appellant is not, on the facts as found by the FtT Judge, an
      individual who would be suspected of, or perceived to be involved in
      Kurdish political activities, or support for Kurdish rights.


  18. The decision must be read as a whole and when  properly  read,  in  my
      judgement, on the unchallenged findings made by the Judge, it was open
      to the Judge to conclude that  the  appellant  is  not  at  risk  upon
      return.  The decision is one that was open to the Judge, and cannot be
      said to be perverse,  irrational  or  unreasonable.   The  appellant's
      grounds of appeal amount to nothing more than a  disagreement  with  a
      conclusion that was properly open to the Judge.


  19. It follows that in my judgment, the decision of FtT Judge Mitchell is
      not infected by a material error of law and I dismiss the appeal.


Notice of Decision


  20. The appellant's appeal against the decision of FtT Judge Mitchell is
      dismissed and the decision of the FtT Judge is to stand.


  21. I continue the anonymity direction previously made.


Signed                                  Date          21st June 2019


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia





TO THE RESPONDENT


FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal but in any event, as no fee  is  payable,  there
can be no fee award.



Signed                                                21st June 2019


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia

