
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/12046/2017

                                                 PA/12049/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|Centre                               |                                |
|On 6 February 2019                   |On 12 February 2019             |
|                                     |                                |


                                   Before
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL

                                   Between
                                  FAHAD [S]
                                   ALI [H]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Unrepresented
For the Respondent:    Mr Bates Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I have considered whether any parties  require  the  protection  of  an
    anonymity direction. No anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
    respect of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and
    evidence I do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

 2. The Appellants are nationals of Pakistan A1 was born on  31.7.1984  and
    A2 was born on 2.2.1986. In order to avoid confusion, the  parties  are
    referred to as they were in the First-tier Tribunal.

 3. This is an appeal by the Appellants against the decision of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Devlin promulgated  on  17.7.2018  which  dismissed  the
    Appellants  appeals  against  the  decision  of  the  Respondent  dated
    4.11.2017 based on their sexuality.

The Judge's Decision

 4. Grounds of appeal were lodged and permission was refused by  First-tier
    Tribunal  Judge  Andrew  in  a  decision  dated  14  August  2018.  The
    application was renewed and came before Upper Tribunal Judge Gill on 16
    November 2018. The 'Reasons' section of  the  Notice  of  Decision  are
    detailed and consist of 5 paragraphs and conclude:

         "When read as a whole, the judge's decision is a very detailed  and
         fair one. There is no arguable error of law.'

 5. The decision however is headed 'Permission to appeal is granted.'

Discussion

 6. Mr Bates referred to Safi and others (permission to  appeal  decisions)
    [2018] UKUT 00388 (IAC) in which the tribunal stated that It is  likely
    to be only in very exceptional circumstances that  the  Upper  Tribunal
    will be persuaded to entertain a submission that a decision  which,  on
    its face, grants permission to appeal without express limitation is  to
    be construed as anything other than a grant of permission  on  all  the
    grounds accompanying the application for permission, regardless of what
    might be said in the reasons for  decision  section  of  the  document.
    Therefore while the  reasons  for  the  decision  appeared  to  suggest
    permission would be refused he was content to proceed on the basis that
    permission had been granted.

 7. The Appellants confirmed that they wished to rely  on  the  grounds  of
    application drafted by a Mr Chaudry of counsel on behalf of IAS who had
    previously represented them. They had nothing to add to the grounds.

 8. Mr Bates made submissions on behalf of the Respondent and  there  is  a
    full note of his submissions in the record of proceedings. It would  be
    fair to say that he relied largely on the 'reasons' given by Judge Gill



Finding on Material Error

 9. Having heard those submissions and read the detailed and  well-reasoned
    decision of Judge Devlin I reached the  conclusion  that  the  Tribunal
    made no material errors of law.

10. The Appellants made an application for refugee status  based  on  their
    risk on return to Pakistan as gay men who have  entered  into  a  civil
    partnership. They had previously made a claim for asylum based on their
    sexuality and relationship which at not resulted in a civil partnership
    and this was refused and their appeal was  dismissed  after  a  hearing
    before Judge De Haney dated 29 July 2013. In  essence  Judge  De  Haney
    dismissed their appeals because he did not accept that  they  were  gay
    men and found they had fabricated this claim in order to remain in  the
    UK. His decision was challenged and, in a  decision  dated  4  November
    2013 the Upper Tribunal found no error  of  law  in  Judge  De  Haney's
    decision.

11.  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Devlin  quite  properly   recognised   in
    accordance with Devaseelan [2003] Imm AR 1 that the starting  point  of
    his decision was the decision of Judge De Haney and he set the law  out
    in full at paragraph 74(1)-(7) recognising at paragraph 76  that  Judge
    De Haney's decision was the authoritative assessment of the Appellants'
    status at the time when the decision was made.

12. The suggestion made in the grounds that Judge  Devlin  'dittoed'  (sic)
    the adverse credibility findings made by the previous Judge  is  wholly
    without merit. The Judge considered in great detail the fresh  evidence
    adduced by the Appellants. At paragraphs 80-92 he gave reasons why that
    evidence would not justify him going behind the decision  of  Judge  De
    Haney which included for example the fact that the oral witnesses  were
    apparently known to the Appellants at the time of the first hearing but
    had not been called; they appeared to have no independent knowledge  of
    the matters they spoke of; their support for the Appellants account  of
    events that caused them to flee from Pakistan was 'tangential'; none of
    the individuals gave live evidence and had such evidence tested. It was
    also clearly open to him to approach that evidence with some caution in
    accordance with the guidance in Devaseelan  when  it  was  evidence  of
    witnesses who knew the Appellants at the time of the first hearing  and
    therefore could have been called at  the  time  of  the  first  hearing
    unless there was good reason for this failure and no  such  reason  was
    given.

13. Judge Devlin nevertheless went on to consider the  Appellants  evidence
    in detail and their explanations for the discrepancies found  by  Judge
    De Haney at 97 onwards and rejected at paragraph 120-121 their argument
    that the 'modulations' in their narrative was in some way probative  of
    the reality of their fear as 'non sensical'. He found at paragraph 132-
    134 that the discrepancies remained unexplained and made  detailed  and
    well reasoned findings to explain his conclusion.

14. The argument which criticises the Judges approach to the absence  of  a
    representive appearing on behalf of the Respondent  is  wholly  without
    merit. The Judge quite  properly  rejected  at  paragraph  136-143  the
    suggestion  that  the  failure  to  cross  examine  required   him   to
    uncritically accept their attempts to address  the  inconsistencies  in
    their account distinguishing this case from MS Sri  Lanka  [2012]  EWCA
    Civ 1548. Nor did this mean that the Judge  was  required  to  conclude
    that the Respondent had declined the opportunity to cross  examine  the
    authors of the letters of support as the Appellants  had  indicated  in
    the CMR form that they would not be called to give  live  evidence  The
    Judge was entitled to ask  questions  for  clarification  purposes  and
    there  is  nothing  objectionable  in  the  one  example  cited   "What
    specifically served to convince him that  the  Appellants  were  gay?",
    there is nothing that justifies describing this as 'cross examination.'

15. The suggestion that the Judge failed to consider the Civil  Partnership
    Certificate  is  also  without  merit  because  he   did   and   indeed
    acknowledged that there was a difference between booking a ceremony and
    going through with it (paragraph  147).  However  he  was  entitled  to
    considered this  ceremony  in  the  context  of  findings  made  as  to
    inconsistencies between  their  accounts  of  when  their  relationship
    started and when they lived together, and the  absence  of  documentary
    evidence of prior affection. He was also entitled to take into  account
    that the Civil Partnership was entered into at a time when their appeal
    against Judge De Haney's decision was still pending and therefore their
    status was, and continued to  be,  precarious  which  impacted  on  the
    weight he gave the partnership document.

16. Thus the conclusions the Judge reached based on all the evidence before
    him were findings that were reasonably open to him and the grounds  are
    merely a disagreement with those findings.

17. The grounds also criticise the Judges findings in relation to Article 8
    and suggest "he dealt with the issue in  a  throwaway  line."  This  is
    plainly wrong as there are 6 detailed paragraphs  addressing  the  only
    Rule they could potentially meet,  paragraph  276ADE1  (vi)  against  a
    finding that they were not, as they claimed, gay  men.  He  found  that
    they had lived the vast majority of their  lives  in  Pakistan  and  he
    rejected  their  claim  that  their  families  had  disowned  them  and
    therefore  found  that  they  would  have   help   in   re-establishing
    themselves. He was entitled to conclude  in  those  circumstances  that
    there would be no very significant obstacles to them  reintegrating  on
    return. His assessment of Article 8 outside the Rules was therefore  in
    the context of finding that the Appellants did not meet the  Rules.  He
    nevertheless then went  on  to  consider  whether  the  Appellants  had
    identified any reason for a grant  of  leave  outside  the  Rules,  any
    compelling circumstances and found there were none. He found that  they
    had maintained a fabricated asylum claim and noted  the  strong  public
    interest in discouraging such behaviour. He  then  applied  the  public
    interest factors as required by s 117 B of the Nationality, Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002 and found that there was  nothing  outweighing  the
    public interest in removal. Contrary to what is asserted in the grounds
    the assessment is well structured and takes into  account  all  of  the
    relevant factors.

CONCLUSION

18. I therefore found that no errors of law have been established and  that
    the Judge's determination should stand.

DECISION

19. The appeals are dismissed.


Signed                                                              Date
8.2.2019
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell
