
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/12243/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|on 26th July 2019                  |On 21st August 2019                |
|                                   |                                   |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DEANS


                                   Between

                                     MM
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr S Winter, Advocate, instructed by DMO Olabamiji,
                    Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr K Young, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This is an appeal against a decision by Judge of the First-tier
      Tribunal Lea dismissing an appeal on protection and human rights
      grounds.

   2. The appellant is a national of DRC.  She claims that while in DRC she
      joined an underground opposition organisation known by the initials
      APARECO.  In February 2018, on a Sunday when the appellant was
      attending church, the police raided her house and detained her
      husband.  The appellant was warned not to go home as the police were
      looking for her.  She took her children to her father's house, where
      she stayed until an agent made arrangements for her to travel to the
      UK in April 2018.

   3. The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal did not believe the appellant's
      evidence about her alleged experiences in DRC.  In particular, the
      judge did not believe the appellant's account of how she joined
      APARECO in DRC and the judge noted that the appellant had not joined
      APARECO in the UK.

   4. Permission to appeal was granted by the Upper Tribunal.  The grounds
      for granting permission to appeal arose from the judge's treatment of
      the appellant's alleged membership of APARECO.  The judge arguably
      erred in finding the appellant's account of how she joined APARECO in
      DRC was not credible and also by drawing an adverse inference from the
      appellant's failure to join APARECO in the UK.  It was suggested in
      the grant of permission to appeal that this latter point was not put
      to the appellant at the hearing.

   5. Permission to appeal was not granted in respect of a further ground in
      the application contending that the judge did not have proper regard
      to an expert report.  At the hearing Mr Winter did not seek to pursue
      this ground on behalf of the appellant.

Submissions
   6. In relation to how a person becomes a member of APARECO I was referred
      to the procedures described in BM and Others (returnees - criminal and
      non-criminal) DRC CG [2015] 00293.  Mr Winter submitted that according
      to paragraph 99 of this decision, APARECO issued membership cards
      until 2013 when the membership cards were replaced by what he referred
      to as a "consensus mechanism".  Mr Winter further submitted that a
      "consensus" mechanism was consistent with the appellant's evidence of
      having been introduced to other members before she joined.

   7. I understood from Mr Winter that it was not contended that the issue
      of the appellant's involvement in the UK with APARECO was not raised
      before the First-tier Tribunal.  Mr Winter informed me that, according
      to the Presenting Officer, the appellant had been asked if she was
      involved with APARECO in the UK.  He submitted, however, that APARECO
      has no presence in Glasgow, where the appellant resides.

   8. So far as regime change in DRC was concerned, Mr Winter submitted that
      even though Kabila was no longer President, the country guideline case
      of BM should still be followed.  If it was accepted that the
      appellant's husband was detained and had disappeared, then the
      appellant would be a person at risk on return.

   9. Mr Winter continued by stating that a different judge might have taken
      a different view on certain issues, such as whether it was plausible
      that the authorities would not have looked for the appellant at her
      father's house.  The appellant had a friend in DRC, Bienvenue, with
      whom she was in touch.  For Bienvenue to have looked for the
      appellant's husband might have put him at risk.  It was illegal in DRC
      to be a member of APARECO and, as the appellant said at Q80 of her
      asylum interview, her activities for APARECO were carried out in
      secret.  Although at her interview the appellant did not know where
      the headquarters of APARECO was located, she knew that it was in
      Europe, which was correct.

  10. For the respondent, Mr Young began by pointing out that the membership
      process described at paragraph 99 of BM was not a "consensus"
      mechanism, as referred to by Mr Winter, but a "census" mechanism.  It
      was further pointed out that the process described at paragraph 99 of
      BM for becoming a member applied to becoming a member in Europe, not
      in DRC.  It was also pointed out that APARECO has an online presence
      even though there was no physical presence in Glasgow.

  11. Mr Young submitted that the grounds in the application for permission
      to appeal did not justify setting aside the decision of the First-tier
      Tribunal.  The judge was entitled to find that it was not plausible
      that the appellant would have joined APARECO in DRC without any checks
      or vetting.  The appellant could have engaged with APARECO outside DRC
      through its website.

  12. In response Mr Winter acknowledged that APARECO has an online
      presence.  The organisation has office-bearers outwith DRC, as
      mentioned at paragraphs 50-58 of BM, and there are meetings in
      England.  The vetting process for new members was described at
      paragraph 53 of BM.  There was nothing to indicate that the census
      mechanism for recording membership did not apply inside DRC as well as
      outside.  It was the appellant's evidence that in DRC she was
      introduced to a group of 5 people before she was vetted.  She did not
      say she was told they were members.  Her evidence was consistent with
      the census mechanism.  Her introduction to the 5 people may have been
      part of the vetting process.  The description of how the appellant
      joined APARECO was plausible.  Even if she was not involved with
      APARECO in the UK, if it was accepted that she was a member in DRC
      then this was material.  Her husband was kidnapped and the authorities
      were looking for her.

Discussion
  13. Much of the attention at the hearing before me was directed to the
      process for becoming a member of APARECO and the procedures for
      recording membership as described in BM.  In DRC itself APARECO is an
      underground organisation, as found at paragraph 87(iii)of BM.  In DRC
      it operates in secrecy, as pointed out by the appellant in answer to
      Q80 at her asylum interview.  I note also that in response to Q44 at
      her asylum interview the appellant is recorded as saying: "Every group
      is formed of 5 people, the leader of the group was Mama Mado, I was
      very close to Mama Mado, it was her who introduced me to the group
      (she introduced you to APARECO?) yes."


  14. Mr Winter referred to a vetting process for potential members,
      described in evidence recorded at paragraph 53 of BM.  While Mr Winter
      seemed to assume that the process for becoming a member would be the
      same both outside and within DRC, I was uncertain of the basis for
      such an assumption.  The findings made in BM, in particular those at
      paragraph 99, clearly referred to a person who had joined APARECO
      after arriving in the UK.  At paragraph 20 of her decision the Judge
      of the First-tier Tribunal referred to the appellant as saying in her
      statement that the process of applying online to join the organisation
      described on the APARECO website applied only to Europe.

  15. The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal then proceeded to find at
      paragraph 20 that it was not plausible that the appellant's friend
      would have introduced her to members of the group before the
      organisation had been able to vet her, stating: "The Appellant in her
      oral evidence accepted that her friend introduced her to the five
      people in her group before the Appellant had gone through the vetting
      process.  So the vetting process clearly happens in DRC as well as in
      Europe.  The Appellant claims that the group in the DRC operates
      underground and this is consistent with the background information.
      However, this being the case, it is not plausible (given the risks
      involved) that the Appellant's friend would introduce her to members
      of the group before the organisation had a chance to vet the
      Appellant.  The Appellant stated that she had to give her ID to her
      friend but she does not even know where her friend took this to have
      it checked."

  16. In response to this Mr Winter submitted that the appellant was not
      told the 5 people to whom she was introduced were members of the
      group.  This submission, however, is not consistent with what the
      judge recorded at paragraph 20 of her decision as the appellant's oral
      evidence, namely that she was introduced to the 5 members of her group
      before she had gone through the vetting process.

  17. It seems that even if the process for becoming a member of APARECO is
      different in DRC from the process established in BM, there is still
      some sort of approval or vetting involved.  This would be consistent
      with APARECO's existence as an underground organisation in DRC.  At
      paragraph 20 of her decision the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal
      found that it was not plausible that the appellant would have been
      introduced to members of the group before the organisation had an
      opportunity to vet her.  This was a finding that the judge was
      entitled to make.  In doing so the judge did not disregard either any
      part of the appellant's own evidence about this matter or the country
      guidance in BM.

  18. It seems to me that Mr Winter's concern, based on BM, about the
      carrying of membership cards having been replaced since 2103 by
      "internal census records" has little relevance to the appellant's
      situation.  As was pointed out in evidence recorded at paragraph 52 of
      BM, there is no membership list in DRC.  Indeed, Mr Winter's
      submission to me when he mistakenly referred to a "consensus"
      mechanism suggests that Mr Winter may himself have been under a
      misapprehension that the vetting process somehow involved a consensus
      among members that a new member should be allowed to join.  According
      to BM, however, the "census mechanism" is a way of recording
      membership rather that a procedure for admitting new members.

  19. The other finding by the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal which is
      challenged is to be found at paragraph 19 of the decision, where the
      judge stated that, according to the appellant, she was allowed to join
      APARECO in DRC without going through the normal procedures because her
      friend saw she was so interested in it and then commented: "However,
      despite this, since coming to the UK, where she would have been able
      to be a member of APARECO without any danger to herself, she has not
      joined APARECO and seems to have no further involvement with it.  It
      is clear from the background information that APARECO is an
      organisation that appeals to Diaspora outside the DRC which makes it
      even more surprising that the Appellant has not been involved with it
      since coming to the UK."

  20. As already noted, it was suggested in the grant of permission to
      appeal that this point was not put to the appellant at the hearing
      before the First-tier Tribunal.  The parties nevertheless do not
      dispute that it was.  Mr Winter submitted that there was no physical
      presence by APARECO in Scotland and no office-bearers, meetings or
      other activities here.  He acknowledged though that APARECO has an
      online presence, of which the appellant's statement shows she was
      aware.

  21. At paragraph 19 of her decision the judge was contrasting the
      appellant's alleged enthusiasm to join APARECO when in DRC with her
      complete lack of involvement with APARECO when in the UK.  This was a
      matter which the judge was entitled to found upon.  Taken in context
      the judge's comments disclose no error of law.

  22. The judge made a number of other adverse findings, to some of which Mr
      Winter referred, such as questioning why if the authorities in DRC
      were looking for the appellant they never went to her father's house,
      where she claimed to have been hiding.  Mr Winter did not seek to
      challenge these other findings but to suggest only that a different
      judge may not have made them.  It was not suggested that these
      findings were based upon any error of law or that there were any such
      errors apart from those which have been considered above.  Overall the
      judge made a number of adverse credibility findings.  I am satisfied
      that these findings, which were based upon the evidence and supported
      by adequate reasoning, do not disclose any error of law.


Conclusions
  23. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve
      the making of an error of law.

  24. The decision dismissing the appeal shall stand.


Anonymity
The First-tier Tribunal did not make a direction for anonymity.  As the
appellant claims to have belonged to an underground political organisation
in DRC, even though her claim has been found not to be credible, I consider
it appropriate to make a direction for anonymity in the following terms.
Unless or until a court or tribunal directs otherwise no report of these
proceedings shall identify either directly or indirectly the appellant or
any member of her family.  This direction applies to the appellant and the
respondent.  Failure to comply may lead to contempt proceedings.


M E Deans
                   Date:    14th August 2019
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge

