
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/12090/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House            |      Decision and Reasons           |
|                                |Promulgated                          |
|On 11th July 2019               |          On 16th July 2019          |
|                                |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON

                                   Between

                                   P R T Y
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T D H Hodson, instructed by Elder Brahimi
                    solicitors
For the Respondent:  Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant seeks, with permission, to challenge the determination of
    First Tier Tribunal Judge Howard ('the judge'), promulgated on 20th May
    2019 which dismissed the appellant's appeal against the  refusal  of  a
    protection, humanitarian protection and human rights claim.

 2. The appellant is a national of Cameroon and claimed protection  on  the
    basis of his support for the Southern Cameroon National  Council  ('the
    SCNC') and his risk of persecution by the Cameroon authorities owing to
    his imputed political opinion.

 3. There were four grounds of challenge to the determination of the First-
    tier Tribunal:

      i) the judge recorded at the commencement  of  the  hearing  that  the
         appellant's legal representative  sought  to  submit  a  number  of
         important  documents  corroborating  parts  of  the  core  of   the
         appellant's claim which had only recently come into the  possession
         of the appellant. The appellant's legal representative applied  for
         an adjournment on the basis  that  these  documents  had  not  been
         viewed or assessed by the respondent.  The respondent  was  not  at
         the hearing.

             The judge 'very remarkably' referred in his  determination  at
         [6]  to  a  conversation  with  the  Secretary  of  State's   legal
         representative, Ms Hall, as to  whether  the  representative  would
         make enquiries of the authenticity of the  documents  and  recorded
         'she said not'.  The  judge  proceeded  to  refer  to  a  purported
         exchange with the "phantom"  representative  in  order  to  justify
         refusing  an  adjournment  application  which  was  made   by   the
         appellant's legal representative.  There was no  cross-examination,
         as recorded, because the representative was  not  present  at  all.
         These fundamental errors regarding what  occurred  at  the  hearing
         brought into serious question the reliability of the  determination
         as a record of evidence more generally.

     ii) There were a number of documents produced at the hearing  on  which
         the judge was confused, in particular the date of  receipt  by  the
         appellant of the 'convocation summons'  and  'notice  of  research'
         (arrest warrant).  The judge confused the receipt of these with the
         documents the appellant referred to in his asylum interview.

    iii) The judge  failed  to  consider  or  make  any  findings  on  other
         documents which the appellant had  already  provided  such  as  the
         membership card for the SCNC and the brother's death certificate.

     iv) The judge failed to have the ambiguity of the date of the  father's
         death (2011 or 2012) resolved and this could have  been  undertaken
         by cross examination if this was in issue.

 4. Permission to appeal was granted by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Grant
    Hutchison on the basis that if there  was  no  Home  Office  presenting
    Officer present, no cross examination and no  submissions,  the  record
    that  there  were,  seriously  undermined  the   reliability   of   the
    Determination.

 5. At the hearing before me Mr Clarke, rightly in my view,  conceded  that
    the reliability of the record of the proceedings and the  determination
    were seriously called into question and the perception of fairness  was
    important. Mr Clarke confirmed that  the  Secretary  of  State  had  no
    record of any presenting officer being present at  the  hearing  on  21
    March 2019.

 6. Mr Hodson who was present at the First-tier tribunal submitted that his
    concern in relation to the late admission of  the  documentation  which
    corroborated the appellant's claim,  without  inspection  by  the  Home
    Office, would lend the determination  open  to  appeal  and  hence  the
    application for an adjournment.

    Analysis

 7. It is clear from the record of proceedings that,  although  the  'front
    sheet' records a Ms S Hall as being present on behalf of the  Secretary
    of State, there is no reference in  the  hand  written  record  by  the
    judge, to any exchange with  the  Home  Office  presenting  Officer  in
    relation to an adjournment application, there was no  cross-examination
    and no submissions made by a representative on behalf of the  Secretary
    of State.

 8.  The  time  delay  between  the  hearing  and   promulgation   of   the
    determination was 2 months.  It is possible that owing to the record of
    the front sheet the judge became confused as to whether a  Home  Office
    presenting officer was present some 2 months after the hearing  but  to
    rely on a phantom exchange with a non-existent legal representative  in
    order  to  refuse  an  application  for  an  adjournment  (because  the
    documents would not be assessed by the Home Office)  was  a  procedural
    irregularity at the very least and a material error of law  because  it
    calls into question the reliability of the evidence recorded, and  thus
    its assessment in relation to the credibility of the appellant.

 9. At paragraph 11  the  judge  refers  to  the  appellant  being  'cross-
    examined' and at paragraph 12

         "thereafter I heard submissions from Ms Hall and Mr  Hodson.  I  do
         not propose to rehearse those submissions here they are set out  in
         the record of proceedings. I reserved my decision".

10. There were no submissions set out in the record of proceedings from the
    representative of the Secretary of State.

11. I do not proceed to consider the remaining grounds in detail  but  note
    that the grounds assert that the judge also became confused in relation
    to the  evidence  and  although  not  specifically  identified  in  the
    grounds, for example at paragraph 27, the judge states

         'His screening interview took place on 26 October 2017  and  he  is
         recorded as saying an arrest warrant had  been  issued.  He  states
         that he did not say that'.

12. An examination of the screening  interview  shows  that  the  appellant
    specifically stated there was no arrest warrant.

13. Essentially the record of the hearing and the findings of the judge are
    unreliable and cannot stand.

14. There was clearly no representative for the Secretary of State  present
    at the hearing and the judge, in so recording, fundamentally undermines
    the reliability of his later assessment of the evidence.  On the  basis
    of the requirement for the perception of procedural  fairness  and  the
    just disposal of this appeal, owing to the material errors  of  law  as
    found the matter should be re-heard de novo.  None of the findings will
    stand.

15. The Judge erred materially for the reasons identified. I set aside  the
    decision pursuant to Section  12(2)(a)  of  the  Tribunals  Courts  and
    Enforcement Act 2007 (TCE 2007).  Bearing in mind the nature and extent
    of the findings to be made the matter should be remitted to the  First-
    tier Tribunal under section 12(2) (b) (i) of the TCE 2007  and  further
    to 7.2 (b) of the Presidential Practice Statement.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed      Helen Rimington  Date 11th July 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington

