
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12199/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford (via Skype)        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 19 March 2021                     |On 30 March 2021                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                     R O
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Jafferji instructed by Burton & Burton
Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mrs Pettersen Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


     1. On 22 October 2020 First-tier Tribunal Judge Sangha  dismissed  the
        appellant's appeal on protection and human rights grounds.
     2. Permission to appeal has been granted by another judge of the First-
        tier Tribunal on 16 November 2020, the operative part of the  grant
        being in the following terms:


        2.   The grounds seeking permission  raise  five  issues.  Firstly,
             they assert that the Judge erred in failing  to  consider  the
             current country guidance caselaw and CPIN, that  his  findings
             on the Article 3 medical claim were flawed, that he  erred  in
             refusing the adjournment, that he attached undue weight to the
             Respondent's position,  and  that  his  consideration  of  the
             previous decision was erroneous.


        3.   It is of some concern, that although the  decision  in  SMO  &
             others was promulgated in mid-2019, there is no  reference  at
             all in the Judges findings.  Instead,  he  refers  to  country
             guidance, which was replaced by SMO, and he has referred to  a
             CPIN which is now out of date. There is also some merit in the
             criticism of the psychiatric evidence, particularly as it does
             not make a diagnosis of PTSD.  Weight  is  a  matter  for  the
             Judge, but the number of paragraphs in the decision devoted to
             the Respondent's case, compared to the single  paragraph,  for
             the Appellant, may give rise to concerns of bias.


        4.   The failure to refer to the current country guidance  caselaw,
             in my judgement, amounts to an arguable error of law. In those
             circumstances, I  grant  permission  to  appeal.  All  grounds
             should be left arguable.



Error of law


     3. There is no Rule 24 response from the Secretary of  State  but  Mrs
        Pettersen conceded, having read the grounds,  that  the  error  had
        been made out sufficient to warrant  all  the  findings  being  set
        aside and the appeal remitted to the First-tier Tribunal sitting at
        Birmingham to be heard afresh by a judge other than Judge Sangha.
     4. I find the Judge has erred in law  in  a  manner  material  to  the
        decision to dismiss the appeal  of  the  reasons  set  out  in  the
        grounds, grant of permission  to  appeal,  and  concession  by  the
        Secretary of State's representative.

Decision

     5. The Judge materially erred in law. I set the decision  aside.  This
        appeal shall be remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  sitting  in
        Birmingham to be heard afresh by a judge other than Judge Sangha.

Anonymity.


     6. The First-tier Tribunal made no order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)  of
        the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008.



Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson
                  Dated 23 March 2021





