
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12147/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Civil Justice Centre     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13 November 2018                          |On 08 January 2019            |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS


                                   Between

                                     A S
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr H Samra of Harbans Singh & Co (Soho Road)
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
Dhaliwal promulgated on 5 January 2018 in which she dismissed the
Appellant's appeal on protection grounds against the decision of the
Respondent dated 6 November 2017 refusing asylum in the UK.


2.   The Appellant is a national of Afghanistan born on 10 December 1990.
He arrived in the United Kingdom clandestinely in October 2007.  On 2
December 2010 he made an application for asylum.  The application was
deemed withdrawn on 15 March 2011 because the Appellant had absconded.  It
appears that the Appellant subsequently re-emerged and on 28 February 2017
made further submissions in respect of his asylum claim.  This resulted in
him being interviewed on 18 May 2017.  Thereafter, upon due consideration,
the Respondent refused the asylum claim for reasons set out in a 'reasons
for refusal' letter ('RFRL') dated 6 November 2017.


3.   The Appellant appealed to the Immigration and Asylum Chamber.


4.   The First-tier Tribunal Judge made some findings in favour of the
Appellant, but ultimately rejected the claim on the basis that it was
reasonable for him to relocate to Kabul.


5.   The Judge made the following favourable findings.

(i) At paragraph 15:

"I did not find any factors which undermined the Appellant's credibility in
this regard and I am likewise able to accept that

(i)  the Appellant lived with his family in the Baghlan Province,

(ii) the father of the Appellant was a commander for the Taliban,

(iii)    due to his father's influence, both of his older brothers joined
the Taliban and

(iv) as the Appellant was about to be recruited, his mother and maternal
uncle arranged for him to leave the country."


     (ii) At paragraph 16:

         "When I take the evidence in the round, I am satisfied that the
         account given by the Appellant of him being recruited and being
         trained by the Taliban is reasonably likely to be true."


(iii) At paragraph 19:

         "As the country guidance is that Baghlan is a province that is
         controlled by the Taliban and I accept that the father of the
         Appellant is a commander for the Taliban, I am clear that Baghlan
         is not a safe location for the Appellant to return to."


6.   Further to the findings of fact, the Judge indicated the framework of
consideration of the issue of protection: for example, at paragraph 17 - "I
move on to consider whether the Appellant is still at this present time at
risk from the Taliban, if so, whether there is sufficiency of protection
from the state and whether relocation can mitigate that risk." Further to
the finding that there was a risk in Baghlan, the Judge stated: "I
therefore go on to consider relocation to Kabul.  Internal relocation may
be both relevant and reasonable but this will depend on the person's
profile and personal circumstances." (paragraph 20). The Judge then
referred to elements of the country guidance and country information
materials that were before her (paragraphs 21-23) before considering the
particular circumstances of the Appellant.


7.   The Judge ultimately reaching the following conclusion:

"I am not satisfied that the Appellant has discharged the burden of proof
to establish that he is entitled to be granted asylum.  Taking into account
all of these factors, I have concluded that whilst the core of the
Appellant's claim is reliable and he may be at risk from the Taliban in
Baghlan, he is able to return and relocate to Kabul where there will be no
risk to him.  I therefore do not find that it would be unduly harsh in any
way for the Appellant to return to Afghanistan." (paragraph 34).


8.   The Judge went on to consider humanitarian protection and human rights
outside the scope of the protection claim, before dismissing the appeal on
asylum, humanitarian protection, and human rights grounds.


9.   The Appellant applied for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.
Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Blundell.
Judge Blundell identified two matters of concern.  The material parts of
the grant of permission are in the following terms:

"I find it difficult to reconcile the Judge's acceptance that the Appellant
would be in fear of the Taliban in his home area and her decision (in
relation to Kabul) that the Taliban have no ongoing interest in him due to
the passage of time.  I am also concerned that the Judge failed to consider
the significance of what was (first) said in PM (Afghanistan) [2007] UKAIT
89 when considering the extent to which the Taliban would be likely to
detect the Appellant in Kabul when he came to seek employment or
accommodation.  Whilst the relevant part of that decision was cited at [21]
of the Judge's decision, it is arguable that she failed to apply that
guidance in her subsequent assessment.  As contended in the grounds, the
Appellant's close family was accepted to have significant links to the
Taliban and it is arguable that the Judge failed to consider the country
guidance and the more recent background material against that background."


10.  The first matter identified in the grant of permission to appeal is
not pursued before me by Mr Samra.  In my judgment it was wise of Mr Samra
not to rely on it. Indeed, for completeness, I should say that he did not
initially refer to it at all in his oral submissions; it was only when Mr
Mills mentioned it in his submissions that Mr Samra acknowledged that he
was not seeking to rely upon it.


11.  For the avoidance of any doubt: in my judgement there is no difficulty
at all in reconciling the notion that the Appellant might be at risk in his
home area where he is known, but might not be at risk in Kabul where he is
not known.  As I note, this point was not pursued any further and I say no
more on it.


12.  It follows that the focus of argument before me was in respect of the
First-tier Tribunal Judge's evaluation of the reasonableness or otherwise
of relocation to Kabul against the framework of country guidance and
country information.


13.  Accordingly, in the premises, I invited Mr Samra to take me to the
particular materials that provided the relevant framework upon which he
would wish to rely in developing the challenge to the decision of the First-
tier Tribunal Judge. This was because it was at the core of the grounds of
appeal - and the grant of permission to appeal - that the Judge had in some
way deviated from guidance either in law or in substantial material fact to
an extent that it amounted to error of law.


14.  In this context Mr Samra took me first of all to the Appellant's
bundle before the First-tier Tribunal which included case law. My attention
was directed to paragraph 130 of PM and Others (Kabul, Hizb-i-Islami)
Afghanistan CG [2007] UKAIT 89 - which was referenced in the grant of
permission to appeal with the acknowledgement that Judge Dhaliwal had
referred to it at paragraph 21 of her decision.


15.  In the circumstances, before turning to the specific paragraph cited
by Mr Samra it is helpful to set out what Judge Dhaliwal said about this
case - which in essence was to restate what was said in the headnote:

"In PM and Others (Kabul, Hizb-i-Islami) Afghanistan CG [2007] UKAIT 00089
the Tribunal held: (i) Those returned from the United Kingdom will not,
without more, be at real risk at the airport or after arrival in Kabul.
(ii) Those returned from the United Kingdom are not at real risk, without
more, of being suspected by the authorities as insurgents.  (iii) The past
of an individual seeking accommodation or work in Kabul, or elsewhere, may
be discovered and mentioned to the authorities.  Similarly, the authorities
may become aware of someone newly arrived in an area.  That may result in a
person being detained for questioning but there is no satisfactory evidence
such questioning gives rise to a real risk of serious harm.  (iv) Subject
to an individual's personal circumstances, it is unlikely to be unduly
harsh (or unreasonable) to expect them to relocate to Kabul if they have
established a real risk of serious harm in (and restricted to) areas
outside Kabul." (paragraph 21).


16.  The specific passage at paragraph 130 of PM to which Mr Samra took me
is in the following terms:

         "We accept that those who fall into the hands of the Taliban,
         unless considered friendly to them, are likely to be ill-treated."


17.  Mr Samra then took me to the citation at paragraph 23 of the Judge's
decision from a report by the Immigration and Refugee Board of Canada dated
15 February 2016 titled 'Afghanistan: Whether the Taliban has the capacity
to pursue individuals after they relocate to another region (2012 - January
2016)'.  The passage cited by the Judge is in these terms:

"The Taliban may be able to find a person who relocates to a different area
and that they have been successful in doing so, particularly when targeting
their well-known or well-positioned opponents ... the Taliban has shadow
governors and military commanders in almost all provinces; communication
and information sharing between the command structure is likely, including
in efforts to obtain information about a person's background ... it is more
difficult to track people who have moved into urban environments but even
then the Taliban have spies and members who can gather considerable
information."


18.  Mr Samra next took me back to the Appellant's bundle and the case of
RQ (Afghan National Army - Hizb-i-Islami - Risk) Afghanistan CG [2008]
UKAIT 00013 and a report cited therein from the UNHCR on internal flight.
The particular passage is from paragraph 28.08 of the UNHCR report (dated
June 2005).  It is in these terms:

"It is not difficult to track people down in Afghanistan, although it might
take time.  Neighbours and landlords will check people's backgrounds,
because everyone thinks in terms of security, and so they would want to
check a newcomer's background in their home area.  Further, messages are
sent across the country via chains of communications based on personal
contacts, and it would be natural to investigate where someone was from in
order to see what role they could play in such a network.  The postal
service is unreliable and only delivers to the district centres, not to the
villages, so that travellers are often used to deliver messages and goods
to relatives and friends."


19.  In this context I also note the following passage in RQ at paragraph
105 - immediately following the quotation from the UNHCR report:

"That extract supported the evidence of the Appellant and his expert
witnesses.  Outside Kabul, we accept that enquiries would be made about an
individual's background and that the rumour mill would wish to satisfy
itself as to whether an incoming unknown individual posed a risk to that
community.  We do not consider that (absent family connections who could
provide safety in a particular area) internal relocation outside Kabul
would be available to Appellants with difficulties in their home areas."


20.  In my judgement the Tribunal's comments at paragraph 105 of RQ
demonstrate that the passage from the UNHCR report was considered to be of
particular significance and application for somebody seeking to relocate in
a place other than Kabul.  To that extent, it is not directly on point in
the circumstances of the instant case.


21.  Be that as it may, I do note paragraph 107 of RQ:

         "However, if news of being specifically wanted by a warlord or
         commander is likely to reach Kabul, we accept that an Appellant's
         safety in Kabul cannot be satisfactorily assured to the domestic
         protection standard set in Horvath ..."

     In this context, it is also relevant to note paragraphs 101 and 102,
which are in these terms:

"101. However, where an individual was 'wanted' by the Taliban or Hizb-i-
Islami, then the evidence was that the situation in Afghanistan remains
sufficiently lawless that if he were found, there would be nothing to
prevent them dealing with him as they thought fit.  A person who was wanted
in his home area for a specific reason would be able to show a real risk of
persecution (or treatment entitling him to humanitarian protection, as
appropriate) in his home area.

102. The next question was whether such a person could relocate away from
the risk and whether it would be unduly harsh to expect him or her to do
so.  Where there was an individual risk, it would be a question of fact
whether internal relocation was an option.  In general, for a person with
no particular profile, the Tribunal had held that there was no risk in
Kabul engaging the international protection Conventions (M v Secretary of
State for the Home Department (Afghanistan) [2004] UKIAT 00035)."


22.  These matters find expression in the headnote of RQ at (6)(b)

         "the safety of internal relocation to Kabul is a question of fact
         based on the particular history of an individual Appellant and of
         the warlord or faction known to be seeking to harm him."

Otherwise it is to be noted that the headnote at paragraph (5) says this:

"Where the risk to a particular Appellant is confined to his home area,
internal relocation to Kabul is in general available.  It would not be
unduly harsh to expect an Appellant with no individual risk factors outside
his home area to live in Kabul and assist in the rebuilding of his
country."


23.  For completeness, I should note that included in the Appellant's First-
tier Tribunal bundle were extracts from the case of ZN (Warlords, CIPU list
not comprehensive) Afghanistan [2005] UKIAT 00096.  ZN considers the
situation where there was what was described as a vendetta by a powerful
warlord against an individual.  Mr Samra did not seek to place any
particular reliance upon it in the context of the submissions advanced
before me.  I do note, however, that ZN, again, emphasises the fact-
sensitive nature of the assessment of any individual case - each case must
be decided on its own facts - and that in circumstances where the matter is
essentially one of fact-finding for the First-tier Tribunal the Upper
Tribunal will be slow to interfere with that evaluation, particularly in
the context as here where the initial task is to consider whether there has
been an error of law.


24.  Having been taken through these various passages by Mr Samra I invited
his comments on paragraph 24 of First-tier Tribunal Judge Dhaliwal's
decision:

         "I therefore start this part of my considerations on the basis that
         the Taliban can find persons that they wish to find as they have
         the resources to do so and whilst it is more difficult to find
         persons that have moved into urban areas, it can be done."


25.  Mr Samra acknowledged the substance of Judge Dhaliwal's observation,
and accepted that it was an effective summary of the materials cited by the
Judge. Moreover and more particularly, he acknowledged that it adequately
reflected the substance of the materials to which he had taken me and which
I have rehearsed above.


26.  It follows that the Appellant is not able to maintain any argument
that the Judge disregarded or misunderstood the nature of the issues in the
appeal, the country guidance, or the country information.


27.  Mr Samra otherwise in amplification of the grounds of appeal invited
me to consider that notwithstanding the adequacy of the observation at
paragraph 24 in the following paragraphs - paragraphs 25-29 - the Judge in
substance speculated as to the circumstances of the Appellant on return,
and the nature of any interest that the Taliban might have in him.


28.  For the Respondent Mr Mills argued that the Judge had not fallen into
any error of law but had made an appropriate evaluation of the particular
facts of the individual case.  He sought to emphasise the context of the
two country guidance cases particularly relied upon before the First-tier
Tribunal - PM and RQ.  In particular he noted that references to landlords
or neighbours checking the background of new arrivals was in the context of
seeking to protect against any possible threat the new arrival might pose,
not did not therefore relate to the possibility that such persons were
concerned about the background of new arrivals with a view to informing the
Taliban. PM was concerned with the influx of Pashtuns after an earlier
insurgency; in RQ consideration was of the risk to specific individuals who
had been in the Afghan National Army and might be targeted by the Taliban
because of such membership; these were not cases that were focused upon
people with little or no profile.  This is reinforced by the references to
the Taliban seeking to target individuals who are well-known or well-
positioned opponents.


29.  Mr Mills invited me to consider that from paragraph 25 onwards the
Judge essentially embarked on a sustainably reasoned evaluation of whether
there was reason to consider that the Appellant would be at risk because of
some continuing adverse interest such that it would be reasonably likely
that the Taliban would expend time, energy and resources in pursuing him.


30.  I agree with the position advanced by Mr Mills.  It seems to me clear
enough that from paragraph 25 onwards the Judge is considering the
individual circumstances of the Appellant against the background summarised
at paragraph 24 - a background acknowledged by Mr Samra to be one with
which he does not take any dispute.


31.  At paragraph 25 the Judge does little more than observe that it is
some considerable time since the Appellant left Afghanistan, having left at
the age of 12 or 13, possibly between ten or twelve years previously.  That
is an indisputable fact and in and of itself cannot be said to indicate any
error.


32.  The following paragraphs set out four points which the Judge
considered relevant to her assessment of whether or not the Appellant is
likely to be pursued in Kabul by the Taliban.


33.  The first point, at paragraph 26, picks up from the period of absence
from the country.  It is in these terms:

"Firstly, I cannot ignore the fact that the Appellant left Afghanistan a
considerable time ago and whilst his father may well have been interested
in finding out his whereabouts ten years ago, there is no up-to-date
information as to the risk, if any, that may be in existence today.  In the
absence of any up-to-date information as to whether his father is still in
the same locality, holds the same position, holds the same views or indeed,
whether he is still alive, I can only surmise based on what is in front of
me.  I find that if the Appellant's father was unable to locate him ten to
twelve years ago, there is not likely to be any interest or expectation
that the Appellant will now be found.  Any searches that his father may
have put in place ten to twelve years ago are likely to have dissipated
over time."


34.  I do not accept Mr Samra's suggestion that the Judge was in some way
idly speculating as to whether or not the Appellant's father was still
alive.  It seems to me what the Judge was doing was trying to make an
assessment on the available information as to the likelihood or otherwise
of there being a continuing interest in identifying and pursuing the
Appellant.  In substance, the Judge sustainably was taking into account in
her overall consideration that the passage of time would mean that any
previous search would have dissipated; in substance the Judge was saying
that it was not likely that the Appellant would be being actively sought by
the Taliban.


35.  At paragraph 27 the Judge comments that the Appellant's appearance
will have materially changed since leaving Afghanistan as a child of 12 to
13 years.  Mr Samra points out that whilst his appearance might have
changed his personal details would remain the same and accordingly, were he
to return to Kabul and offer those details up in the process of registering
his presence or seeking employment, there was a potential for him to be
identified by others.


36.  In the first instance, it seems to me that it was open to the Judge to
have made the observation that the Appellant would be "physically
unrecognisable". In context this was to identify - unobjectionably in my
judgement - that it was not likely that the Appellant would come to the
attention of Taliban members inadvertently by, as it were, being seen in
the street or 'bumping into' somebody who may have known him from the past.


37.  As regards Mr Samra's submission that the Appellant would still have
to use his own identity, such a circumstance only becomes a potential risk
factor if he is being actively sought.  That is a distinct and different
point, addressed in the Judge's overall assessment of whether the Taliban
have any continuing interest in the Appellant.  Accordingly, I find no
substance in the criticism of the Judge's evaluation at paragraph 27.


38.  At paragraph 28 the Judge makes the observation that she accepts that
the Appellant has not been in touch with his wider family, including in
particular his maternal uncle, and therefore, in the circumstances, there
is no reason for the Appellant's father to become aware through family
members if the Appellant were to return to Afghanistan.  It seems to me
this is entirely sustainable. In any event it is not a matter in respect of
which any specific criticism is made by Mr Samra.


39.  The Judge then says this at paragraph 29:

"Fourthly, it is unlikely that the Taliban themselves would have any
interest in finding the Appellant as he is neither well-known nor known to
be a well-positioned opponent.  They are unlikely to know of the
Appellant's existence and his background.  Even if they came to know of his
identification in a population of almost 5,000,000 in Kabul, which I find
unlikely, the passage of time means that there will be no current interest
to pursue this Appellant in Kabul city where their assets are limited and
their resources are focused on high target individuals."


40.  In my judgement this latter passage reflects the Judge's consideration
and application of much of the case law and country information cited above
to the particular circumstances of the Appellant.  In this regard the Judge
offers reasons that are sustainable and open to her. I find no basis for
criticising this passage.


41.  Accordingly, I find that the Judge has adequately explained why she
considered that the Appellant is not a person who is likely to be actively
sought by the Taliban in Kabul if he were returned at the present time, and
is not a person who is likely inadvertently to come to their attention by
being, as it were, recognised in the street.  Even if information were to
get back to them as to his identity there is no reason to think that they
would perceive him as somebody worthy of chasing down in Kabul.


42.  These matters were essentially matters of fact for the evaluation of
the Judge.  I am not persuaded that in making that evaluation the Judge has
in any way departed from the country guidance or otherwise fallen into
error of law. Nor does the Judge's evaluation seem to be remotely
inconsistent with the country information cited by the Judge - and I bear
in mind that my attention has not been drawn to any contrary evidence that
might point in a different direction.


43.  Accordingly, I can identify no error in the approach of the Judge.


44.  I am reinforced in this evaluation, it seems to me, by the more recent
decision of AS (Safety of Kabul) Afghanistan CG [2018] UKUT 00118 (IAC). AS
was heard prior to the hearing before Judge Dhaliwal but not promulgated
until afterwards: necessarily it was not a decision that the Judge could
have had available to her.  In AS the type of issue considered herein was
given consideration by the Upper Tribunal, who offered the following
country guidance as set out at paragraph (i) of the headnote: "A person who
is of lower level interest for the Taliban (i.e. not a senior government or
security services official, or a spy) is not at real risk of persecution
from the Taliban in Kabul."  The decision otherwise goes on to speak about
the availability of Kabul as a venue of internal relocation and in that
regard says this at (iii):

"However, the particular circumstances of an individual applicant must be
taken into account in the context of conditions in the place of relocation,
including a person's age, nature and quality of support network/connections
with Kabul/Afghanistan, their physical and mental health, and their
language, education and vocational skills when determining whether a person
falls within the general position set out above".

The 'general position' being that "it will not, in general be unreasonable
or unduly harsh for a single adult male in good health to relocate to Kabul
even if he does not have any specific connections or support network in
Kabul" (see headnote at (ii)).


45.  I cannot see anything in AS that suggests the Judge reached an
erroneous conclusion in the appeal. More particularly AS reinforces the
correctness of the substance of the approach taken by the First-tier
Tribunal Judge.


46.  For completeness, I note one further point.  During the course of
submissions Mr Samra sought to argue that the First-tier Tribunal Judge had
not given a full and comprehensive consideration to the concept of internal
flight with reference to the sort of factors and guidance set out in the
decision of Robinson.  This was not a point pleaded in the grounds of
appeal in support of the application for permission to appeal and was not a
point mentioned in the grant of permission to appeal.


47.  In the circumstances I did not permit Mr Samra formally to develop the
point.  Even had I done so, it seems to me that there is nothing in the
background and circumstances of the Appellant that would take him outside
the repeated observations in country guidance cases that generally for
individuals relocation to Kabul is entirely viable.  Insofar as brief
reference was made to the most recent country guidance case, there is
nothing to suggest  other than that the Appellant is a single adult male in
good health - indeed Mr Samra acknowledged as much.  The only suggested
distinguishing feature was that he had left Afghanistan at a very young age
and therefore had had no direct experience of living in Afghanistan as an
independent adult.  That may be so but it is to be noted that the country
guidance refers to the possibility of internal relocation even for somebody
without any specific connection or support network in Kabul. Further,
although the Appellant left at the age of 12 or 13, it was not until some
three or four years later in 2007 that he arrived in the United Kingdom: it
follows that he has been able to survive in difficult circumstances even
whilst a minor.  He has also lived for a substantial period of time whilst
in the UK as an absconder. As suggested in the RFRL he appears to be an
individual who has demonstrated considerable resource.  In the
circumstances, even if I were to have permitted argument on the internal
flight Robinson relocation test, it seems to me that there is nothing that
hints that such arguments could possibly avail the Appellant.



Notice of Decision

48.  The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Dhaliwal contained no error
    of law, and accordingly stands.


49.  The Appellant's appeal remains dismissed.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed:                                 Date: 5 January 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis

