
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12786/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 27 February 2018                     |On 26 April 2018                    |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

                                 mr Ming [C]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss M Cleghorn, instructed by DWFM Beckman
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This matter previously came before me at North Shields on  23  November
    2017.  For the reasons given in the decision promulgated on 8  December
    2017, a copy of which is annexed to this  decision,  I  set  aside  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The purpose of the hearing on 27 February was to hear further  evidence
    from the appellant, his partner, and an  additional  witness;  to  hear
    submissions; and, for me to remake the decision on  Article  8  grounds
    alone.  That inevitably includes a  consideration  of  the  Immigration
    Rules relevant to deportation, that is paragraphs 398 and 399.   It  is
    not submitted that this is a case to which paragraph  399A  applies  or
    that paragraph 399(b) is applicable.

 3. The Secretary of State's powers to deport  foreign  national  offenders
    are set out in Section 32 UKBA 2007.   It  is  not  disputed  that  the
    claimant is  a  foreign  criminal  as  defined  in  that  section.   By
    operation of section 32 (5) UKBA, the Secretary of State  must  make  a
    deportation order in respect of a foreign criminal  unless  she  thinks
    that an exception in section 33  of  the  Act  applies.   That  section
    provides, so far as is relevant, as follows:-

         33 Exceptions

         (1)  Section 32(4) and (5)-

             (a)  do not apply where an exception in this  section  applies
             (subject to subsection (7) below), and

             (b)  are subject to sections 7 and 8 of  the  Immigration  Act
             1971 (Commonwealth citizens, Irish citizens,  crew  and  other
             exemptions).

         (2)  Exception 1 is  where  removal  of  the  foreign  criminal  in
         pursuance of the deportation order would breach-

             (a)  a person's Convention rights, or

             (b)   the  United  Kingdom's  obligations  under  the  Refugee
             Convention.

         (3)  Exception 2 is where the Secretary of State  thinks  that  the
         foreign criminal was under the age of 18 on the date of conviction.

 4. The appellant is a foreign criminal as defined in Section 117D  of  the
    2002 Act.  I am therefore bound to consider the matter as  set  out  in
    Section 117B in addition to  117C which provide as follows:-

         "117B Article 8: public interest considerations applicable in all
    cases

         (1)  The maintenance of effective immigration controls  is  in  the
             public interest.

         (2)  It is in  the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
             interests of the economic well-being of  the  United  Kingdom,
             that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
             are able to speak  English,  because  persons  who  can  speak
             English-

             (a)  are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

             (b)  are better able to integrate into society.

         (3)  It is in  the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
             interests of the economic well-being of  the  United  Kingdom,
             that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
             are financially independent, because such persons-

             (a)  are not a burden on taxpayers, and

             (b)  are better able to integrate into society.

         (4)  Little weight should be given to-

             (a)  a private life, or

             (b)  a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,

             that is established by a person at a time when the  person  is
             in the United Kingdom unlawfully.

         (5)  Little weight should be given to a private life established by
             a person at a time when the  person's  immigration  status  is
             precarious.

         (6)  In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation,  the
             public interest does not require the person's removal where-

             (a)   the  person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting   parental
                  relationship with a qualifying child, and

             (b)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave
                  the United Kingdom.

         117C  Article  8:  additional  considerations  in  cases  involving
         foreign criminals

         (1)   The  deportation  of  foreign  criminals  is  in  the  public
             interest.

         (2)  The more serious the offence committed by a foreign  criminal,
             the greater is the  public  interest  in  deportation  of  the
             criminal.

         (3)  In the case of a foreign  criminal  ("C")  who  has  not  been
             sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years  or  more,
             the public interest requires C's deportation unless  Exception
             1 or Exception 2 applies.

         (4)  Exception 1 applies where-

             (a)  C has been lawfully resident in the  United  Kingdom  for
                  most of C's life,

             (b)  C is socially and culturally  integrated  in  the  United
                  Kingdom, and

             (c)   there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles  to   C's
                  integration into the country to which C is proposed to  be
                  deported.

         (5)  Exception 2 applies where  C  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
             relationship with a  qualifying  partner,  or  a  genuine  and
             subsisting parental relationship with a qualifying child,  and
             the effect of C's deportation on the partner or child would be
             unduly harsh.

         (6)  In the case of a foreign criminal who has been sentenced to  a
             period of imprisonment of at  least  four  years,  the  public
             interest requires deportation unless there are very compelling
             circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions  1
             and 2.

         (7)  The considerations in subsections (1) to (6) are to  be  taken
             into account where  a  court  or  tribunal  is  considering  a
             decision to deport a foreign criminal only to the extent  that
             the reason for the decision was the offence  or  offences  for
             which the criminal has been convicted."

 5. The starting point in this case is assessing the best interests of  the
    children given that that is a primary concern.  That must  be  assessed
    at this stage without taking into account any countervailing factors.

 6. The children are British citizens and have been since birth.  I  accept
    the evidence of the appellant and his wife, which  is  unchallenged  in
    submissions, that the children do not spontaneously speak  in  Mandarin
    although it is clear that they understand it.  The older child  is  now
    7� years of age, the younger only a little over 3 years of age.

 7. In assessing their best interests I have had regard to  the  report  of
    the social worker which was produced to me  and  again  which  was  not
    challenged by the respondent.  Neither for that matter was  the  report
    of the country expert, Dr Christoph  Bluth,  which  sets  out  in  some
    detail the difficulties that the family would  have  if  they  were  to
    relocate to China.

 8. An  assessment  of  the  children's  best  interests  also  involves  a
    consideration of what the alternatives to the continuing of the  status
    quo would be.  At present the children have both  parents  living  with
    them.  I accept  that  because  the  appellant  stays  at  home  he  is
    effectively the primary carer, as is the evidence in the case and as is
    supported by the social worker.  It is  the  appellant  who  takes  the
    children to school, to doctor's appointments and spends a greater  part
    of his time with them.

 9. I am satisfied that there are a number of obstacles which would make it
    difficult for the children to go to live in China with  their  parents.
    First, as Dr Bluth points out in his report, the appellant's wife is no
    longer a citizen of the  Republic  of  China  as  she  has  voluntarily
    acquired  British  citizenship.  She   therefore   lost   her   Chinese
    Citizenship by operation of Chinese  law.  The  difficulty  is,  as  he
    points out in his report at 5.2.2, Miss Lin and the appellant  are  not
    formally married and thus  she  would  not  be  able  to  obtain  entry
    clearance to China as his dependant.  There would also be  difficulties
    in respect of the children in that they would not be able to  obtain  a
    household registration certificate  (5.2.4)  because  the  partner  and
    children are British citizens and the appellant and Miss  Lin  are  not
    married.

10. On that basis they would have no access to state funding for education,
    the health service or other  public  services.   There  would  also  be
    difficulties in attending school  except  at  a  significant  cost  and
    because at Chinese schools there  would  be  no  concessions  made  for
    foreign students and they do not have second  language  programmes.   I
    accept that there would, in the circumstances, be  severe  difficulties
    integrating into the Chinese education system particularly in the  case
    of the older daughter and I accept the conclusion that on the facts  of
    this case they, as Dr Bluth states, they would not be able to  move  to
    China and be granted permanent residence (5.2.10).

11. I note also that Dr Bluth considered the possibility of Miss Lin having
    her Chinese nationality restored and whilst that would be possible, she
    would first have to renounce her British citizenship.  I accept that as
    Dr Bluth opinion  there are several reasons why this may  be  difficult
    given that she is not married to her partner and has on  the  basis  of
    Chinese law no legitimate relationship with him and that there would be
    difficulties which flow from a deemed violation of previous and current
    family planning policy given that she would be treated as  not  married
    there being no quota for unmarried persons (5.3.5) resulting in  social
    compensation fees which would have to be  paid.   That  in  turn  would
    impact negatively on the children.

12. Whilst I accept on the basis of country guidance  decisions  that  this
    would not be sufficient to amount to a breach of Article 3, nonetheless
    the children and Miss Lin face very real and  significant  difficulties
    in being allowed to live in China at all let alone be able in the  case
    of the children to be registered and  to  be  permitted  to  enter  the
    education system as well  as  entitlement  to  other  social  benefits.
    There would be no access to public services.

13. In light of all of the above,  I  consider  that  the  children's  best
    interests is to remain in the United Kingdom.   It  would  also  be  in
    their best interests for both  parents  to  live  with  them.   I  also
    consider that the effect on them of living in China  would  be  severe,
    even in the unlikely event that they  and  their  mother  could  obtain
    permission to remain there.

14. In considering whether it would be unduly harsh to expect them to go to
    live in China with both parents, consideration must  be  given  to  the
    substantial negative factors which clearly exist in this case.

15. It is not in dispute that the appellant has a poor immigration history.
     He entered the United Kingdom unlawfully and has never had  the  right
    to be here.  He has also committed two  criminal  offences,  the  first
    being an offence of dishonesty for which  he  served  two  months,  the
    offence relating to his entry to  the  United  Kingdom  using  a  false
    document.

16. The second  offence  is  of  greater  complexity.   The  appellant  was
    convicted in 2011 of producing cannabis, to which  he  pleaded  guilty.
    In his sentencing remarks His Honour Judge Mooncey noted the following:-



         "It is accepted by you that you are responsible  for  helping  grow
         these plants.

         The prosecution  have  accepted  your  basis  of  plea,  that  your
         involvement was for four days and no more.

         You say that you arrived in Derby thinking that  you'd  be  getting
         proper work rather than this kind of work and you were, in  effect,
         forced to work, although you accept it was not  duress.   You  also
         make it clear that you knew that  the  enterprise  that  was  being
         carried on was illegal.

         ... As you are no doubt aware,  cases  of  this  nature  are  quite
         common and the only sentence that is appropriate is one of custody.
          The Court of Appeal says these deterrent sentences  are  necessary
         to prevent people from being attracted to this kind  of  offending.
         Yours is not an unusual case.   There  are  many  cases  that  come
         before the court where people who are described as  gardeners  have
         to be punished and the people at the top do not  seem  to  feature.
         Without these gardeners these enterprises would not work."

17. Whilst the judge was clearly aware of the applicant's doubts  over  the
    immigration status he did state  that  he  was  ignoring  that  in  the
    sentencing.  He also took into account mitigation put in on  behalf  of
    the appellant and his partner and the expected child.  Credit was  also
    given to the appellant for an early guilty plea.

18. What differentiates this case is that subsequent to the sentencing,  as
    a result of submissions made in response  to  a  Section  120  One-Stop
    Warning in which the appellant claimed that he was a  potential  victim
    of trafficking, he was interviewed and his case  was  referred  to  the
    competent authority.  On 19 April 2016 he was issued  with  a  positive
    conclusive  trafficking  decision.   On  that  basis,  the   respondent
    accepted that by virtue of Section 33(6A) of the UK  Borders  Act  2007
    there was in place an exception such that sections 32 (4)  and  (5)  of
    the 2007 Act do not apply, subject to section  33(7) of that Act  which
    provides:

         32.  The application of an exception -

               a) Does not prevent the making of a deportation order;

               b) Results in it being assumed neither that  the  deportation
                  of the person concerned is conducive to the  public  good,
                  nor  that it is not conducive  to  the  public  good;  but
                  section 32(4) applies despite the application of Exception
                  1 or 4

19. It must, however, be borne in  mind  that  the  appellant  is  still  a
    foreign criminal as defined both in section 32 of the 2007 Act  and  in
    section 117D of the 2002 Act. It follows  therefore  that  there  is  a
    subset of foreign criminals such as those who are the victims of modern
    slavery whose deportation is in the public interest but is  not  deemed
    to be conducive to the public good.  There is, however, a difference in
    that sections 32 and 33 of the 2007 Act are concerned with the  process
    under which Secretary of State may be compelled to make  a  deportation
    decision whereas section 117 is directed to a court's assessment of the
    public interest once the decision to make a deportation  order,  be  it
    discretionary or otherwise, has been made.

20. In reaching my decision I bear in mind WZ (China) v  SSHD  [2017]  EWCA
    Civ 795 and also AJ (Zimbabwe) v SSHD at [13] to [14] and [17],  albeit
    bearing in mind that this is not a  case  in  which  the  appellant  is
    subject to automatic deportation, nor was he sentenced  to  a  term  of
    more than 4 years.

         13.  This court has on a number of occasions had cause to emphasise
         that the mere fact that there will be a detrimental effect  on  the
         best interests of the children where the parent (almost always  the
         father) is deported in  circumstances  where  the  children  cannot
         follow  him  does  not  by   itself   constitute   an   exceptional
         circumstance. In LC (China) v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
         Department [2014] EWCA Civ 1310; [2015] ImmAR 2  the  appellant,  a
         citizen of China, had been convicted of two offences of robbery and
         sentenced to five years' imprisonment. The Secretary of State  made
         a deportation order which was challenged on article 8 grounds.  The
         appellant had two young children who were British  citizens  and  a
         partner who had indefinite leave to remain in the UK. The FTT  held
         that it would be disproportionate to deport him after  taking  into
         account the nature of his offending,  the  likelihood  of  his  re-
         offending, the circumstances facing the family if they were all  to
         live in China, and the best interests of the children. The UT  held
         that the FTT had been in error and upheld the order. The  Court  of
         Appeal (Moore-Bick, Ryder LJJ and David Richards J)  dismissed  the
         appeal. Moore-Bick LJ noted that this was not a  case  of  removing
         someone who had illegally entered the country - had  it  been,  the
         decision of the FTT, which placed particular emphasis on  the  best
         interests of the children, might well have  been  sustainable.  But
         here the more important public interest was engaged of deporting  a
         foreign criminal. He observed that:






             ".... neither the fact that  the  appellant's  children  enjoy
             British nationality nor the fact that they  may  be  separated
             from their father for  a  long  time  will  be  sufficient  to
             constitute exceptional circumstances of a kind which  outweigh
             the public interest in his deportation"






         14.  In Secretary of State for the Hone Department v  CT  (Vietnam)
         [2016] EWCA Civ 488 a foreign criminal with two  firearms  offences
         and a variety of other offending was sentenced to seven and a  half
         years' imprisonment, having earlier served a lengthy sentence.  The
         FTT nonetheless found  that  his  deportation  would  infringe  his
         article 8 rights. The fact that it was in the best interests of the
         children for their father to remain in the UK weighed  particularly
         heavily with the tribunal. Rafferty  LJ,  giving  a  judgment  with
         which Tomlinson LJ agreed, held that it was not a factor capable of
         constituting exceptional circumstances (paras.36 and 38):






             "The effect on the children was, on  the  evidence,  to  leave
             them unhappy at the prospect of their father being on  another
             continent.  I  readily  accept  that  description.  Experience
             teaches that most children would so react. I cannot accept the
             conclusion that, added to  a  low  risk  of  reoffending,  the
             effect on them tips the balance. These children  will  not  be
             bereft of both loving parents. Nor was  there  evidence  of  a
             striking condition in either (I  ignore  the  stepchildren  by
             virtue of their age)  which  his  presence  in  the  UK  would
             dispositively resolve. He is said to have "a  particular  tie"
             with the Respondent. The son was  said  to  have  spoken  less
             confidently when his father was in prison and to have returned
             to confidence upon his release. That is not exceptional. ...






             Appellate  guidance  is  clearer  now  than   when   the   FTT
             promulgated its  decision.  As  paragraph  24  of  LC  (China)
             succinctly explains, where the person to be deported has  been
             sentenced  to  4  years'  imprisonment  or  more,  the  weight
             attached to the public interest in  deportation  remains  very
             great despite the  factors  to  which  paragraph  399  refers.
             Neither the British nationality of the  Respondent's  children
             nor their likely separation from their father for a long  time
             is  exceptional  circumstances  which  outweigh   the   public
             interest in his deportation. Something  more  is  required  to
             weigh in the balance and nothing  of  substance  offered.  The
             approach of both the FTT and the UT failed to give  effect  to
             the clearly expressed Parliamentary intention."


         ...


         17.  These cases show that it will be rare for the  best  interests
         of the children to outweigh the strong public interest in deporting
         foreign criminals. Something more than a lengthy separation from  a
         parent is required, even though such separation is  detrimental  to
         the  child's  best  interests.  That  is  commonplace  and  not   a
         compelling circumstance. Neither is it looking at  the  concept  of
         exceptional circumstances  through  the  lens  of  the  Immigration
         Rules. It would undermine the specific exceptions in the  Rules  if
         the interests of the children in maintaining a close and  immediate
         relationship with the deported parent were as a matter of course to
         trump the  strong  public  interest  in  deportation.  Rule  399(a)
         identifies the particular circumstances where it is  accepted  that
         the interests of the child will outweigh  the  public  interest  in
         deportation. The conditions are onerous and will only rarely arise.
         They include the requirement that it would not  be  reasonable  for
         the child to leave the UK and that no other family member  is  able
         to look after the child in the UK. In  many,  if  not  most,  cases
         where this exception is  potentially  engaged  there  will  be  the
         normal relationship of love and affection between parent and  child
         and it is virtually always in the best interests of the  child  for
         that relationship to  continue.  If  that  were  enough  to  render
         deportation a disproportionate interference with  family  life,  it
         would drain the rule of any practical significance. It  would  mean
         that deportation would constitute a  disproportionate  interference
         with private life in the ordinary run of cases where  children  are
         adversely affected and the  carefully  framed  conditions  in  rule
         399(a) would be largely  otiose.  In  order  to  establish  a  very
         compelling justification overriding the  high  public  interest  in
         deportation, there must be  some  additional  feature  or  features
         affecting the nature or quality of the relationship which take  the
         case out of the ordinary.


21. Allowing for the fact that the Rules  have  been  amended  since  these
    decisions, there are a number of factors to be taken  into  account  in
    assessing undue harshness.  Undue harshness is  to  be  interpreted  in
    accordance with the ordinary meaning.  In doing so I consider that  the
    factors set out in Section 117B and 117C of the 2002 Act must be  taken
    into account.

22. For the reasons set  out  above,  I  am  satisfied  that  removing  the
    children to China would not be in their best interests given that  they
    could not lawfully reside there and would at best be subject to  severe
    restrictions on their ability to  be  educated,  and  through  lack  of
    accommodation.  I find that would not  be  countered  by  both  parents
    living with them owing to the severe legal and other obstacles to  them
    and their mother living in China.

23. Several of  these  factors  militate  against  the  appellant.   First,
    although he speaks some English, he and his wife required the  services
    of an interpreter at the hearing.  Second, there is no evidence  before
    me as to the exact situation of the children but it is difficult to see
    how it could be that the family could be financially independent on the
    basis of the earnings  as  presently  constituted.  While  I  note  the
    consistent evidence that the appellant will be given a job as  a  chef,
    there is no firm written job offer,  but  viewing  the  evidence  as  a
    whole, I am satisfied that the appellant would get a job, thus reducing
    any financial dependence there may be on the  state.  That  was  not  a
    factor pressed on me by Mr Diwnycz.

24. Clearly, if this were a situation where there  were  no  children,  the
    appellant's case would lacking any merit given that he  has  never  had
    leave to be here and the relationship was formed with his partner  when
    his position was manifestly precarious.

25. The starting point in  assessing  the  public  interest  is  the  clear
    statement of parliament that the deportation of foreign criminals is in
    the public interest.  The offence in this case was serious and involves
    production of drugs.  Whilst the sentence  of  two  years  is,  in  the
    context of production of drugs, relatively low, equally this  reflected
    a significant reduction of sentence in this case.

26. The exception set out in Section 117C(5), that is exception 2, mirrored
    in the  Immigration Rules referred to above.

27. What sets this case apart is the acceptance by the respondent that  the
    appellant is a victim of modern slavery.  Whether and  to  what  extent
    the sentence and indeed the conviction would be the same now is  not  a
    matter for me but is a matter for  the  appellant  should  he  wish  to
    pursue this through the correct channels.   Whilst  the  exception  for
    victims of trafficking exists in respect of UK Borders  Act  2007  that
    does not apply in the case of parliament's express intentions  set  out
    in Section 117C(1) which does  not  include  that  exemption.   It  was
    parliament's clear intention to  stress  the  public  interest  in  the
    deportation of foreign criminals to  expand  to  a  greater  number  of
    people than are covered by the automatic deportation provisions in  the
    Borders Act 2007. On that basis, I do not agree with  Miss  Pickering's
    submission that there is no public interest in removal.

28. I accept that it is perhaps less in this  case  given  the  trafficking
    decision and it is of some note that there has been  no  repetition  of
    the offending behaviour in the subsequent  eight  years.   These  must,
    however, be set against  the  other  negative  factors  set  out  above
    including the precarious nature of the  appellant's  position  and  his
    long period of overstaying.  Indeed, he has never had permission to  be
    in the United Kingdom.

29. Turning back then to the analysis of unduly harshness in  399(a)(i),  I
    consider that the impact on the children of having  to  live  in  China
    even with her own parents given the serious  difficulties  which  would
    effectively mean that their private lives could  not  exist  given  the
    legal disabilities under which they live and their inability to  access
    education and public services is such that requiring them  to  live  in
    China would, even bearing in mind the large number of negative factors,
    be unduly harsh.

30. It does not, however, follow that it would be unduly  harsh  to  expect
    them to be separated from their father.  That is,  if  he  were  to  be
    deported to China.  I note Miss Cleghorn's submissions to that fact but
    as noted in the cases cited above, this is the effect  of  deportation.
    It does separate parents from their children.  It is only in  the  rare
    cases that the  public  interest  in  deporting  foreign  criminals  is
    outweighed by the harm done to their children.

31. In considering the report by the independent social worker, I note that
    she was directed to consider if  it  would  be  unduly  harsh  for  the
    partner and children to remain if  the  applicant  were  deported  (see
    letter of instructions).  That issue is addressed at section 11 of  the
    report where  it  is  opined  that  father/daughter  relationships  are
    important in women becoming higher achievers;  that  the  children  are
    likely to be shaped by their early experiences; that the children  have
    an established relationship with their father; that the best  interests
    of children must be a primary concern; and, that to  be  cared  for  by
    both parents will continuously serve  the  children's  best  interests.
    There is, however, not  opinion  offered  as  to  what  the  effect  of
    separation will be.  While the theme set out in section 11  is  further
    developed in section 12, this is generalised. The final conclusion is:

         "... to develop their full potential, children need safe and stable
         housing, adequate and nutritious  food,  access  to  medical  care,
         secure  relationships  with   adult   caregivers,   nurturing   and
         responsive parenting, and high-quality  learning  opportunities  at
         home, in child care settings and in school.... [The  applicant  and
         his partner] are providing and meeting their children's needs as  a
         couple. To continue to do so Mr [C] should be allowed to remain  in
         the UK."

32. With respect, this just does not answer the question of what the effect
    of removal would be. There is, in consequence, little or  no  objective
    evidence of any harm over and above the normal consequences to children
    of the deportation of a parent.

33. I accept that the removal of the primary care giver on  young  children
    will  be  hard.  I  am  satisfied  that  both  children  have  a  close
    relationship with their father, and it is  important  to  them.  He  is
    closely involved in their upbringing, and in taking the older child  to
    school. His not working allows the mother to work, and he cares for the
    children when she is not there. It is likely that  their  mother  would
    have to cease work to look after  them,  and  that  the  family  would,
    financially, be worse off.  Contact  with  the  father  would  be  very
    limited, and there is  little  prospect  of  physical  contact  through
    visits. The reality is that the very essence of day to day family  life
    would be negated,  communication  being  possible  only  by  electronic
    means.  This is not a case in which the children have  previously  been
    aware of separation from their father while he  was  in  prison,  given
    that the older child was only a baby when he was released.  There  will
    thus be a rupture in the family life which has  existed  for  7  or  so
    years, effectively the whole of the life experience of the older child.



34. This is not, however, a case in which the appellant has been  separated
    from his children already due to serving a prison  sentence,  at  least
    not since the older child was very young. There is thus  a  continuous,
    and (I am satisfied on  the  evidence  before  me)  particularly  close
    family life, given not least it appears owing to the lack of either the
    appellant or his wife have extended family networks here; there is just
    the nuclear family.  There would, however, be no removal to an entirely
    different environment away from the United Kingdom, or to  an  entirely
    different educational setup in the case of the older child which  would
    be the case were the family to relocate to China (were that possible).

35. Taking all of these factors into  account,  I  am  satisfied  that  the
    effect on the children would be harsh, but would it be unduly harsh?

36. Balanced against the harshness to the children  is  the  strong  public
    interest in the removal of foreign criminals. That interest is set  out
    in more detail in OH (Serbia) v SSHD [2008] EWCA Civ 694. Great  weight
    must clearly be given to it, bearing in mind  those  factors,  and  the
    length of the sentence.

37. Some weight must be attached to the appellant's favour that he has  not
    reoffended since the index offence, but  equally,  as  set  out  above,
    there are negative factors flowing from section 117B which are  not  in
    his favour; neither is his immigration history.

38. There is in this case a nexus between the modern slavery conclusion and
    the index offence which was committed while the appellant was under the
    control of those who had subjected him to that. The appellant  accepted
    that this did not amount to duress, but as was noted in MK v  R  [2018]
    EWCA Crim 667, the defence provided for in section  45  of  the  Modern
    Slavery Act 2015 is wider, albeit that it is not retrospective (see R v
    Joseph [2017] EWCA Crim 36 at [4]), nor, in  consequence  are  the  CPS
    guidelines. Whether the conviction should be overturned  is  manifestly
    not a matter for the Upper Tribunal, but I do  not  consider  that  the
    close nexus between the modern slavery conclusion and the index offence
    can be discounted in assessing the public interest and  whether  it  is
    outweighed, even though, as I accept, the  modern slavery decision does
    not assuage the applicant's guilt.  On the  particular  facts  of  this
    case, and bearing  in  mind  the  factors  which  make  up  the  public
    interests as identified in OH (Serbia),  I  consider  that  the  public
    interest in deportation, while  still  strong  and  entitled  to  great
    weight, is lessened. Nonetheless, the public interest in deportation is
    in this case strengthened to a limited degree owing to the  appellant's
    limited ability to speak English (although it appears good  enough  for
    most everyday purposes), and his poor immigration history.

39. This is a case  with  a  number  of  unusual  factors,  and  is  finely
    balanced. I am, however,  satisfied,  taking  all  of  the  above  into
    account, that the appellant has satisfied me that, the public  interest
    in his deportation is outweighed, and that thus it would be, given  the
    very close nature of the family bond with the children,  and  the  very
    real difficulty there would be in  maintaining  any  degree  of  family
    life, that the effect of deportation on the children would unduly harsh
    were they to remain in the United Kingdom,

40. Accordingly, I am satisfied that the appellant meets  the  requirements
    of paragraph 399(a)(ii) of  the  Immigration  Rules  and  falls  within
    exception 2 within section 117C of the 2002  Act.   For  all  of  these
    reasons,  I  satisfied  that  the  deporting  the  appellant  would  be
    disproportionate and thus contrary to his protect rights.  I  therefore
    allow the appeal on Human Rights grounds.

Summary of Decision

      1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making  of  an
         error of law and I set it aside.

      2. I remake the decision  by  allowing  the  appeal  on  human  rights
         grounds.

      3. No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                                  Date 20 April 2018
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul

                        ANNEX - ERROR OF LAW DECISION

                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-DN-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12786/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at North Shields                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 23 November 2017                           |                              |
|                                              |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL
Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


                                 MR MING [C]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent



Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Miss M Cleghorn, instructed by DWFM  Bekman
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against the decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge S T Fox promulgated on 18 May  2017  allowing
    Mr Ming [C]'s appeal against the decision of the Secretary of State  to
    make a deportation order against him and to refuse his human rights and
    humanitarian protection claims.

 2. I refer to Mr [C] as the respondent although the Secretary of State was
    the respondent below, and is the appellant in this Tribunal.

 3. The respondent is a citizen of China who it appears entered the  United
    Kingdom in September 2001 when he was discovered attempting to board  a
    plane to Canada using a forged Japanese passport.  He  claimed  asylum,
    was granted temporary admission but failed to attend his interview.  On
    3 April 2002 he was convicted at Uxbridge Magistrates of using a  false
    document and sentenced to four months' imprisonment.

 4. The respondent was next encountered by the authorities in November 2010
    when he was arrested.  On 17 February 2011 he was  convicted  at  Derby
    Crown Court for production of a class B controlled drug - cannabis  and
    sentenced to two years' imprisonment.   There  was  no  appeal  against
    conviction or sentence and, subsequent to this, the respondent was made
    the subject of a deportation order on 21 May 2012.  His appeal  against
    that decision was dismissed by the First-tier Tribunal and subsequently
    by the Upper Tribunal.

 5. On 2 April 2015 the respondent applied for his deportation order to  be
    revoked stating that he had been the victim of modern  slavery  in  the
    United Kingdom, that is, that he had  been  forced  to  assist  in  the
    growing of cannabis which had resulted in his conviction.  On 19  April
    2016 a positive conclusive grounds decision was made where it was found
    that he had been  the  victim  of  modern  slavery.   Accordingly,  the
    respondent revoked the deportation order on 18  May  2016  but  made  a
    further deportation order and refused his human rights and humanitarian
    protection claim.

 6. The respondent is married to a British citizen who is  originally  from
    China.  They have two children aged  3  and  6  who  are  also  British
    citizens.

 7. The Secretary of State was not satisfied that the respondent had a well-
    founded fear of persecution in  China  as  a  Christian  nor  that  his
    deportation would be in breach  either  of  the  Immigration  Rules  or
    contrary to Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention.  The judge  heard
    evidence from the respondent and an additional  witness;  he  also  had
    before him a report from a social worker and medical evidence  relating
    to one of the children who has a significant medical condition.

 8. The judge dismissed the appeal  on  refugee  grounds  but  allowed  the
    appeal on the basis that deportation would be disproportionate and thus
    in breach of the United Kingdom's obligations under Article  8  of  the
    Human Rights Convention.

 9. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal on the grounds  that
    the judge had:-

      a) Failed to give clear reasons as to why the appeal would be  allowed
         it being unclear whether they had been allowed on Article 8 grounds
         outside the Immigration Rules and if that were the case had  failed
         to give clear reasons as to why the public interest in  deportation
         is  outweighed  in  such   circumstances,   the   threshold   being
         particularly high in those circumstances;

      b) in apparently relying on delay on the  part  of  the  Secretary  of
         State which has in fact been due to the difficulties  in  obtaining
         confirmation of the respondent's identity from him and  having  him
         documented by the Chinese authorities;

      c) by stating apparently that the public interest was not  engaged  in
         this case, contrary to Section 117C(1) of the  2002  Act  it  being
         unclear to what the judge was referring; and  in  referring  to  it
         being unreasonable to expect  the  children  to  leave  the  United
         Kingdom rather than the correct test which is to  consider  whether
         it would be unduly harsh;

      d) in failing properly to explain why it would be unduly harsh for the
         children either to remain in the United Kingdom with  their  mother
         alone or to go to China as a family unit, referring at [44] to  the
         decision in Chikwamba which was not relevant to deportation; and in
         failing  to  explain  why  it  would  be  unduly  harsh   for   the
         respondent's wife to return to China with him.

10. Miss  Cleghorn  supplied  a  detailed  response  pursuant  to  Rule  24
    submitting that viewing the decision  as  a  whole  it  was  adequately
    reasoned that the judge had at several places correctly referred to the
    issue of being unduly harsh and that proper reasons had been given  for
    finding that it would not be in the children's best interests for  them
    to go to China and that he had given  sufficient  reasons  for  finding
    that this would be unduly harsh and that it would be unduly  harsh  for
    them to be separated from their father.

11. She submitted further that the judge had not in reality concluded  that
    the public interest in deportation was not engaged in this case and had
    made numerous references to undue harshness such that  Section  117C(5)
    was engaged  thus  there  was  no  public  interest  in  this  case  in
    deportation.

12. It is also submitted that the judge  had  given  adequate  reasons  for
    saying why the mother could not return to China and had properly  dealt
    with the best interests of the children.

13. The judge's decision is to a significant extent confused.  Whilst  this
    is a human rights appeal and the question of whether the  decision  was
    or was not in accordance with the Immigration Rules, was not  a  ground
    of appeal nonetheless  the  judge's  focus  should  have  been  on  the
    Immigration Rules and whether they were met.  That is, after  all,  the
    basis on which the Secretary of State began consideration of Article 8.
     Further,  whilst  to  a  significant  extent  the  matters  raised  in
    paragraph 399A and 398 were produced what is set out in Section 117C of
    the 2002 Act these are not specifically addressed.  Instead, the  judge
    launches into a consideration of Section  117  at  Section  19  without
    having made any findings of  fact  and  confusingly  at  [21]  although
    accepting the deportation of  foreign  criminals  and  public  interest
    concludes that the "public interest ............ was not engaged"  plus
    there are references to obstacles and  difficulties  and  it  would  be
    reasonable to expect children to go to live in China, it is unclear  in
    what context the judge was reaching these conclusions.  Whilst, as Miss
    Cleghorn submitted, it is not correct that at paragraphs [31]  to  [49]
    and 61 that the judge refers to unduly harsh consequences,  equally  in
    other paragraphs the judge  refers  to  it  being  unreasonable  -  see
    paragraph [23].  It is also correct that the judge improperly refers to
    the decision in Chikwamba  and  also  Treebhawon  and  Others  (Section
    117B(6)) [2015] UKUT 674 in the balancing of the children's rights.

14. Other indicators of significant difficulty  in  the  judge's  reasoning
    process are the conclusions [40] that the respondent does not meet  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules which begs the question as to why
    the appeal was allowed if the judge as he appears to have done, thought
    that Section 117(6) was engaged and was  relevant  as  that  reproduces
    paragraph 399A of the Immigration Rules.

15. There are a number of other paragraphs in  this  decision  which  cause
    concern.  At [22] the judge concluded  that  the  respondent's  general
    credibility had not been established yet appears to have  accepted  his
    evidence and that of his wife and at [51] found that the respondent had
    "provided a credible basis for challenging the assertions, analyses and
    conclusions in  the  Secretary  of  State's  refusal  letter.   On  the
    evidence before me today, I am satisfied  those  different  assertions,
    analyses and  conclusions  are  not  valid  and  tenable  and  I  reach
    conclusions myself for the reasons recorded above."

16. If that finding were to stand it is not entirely clear  why  the  judge
    then dismissed the appeal under Article 3 and  the  Refugee  Convention
    given that  those  are  both  issues  raised  in  the  refusal  letter.
    Further, the judge expressly directs himself at [59]  that  this  is  a
    matter outside the Rules referring to his  observations  at  paragraphs
    [19] to [22] as to why these Rules are not met but they simply  do  not
    do so.  Finally,  at  paragraph  [63]  the  judge  concluded  that  the
    interference in the respondent's family life was not in accordance with
    the law but fails to explain why and at [64] satisfied himself that the
    interference was necessary yet found that it was not proportionate.

17.  For  all  of  these  reasons  I  consider  that  the  decision  is  so
    unstructured and frankly incoherent that it is not at all  possible  to
    discern that the judge directed himself properly with  respect  to  the
    law or why he had concluded that the very  high  threshold  in  showing
    that deportation is disproportionate was met if he  was  not  satisfied
    that the requirements of the Immigration Rules were met.

18. Accordingly, I  am  satisfied  that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal did involve the making of an error of law and I set it aside.

Directions

1.   The decision of the First-tier Tribunal will be  remade  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal for it to consider whether on the facts as found by the  judge
    the requirements of the Immigration Rules are met and to consider again
    whether deportation would be proportionate.

2.   The Upper Tribunal will not consider whether  the  applicant's  Article
    3, humanitarian protection or asylum claim are made out as  these  were
    dismissed and there was no cross appeal on these issues.  The  Tribunal
    will therefore consider only the Article 8 issue.

3.   As noted during the hearing, the index conviction in this case  relates
    out of circumstances in which the respondent was compelled to work on a
    cannabis farm.  Whilst it is not suggested that this compulsion reached
    the high threshold to  constitute  a  defence  to  that  criminal  law,
    nonetheless the conclusive finding as to modern slavery is relevant  in
    this context and it would be sensible.  The respondent would  therefore
    be advised urgently to seek advice given the decision in the R v Joseph
    [2017] EWCA Criminal 36.

4.   To that end, the respondent is directed to inform  the  Upper  Tribunal
    in writing marked for the attention of Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul  on
    or before 16 January 2018 as to what steps  have  been  taken  in  this
    regard and whether, if appropriate, what advice has been received.



Signed                                  Date:  4 December 2017
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul

