
[pic]

Upper Tier Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12881/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 4 September 2017                   |On 5 September 2017                  |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup


                                   Between

                                     DJA
                         [Anonymity direction made]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Ms Masih, instructed by Braitch RB Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mrs H Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the appellant's  appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Butler promulgated 30.5.17, dismissing  on  all  grounds
    his appeal against the  decision  of  the  Secretary  of  State,  dated
    7.11.16, to refuse his protection claim.  The Judge heard the appeal on
    12.4.17.

 2. First-tier Tribunal Judge Gillespie granted  permission  to  appeal  on
    22.6.17, stating that the "points raised in  the  proposed  grounds  of
    onward appeal are all fairly arguable. They disclose arguable errors of
    law which, if established, would arguably be material to  the  outcome.
    Permission is granted."

 3. Thus the matter came before me on 4.9.17 as  an  appeal  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

Error of Law

 4. In the first instance I have to determine whether or not there  was  an
    error of law in the making of the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    such that it should be set aside.

 5. I have  carefully  read  and  considered  both  the  comprehensive  and
    otherwise careful decision of the First-tier Tribunal and  the  grounds
    of application for permission to appeal.

 6. I am not satisfied that there is any material error in relation to  the
    first ground at [4(i)] of the grounds of application for permission  to
    appeal. The judge concluded at [66] of the decision that the  appellant
    and his wife were inconsistent as to when the appellant lost his Muslim
    faith. In evidence he told the judge he lost his faith whilst  in  Iran
    and told his family. However, his wife's evidence was that he  did  not
    give up his Muslim faith in Iran, that only happened  in  the  UK.  The
    ground attempts to distinguish a loss of  faith  from  a  cessation  of
    Muslim religious practice. Contrary to the  assertion  in  the  grounds
    that ceasing Islamic  practice  in  Iran  would  have  been  dangerous,
    country background information is to the effect that many Iranians  are
    non-practising in the Muslim faith. I also disagree with the submission
    that it is clear from the evidence cited by the judge at [32] and  [37]
    that the appellant continued to practice the  Islamic  faith  in  Iran.
    That is not clear at all. I am satisfied that it was open to the  judge
    to reach the conclusion as to inconsistency on this issue.

 7. At [69] little weight is attached to a letter from Kia Hadeghi, in part
    because it is said that the person's position is unknown.  Whilst,  the
    author identifies himself as an assistant  to  Reverend  Sotoudeh,  the
    judge was entitled to conclude that there  was  no  evidence  that  the
    person had the authority to write such a letter.  Ms  Masih  sought  to
    rely on a similar from Rev Sotoudeh at A100 of the appellant's  bundle,
    but the two letterheads are different. I am  satisfied  the  judge  was
    entitled to attach little weight to this letter.

 8. I am not persuaded by  the  argument  in  grounds  [4(viii)]  that  the
    appellant will be at risk because, following SSH &  HR  (illegal  exit:
    failed asylum seeker) Iran CG [2016]  UKUT  00308  (IAC),  he  will  be
    questioned on return and cannot be expected to lie. The grounds  assert
    that merely because he had become a member of  a  Christian  church  he
    will be obliged to report that to the authorities. As the  judge  found
    that his Christian conversion was not genuine, there is no  reason  for
    the appellant to disclose anything to the contrary. On the argument  of
    Ms Masih, every Iranian who joins a  Christian  church  will,  by  that
    reason alone, be entitled to international protection, whether  or  not
    their alleged conversion is genuine or not; that cannot be right.

 9. However, the other grounds  of  appeal  highlight  a  number  of  other
    factual errors in the decision which I consider to be material  to  the
    outcome of the appeal.

10. The grounds at [4(ii)] assert that at [67] the  judge  did  not  accept
    that the appellant could have  attended  two  churches  simultaneously.
    Whilst it was the appellant's case that  did  do  just  that,  so  that
    attendance  at  both  overlapped  for  a  period  of   time,   one   in
    Wolverhampton and the other in Birmingham, the essence of  the  judge's
    conclusion at [67] is that it was not accepted that the appellant would
    or could have attended both services on the same day. The  judge  cited
    the appellant's answers to questions in interview, but  these  did  not
    show an inconsistency. The judge  has  given  no  other  and  no  clear
    rational for dismissing the claimed double attendance.  It  would  have
    been open to the judge to reach a conclusion  as  to  why  he  did  not
    accept the appellant attended two different churches on the  same  day,
    but the final sentence of [67] is to the effect that the judge did  not
    accept that the appellant and his wife and daughter "could" attend both
    churches simultaneously. Clearly, they couldn't  be  in  two  different
    places at the same time, but as one of the services was in the  morning
    and the other in the afternoon, it was physically  possible  to  attend
    both church services and the documentary evidence  supported  the  fact
    that they did so.

11. A further ground of appeal is that at [68] the  judge  attached  little
    weight to a letter from pastor Ahmadifar, in  part  because  the  judge
    stated that the appellant did not  mention  him  in  his  interview  or
    witness statements. That is factually incorrect, as he is mentioned  in
    the interview at Q53, witness statement, and was  referred  to  in  the
    RFR. However, the appellant referred to him as Sherpoor  and  explained
    in his witness statement of 1.9.14 at [12], where that this is the same
    person as Ahmadifar.

12. At [70] the judge said there was no evidence as to the progress of  the
    appellant's faith from the Church of the Light in  Birmingham,  when  a
    letter setting out the progress made is at A100. Similarly, at [71] the
    judge said there was no evidence from the appellant's cousin or Reza as
    to his attendance at the Elim Church in  Liverpool,  but  such  letters
    appear at A97 and A99 of the bundle.

13. The judge's conclusions at [73] as to the evidence of  Mr  Coates-Smith
    are undermined by the failure to provide cogent reasoning as to why the
    claim that the appellant's interest in Christianity began  just  before
    his first appeal was dismissed is not credible. It is also contradicted
    by [75] where the judge suggests that  the  path  to  conversion  began
    after the dismissal of his first appeal.

14. Cumulatively, these material errors  of  fact  and  law  undermine  the
    central credibility issue as to the appellant's  Christian  conversion,
    so that it would be unsafe and unfair to allow the decision to stand.

Remittal

15. When a decision of the First-tier Tribunal has been set aside,  section
    12(2) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 requires either
    that the case is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  with  directions,
    or it must be remade by the Upper Tribunal. The scheme of the Tribunals
    Court and Enforcement Act 2007 does not assign the function of  primary
    fact finding to the Upper Tribunal. Where the facts are  unclear  on  a
    crucial issue at the heart of an appeal, as  they  are  in  this  case,
    effectively there has not been a valid determination of  those  issues.
    The errors of the First-tier Tribunal vitiate  all  other  findings  of
    fact and the conclusions from those facts so that there has not been  a
    valid determination of the issues in the appeal.

16. In all the circumstances, at the invitation and request of both parties
    to relist this appeal for a fresh hearing in the First-tier Tribunal, I
    do so on the basis that this is a case which falls squarely within  the
    Senior President's Practice Statement at paragraph 7.2. The  effect  of
    the error has been to deprive the appellant of a fair hearing and  that
    the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding  which  is  necessary
    for the decision in the appeal to  be  re-made  is  such  that,  having
    regard to the overriding objective in rule 2 to deal with cases  fairly
    and justly, including with the avoidance of delay, I find  that  it  is
    appropriate  to  remit  this  appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to
    determine the appeal afresh.

Conclusions:

17. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law such that the decision  should  be
    set aside.

     I set aside the decision.

                    I remit the appeal to be decided afresh  in  the  First-
                    tier  Tribunal   in   accordance   with   the   attached
                    directions.
     [pic]
     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

Consequential Directions

18.  The  appeal  is  remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  sitting   at
    Birmingham;

19. The appeal is to be decided afresh with no findings of fact preserved;

20. The ELH is 3 hours and the appellant indicates that 4 witnesses will be
    called;

21. The appeal may be listed before any First-tier Tribunal Judge, with the
    exception of Judge Butler;

22. An interpreter in Farsi will be required;

23. The appellant is to ensure  that  all  evidence  to  be  relied  on  is
    contained within a single consolidated, indexed and paginated bundle of
    all objective and  subjective  material,  together  with  any  skeleton
    argument and copies of all  case  authorities  to  be  relied  on.  The
    Tribunal is unlikely to accept materials submitted on the  day  of  the
    forthcoming appeal hearing in the First-tier Tribunal;

Anonymity

I have  considered  whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  any
anonymity direction. No submissions were made on the issue.  The  First-tier
Tribunal did make an anonymity order. Given the  circumstances,  I  continue
the anonymity order.

Fee Award         Note: this is not part of the determination.

In the light of my decision, I have considered whether to make a  fee  award
pursuant to section 12(4)(a) of the Tribunals, Courts  and  Enforcement  Act
2007.

I have had regard to the Joint Presidential Guidance  Note:  Fee  Awards  in
Immigration Appeals (December 2011).

I make no fee award.

Reasons: No fee is payable and thus there can be no fee award.

     [pic]
     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated

