
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12056/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Heard at Manchester    Decision & Reasons Promulgated
On 5th April 2019 On 10th May 2019


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY JUDGE UPPER TRIBUNAL FARRELLY


                                   Between

                                  MR H M S
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                          Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                          Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr M Read for Lei Dat and Baig, Solicitors (Renshaw
                    House).
For the respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Presenting Officer.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

   1. The appellant was questioned at Belfast Harbour by immigration
      officials. It transpired that she was an illegal entrant, having
      entered Northern Ireland via the unmanned land frontier with the
      Republic of Ireland. She disclosed that she was an Iraqi national of
      Kurdish ethnicity from Sulaimaniyah. She said she was travelling to
      the United Kingdom to live with her husband, a British national
      originally from Iraq.

   2. She made a claim for protection, stating she feared her elder brother.
      This was because he opposed her marriage. The claim was refused on 29
      September 2018 and her appeal was heard at Manchester on 13 November
      2018 before First-tier Tribunal Judge Raikes. In a decision
      promulgated on 21 November 2018 it was dismissed.
   3. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted on the basis
      the judge may have carried out their own research. A 2nd ground was
      that the findings as to whether or not the marriage was genuine and
      whether she will be returning with her husband to Iraq where unclear.

   4. On behalf of the appellant a bundle has been prepared for admission on
      the basis of rule 15(2)(A) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)
      Rules 2008. This consists of a statement from the appellant's husband
      and hospital letters demonstrating her pregnancy. There is also a
      Council Tax letter showing a common address. In the interests of
      justice I would admit the documents.

   5. The decision refusing the appellant's claim for protection did not
      accept that the appellant was married and in a genuine relationship.
      She claimed they married in a religious ceremony in Iraq on 21 April
      2018 and subsequently underwent a legal ceremony in Jordan on 3 May
      2018. The refusal letter states the marriage certificate produced from
      Jordan was a photocopy. At the hearing before First-tier Tribunal
      Judge Raikes it was indicated that her husband was present but would
      not be giving evidence. The judge did not accept the relationship was
      genuine.

   6. The account given by the appellant and her husband was that in 2006
      because of difficulties over telephone lines she ended up answering
      the phone and it was a wrong number from her future husband. They
      developed a rapport and following this there was ongoing contact. He
      then visited Iraq in 2011 to see family members whereupon they met in
      person. He said this was done discreetly for cultural reasons. A
      relationship developed whereby he proposed marriage which she
      accepted. He then approached her family who were in agreement save for
      her elder brother, albeit he never met her proposed husband. Later,
      her brother was imprisoned and they took the opportunity to marry. He
      states they are expecting their 1st child you on 14 July 2019.

   7. In the First-tier Tribunal the appellant provided a statement dated 1
      November 2018 wherein she states that her husband is a British
      national who has been living in the United Kingdom for over 15 years.
      She states that her elder brother had opposed their marriage because
      it would mean his wife would have to care for their mother in her
      absence. However, in November 2017 he was imprisoned and they took
      this opportunity to marry on 21 April 2018. They became fearful of his
      pending release and on 2 June 2018 left Iraq travelling through Sweden
      and Germany and into the Republic of Ireland.

   8. She states that she handed in the original marriage certificate to the
      respondent at screening interview and a copy was taken and the
      original returned to her. Her substantive interview by way of a video
      conference so she had no further chance to produce it. She states she
      still has the original marriage certificate and photographs of their
      wedding. Photographs can be seen in the bundle.

   9. The refusal letter does not accept there was a threat from her
      brother. Reliance was placed upon section 8 in consideration of her
      credibility. Even if there was a threat this could be avoided by her
      relocation within Iraq. She had a passport so there should be no
      difficulties with the practicalities of return.

  10. In suggesting First-tier Tribunal Judge Raikes carried out her own
      research reference was made to Para 6 ii of the decision which refers
      to the contents of the appellant's appeal bundle with the judge
      stating:

         "... I also, given the appellant's claim, referred myself to the
         COIS relating to Iraq: Courage honour crimes: dated of August 2017
         and also the COI's relating to Iraq: internal relocation, civil
         documentation and returns dated October 2018.

  11. Reference was also made in the application to paragraph 15 of decision
      of First-tier Tribunal Judge Raikes, where she states:

         "... I have also, given the appellant's claim, referred myself to
         other COIS reports produced in respect of Iraq including the most
         recent of those dated October 2018 relating to internal relocation,
         civil documentation and returns; also March 2017 in respect of the
         humanitarian situation, and September 2017 in respect of
         return/internal relocation relating to the security situation in
         Baghdad, the South and Kurdistan Regions of Iraq, and the situation
         in the Contested Areas."

Consideration.

  12. I find this to be a carefully prepared decision in which the judge has
      given adequate reasons for findings that were open.

  13. The claim is based upon fear of the appellant's elder brother. The
      respondent did not accept this is true. The judge has given
      sustainable reasons from paragraph 25 to 27 for rejecting this claim
      also. Notably, in the body of the judgement the judge referred to the
      fact that both sides of the appellant's family attended her wedding
      and were supportive. The only person apparently causing difficulties
      where her elder brother who had never met her husband. Furthermore,
      his grievance was because his wife would have to look after their
      mother who has a disability. However, the judge records that another
      brother has since married and his wife, in the appellant's absence, as
      caring for their mother. Furthermore, there has been no suggestion
      that her brother, apparently now released from prison, has made any
      further enquiries as to them.

  14. The refusal letter did not accept that the marriage was genuine and
      subsisting. There was evidence in the appeal bundle to the contrary.
      This included the appellant's own account; a statement from a landlord
      and a tenancy agreement and photographs of the appellant and her
      husband dressed for the wedding. The judge evaluated this evidence in
      the decision. Rather surprisingly, given that the marriage was an
      issue, the appellant's husband was in attendance but did not give
      evidence. The judge commented on this at paragraph 29.

  15. Furthermore, the judge refers to the Jordanian marriage certificate
      being a photocopy. The appellant states that she submitted the
      original at screening and photocopy was taken and the original handed
      back to her. She said she could provide the original. On the face of
      it would seem in fact the judge still only had a photocopy. There is
      nothing from the appellant's representative to indicate to the
      contrary. These are all matters of evaluation for the judge and
      reasons are given at paragraph 36 sustainable. The matter is evaluated
      in detail from paragraph 29 to 32.

  16. The appellant has now produced documentation to show she is pregnant.
      There is also a Council Tax bill further to rule 15 (2)(A). This
      evidence of course was not before the judge. The evidence that she is
      now pregnant is important but in the absence of DNA testing is not
      definitive. The baby is due to be born in July. Furthermore, the issue
      is not what I would have concluded on the evidence presented but
      whether the judge's conclusion was sustainable. In my view it was.

  17. The judge considered the practicalities of return. She has a passport.
      She has supportive family members in Iraq as does her husband. All of
      them could help with her I think the necessary documentation. The
      evidence recorded was that he returns at last annually. The relevant
      case law was considered. Consequently, I see no issues arising in
      respect of documentation.

  18. It is suggested the judge did not make a clear finding in whether the
      appellant would be returning alone. This was particularly relevant to
      the consideration of relocation. At para 51 onwards the judge
      considers matters in the alternative. On the basis she had not
      demonstrated the marriage was genuine and subsisting then she would be
      returning on her own. However the judge had discounted the threat from
      her brother and therefore she would have the support of her family. In
      the alternative, if the marriage was genuine and subsisting she would
      not be returning as a lone female. On this premise her husband is
      faced with the choice of either joining or not. The judge sets this
      out at paragraph 51 onwards.

  19. The final issue I would deal with is whether the judge has carried out
      independent research and not afforded the appellant and her
      representative an opportunity to comment. Mr Read did not appear in
      the First-tier Tribunal. Mr McVeety has considered the presenting
      officer's preparation notes for the hearing and is of the view that
      the judge did not carry out any independent research that would
      materially. Rather, the reports referred to were either mentioned in
      the documents or at hearing. Other aspects of country information were
      not particularly relevant as they dealt with other parts of the
      country or where historical.

  20. I do not find it established that the judge carried out their own
      enquiries. I find the references at para 6(ii) and at para 15 the
      reference `I have also ... Referred myself to other COIS Reports'
      would appear to be a turn of phrase rather than evidence of
      independent research. A similar expression can be seen at paragraph
      23.

  21. In conclusion I do not find a material error of law established in the
      decision.

Decision

No material error of law has been established. Consequently, the decision
of First-tier Tribunal Judge Raikes dismissing the appeal shall stand.


Francis J Farrelly
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge.

