
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12543/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 25th September 2018               |On 18th January 2019                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KELLY


                                   Between

                                    [T N]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Dingley, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. In a decision promulgated on the 10th October 2018, I held that  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Bradshaw had erred in law by dismissing the  appeal
    against refusal of the appellant's Protection Claim without  adequately
    explaining why the appellant would not  be  at  risk  from  her  former
    trafficker (to whom she was still heavily indebted) even if she were to
    relocate to a different part of Vietnam. More specifically, I held that
    the judge had failed to deal with the question of whether there  was  a
    real risk that the trafficker would be able to  trace  her  whereabouts
    through the Vietnamese 'Ho Khau' registration system. Having made  that
    decision, I concluded that it was necessary to  hear  further  argument
    and (if the parties wished, further evidence) concerning the  issue  of
    the feasibility of relocation.

 2. I previously noted  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  make  an
    anonymity direction and I thus concluded that little purpose  would  be
    achieved by making one now.

The Primary Facts

 3. The accepted facts are as follows. In October 2004, at the  age  of  23
    years, the appellant married a builder ('[VT]) with whom she had a  son
    ('[VB]) who was born in 2006. She left her husband in 2012 due  to  his
    drinking and infidelity and went with her son to live with her  widowed
    mother. When it  became  clear  that  there  was  no  prospect  of  the
    appellant becoming reconciled with  her  husband,  she  began  to  make
    enquiries about working abroad. A local man ('Cuong') agreed to arrange
    for her to obtain work with an electrical company in Iraq for a fee  of
    90,000 Dong. Having paid the fee with borrowed money, she flew to  Iraq
    in August 2014. She was met at the airport and taken to  a  room  where
    she fell asleep. Upon awakening, a woman called 'Hien'  told  her  that
    there was no electrical company and that she would now be  expected  to
    offer the services of  a  prostitute.  However,  the  other  women  had
    already planned their escape and so, whilst the  'boss'  was  drunk  in
    celebration of his birthday, the appellant  ran  away  with  the  other
    women. They travelled overland by lorry for a period of 4 months before
    crossing by ferry to the UK. The appellant became separated  from  Hien
    on arrival. She thereafter met a Vietnamese man called '[LT]' who  took
    her back to his shared accommodation in London where he tried  to  find
    her employment without success. When in March 2015 she  told  him  that
    she suspected she was  pregnant  with  his  child,  he  abandoned  her.
    However, a woman ('[Q]') who resided in the next room arranged for  her
    to work for a family in Leeds in return for 20 per cent of  her  wages.
    However, when [Q] telephoned the family to say that the  appellant  had
    confirmed that she was pregnant, they stated that they no longer wished
    to employ her. [Q] therefore abandoned her at  Leeds  Railway  Station,
    where she was later taken in by another Vietnamese woman  ('[V]').  [V]
    and the appellant's midwife referred her to a  charitable  organisation
    that in turn referred her to a lawyer with the result that she  claimed
    asylum on the 23rd June 2015.

 4. The appellant gave birth to a boy ('[K]') on the 12th October 2015. Her
    elder son ([VB]) is now aged 12 years and lives  with  his  grandmother
    (the appellant's mother) in Vietnam. She fears that on return she  will
    be forced by Cuong into prostitution or domestic servitude with a  view
    to repaying the debt she owes him for arranging her travel to  Iraq  in
    August 2014.

The rival submissions

 5. Mrs Pettersen  drew  attention  to  the  fact  that  it  had  been  the
    appellant's own evidence that Cuong had not pursued the matter with the
    appellant's mother after she had told him that she  did  not  have  the
    money to repay her daughter's debt.  Mrs  Pettersen  argued  that  this
    suggested that Cuong would not be  strongly  motivated  to  pursue  the
    appellant for repayment should she return to Vietnam and relocate  away
    from her home area. Moreover, the appellant's elder son ([VB]) would be
    able to visit  his  mother  elsewhere  in  Vietnam  without  having  to
    register  his  temporary  residence  during  his   absence   from   his
    grandmother's home. It is not therefore reasonably  likely  that  Coung
    would devote the necessary resources (by way of the payment of  bribes)
    to trace the appellant through the Ho Kua  registration  system  simply
    because he had noticed the temporary absence  of  the  appellant's  son
    from the village. Moreover, whilst the evidence suggests that it is due
    to be replaced with an online national database in  2020,  the  current
    system of registration is with the village or provincial  administrator
    and is recorded in a  "household  registration  book"  [see  the  CPIN,
    "Vietnam: Victims of Trafficking", at 9.2.1]. It is thus  difficult  to
    see how Cuong would be able to  trace  the  appellant  without  a  pre-
    existing lead as to her general whereabouts.

 6. Mr Dingley submitted that the concept of debt bondage  related  to  the
    debtor rather than to family  members.  Accordingly,  the  trafficker's
    apparent indifference to pursuing the appellant's mother for  repayment
    was without  significance,  and  it  was  reasonably  likely  that  his
    interest in pursuing the debt would be reignited upon  the  appellant's
    return to Vietnam. In answer to the argument  that,  as  a  local  man,
    Cuong would be unaware of the appellant's  return,  Mr  Dingley  argued
    that he would be alerted to this fact by  her  elder  son  leaving  his
    grandmother's house in to join  his  mother  in  a  different  part  of
    Vietnam rather than merely to pay her a visit. Thus, even if he did not
    do so immediately, Cuong would be bound to notice [VB]'s absence sooner
    or later and take steps to trace her. The appellant would be  bound  to
    register her whereabouts to ensure her own survival  and  that  of  her
    children.  Professor  Christoph  Bluth  reports   that   "the   endemic
    corruption means it is common for loan sharks,  traffickers  and  other
    criminals to track their targets using household  registration  system"
    [paragraph 5.3.11 of his report].

Discussion

 7. For the  reasons  summarised  at  paragraph  4  (above),  I  accept  Ms
    Pettersen's argument  that  the  evidence  suggests  the  risk  to  the
    appellant from Cuong is more theoretical than real. Although  Professor
    Bluth refers to traffickers  using  "posters"  and  "social  media"  to
    locate  their  victims,  his  opinion  that  the  risk  from  Cuong  is
    "substantial"  is  nevertheless  based  upon  the  premise  that   "the
    government has ensured that  any  person  inside  the  country  can  be
    located" [5.3.18]. However, the  evidence  contained  within  the  CPIN
    (above) suggests that the purpose of the Ho Kua registration system  is
    to ensure an appropriate allocation of resources  for  public  services
    rather than the provision of  a  centralised  means  for  tracking  the
    movements of particular individuals.  Whilst I accept Professor Bluth's
    view that "traffickers are able to bribe the  appropriate  authorities"
    to obtain information, this appears to presuppose that  the  trafficker
    is already armed with sufficient information  concerning  the  victim's
    general whereabouts so as to enable him to  identify  the  'appropriate
    authority' in question. I am not  therefore  satisfied  that  Professor
    Bluth has sufficiently explained the mechanism whereby Cuong  would  be
    able to utilise the Ho Kua registration system to trace  the  appellant
    upon her relocation to a different area of Vietnam.

 8. I am nevertheless satisfied, at a more general level, that it would  be
    unduly harsh to expect the appellant to relocate within  Vietnam.  This
    is  because  I  accept  Professor  Bluth's  view  that  victims  of   a
    trafficking are  a  vulnerable  group  that  typically  lack  financial
    resources, significant professional skills, or a  family  network.  The
    appellant fits this profile save for the fact that she  has  a  widowed
    mother whose whereabouts are known to both her husband and  Cuong.  Her
    lack of financial resources, combined with  the  fact  that  she  is  a
    single parent with a young child, means she would in  my  judgement  be
    peculiarly susceptible to falling prey to organised crime, loan sharks,
    and migration brokers, and thus to the risk  of  further  exploitation.
    She would also lack the local knowledge  that  would  be  necessary  to
    navigate the perils of such a hostile environment [5.3.8 to 5.3.10, and
    5.3.19 of his report]. I have therefore concluded that, on this  basis,
    the appellant would be at risk of exploitation on return and that  that
    risk would extend throughout the whole territory of Vietnam.

Notice of Decision

    Having already set aside the decision to dismiss the appellant's appeal
    against refusal of her Protection Claim, I now substitute a decision to
    allow that appeal on the ground that her removal would be  contrary  to
    the obligations of the United Kingdom under the Refugee Convention.

Anonymity is not directed.


Signed                              Date: 10th January 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Kelly
