
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12931/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 14 March 2019                     |On 26 March 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

                                     g e
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Shea, Iris Law Firm (Gateshead)
For the Respondent:    Ms A Holmes, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge A J Blake promulgated on 23 August 2017  dismissing
    his appeal against the Secretary  of  State's  decision  to  refuse  to
    revoke a deportation order and to refuse his human rights claim.

 2. I have made an anonymity order as the appellant has made a claim to  be
    a victim of trafficking into the United Kingdom which was  subsequently
    considered by the Competent Authority. Under  section  2  (db)  of  the
    Sexual Offences Amendment Act 1992, a person who has made an allegation
    that he or she has been trafficked contrary to section 2 of the  Modern
    Slavery Act 2015 is entitled to the  same  life-long  anonymity  as  an
    alleged victim of a sexual offence.

 3. The appellant's case is that he is at risk on  return  to  Ghana  as  a
    former victim of trafficking and that  accordingly  his  appeal  should
    have been allowed.  It is, I think, important to note that there  is  a
    dispute over the appellant's birth, the initial recording of  his  date
    of birth being 17 November 1989.  He now states that the  correct  date
    of birth is 17 November 1996. It might be thought surprising  that  the
    Refugee Legal Centre which assisted him in 2008 did not appear to think
    he was a minor, or that he was later able while  a  young  teenager  to
    travel to Ghana to look for family.

 4. There is a long and detailed procedural history to this case which I do
    not find necessary to set out in this decision.  It  is  sufficient  to
    record that there have been two assessments by the Competent  Authority
    of the appellant, roughly a year apart which appear in the consolidated
    bundle prepared for this hearing.  What the judge did in this  case  is
    to note that this has been done at paragraph 66 and thereon  considered
    that the reasoning set  out  in  the  rejection  letter  had  not  been
    addressed by any of the evidence produced by the appellant  before  me.
    He did take a note of the report produced  by  an  independent  expert,
    Miss Flint, and also the other medical  evidence  indicating  PTSD  and
    concluded at paragraph 68:-

         "On an analysis of the decisions of the Competent Authority  I  did
         not find anything within them that would render them  perverse.   I
         found that the reasoning set out in them  was  sustainable  on  the
         facts as I had found them."

 5. This to an extent echoes the reasoning of the Court of  Appeal,  though
    it predates it, in MS.  The difficulty in this analysis by the judge is
    twofold: first, it neglects to observe that the findings reached by the
    Competent  Authority  are  reached  on  the  basis  of  a  balance   of
    probabilities.  The existence of the report and the findings of it does
    not absolve a judge from making findings of his own in respect  of  the
    asylum claim in its entirety.  To that extent this is explained by  the
    Tribunal in the reported decision in ES [2018] UKUT 35 which the  judge
    appears not to have followed.  The second paragraph of the head note in
    that case states:-

         "The correct approach to determining whether a person  claiming  to
         be a victim of trafficking is entitled to asylum is to consider all
         the evidence in the round as at the date of  hearing  applying  the
         lower standard of proof".

    I conclude that that is not what the judge did.  What the judge did  in
    this case is to in effect adopt the findings of the NRM and  whilst  he
    did make other findings with regard to health and does set out in  some
    detail at paragraphs 47 to 63 some findings of fact, what he  does  not
    do is make any of his own findings as to the reliability  or  otherwise
    of the testimony of the appellant  that  he  had  been  the  victim  of
    trafficking and would be at risk on return as a result.

 6. Accordingly, I am satisfied that the decision involved the making of an
    error of law and in light of the fact that the  core  of  the  findings
    reached by the judge must be set aside (that is  the  entirety  of  the
    findings which are relevant to the issue of whether the appellant is at
    risk on return), I conclude that it would be appropriate in  mind  with
    the Presidential Guidance  to  remit  this  appeal  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for a fresh hearing on all issues.

    Notice of Decision

 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law.

 2. Given that the findings of fact  reached  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    cannot stand, and that the  appeal  will  need  to  be  remade  in  its
    entirety, as well  as  the  lapse  in  time,  I  conclude  that  it  is
    appropriate to remit the it to the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  fresh
    determination on all issues.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him.  This direction applies both to the  appellant  and
to the respondent.  Failure to comply with  this  direction  could  lead  to
contempt of court proceedings.



Signed                                  Date 20 March 2019
[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul






