







Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number:  PA/12525/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 16th September 2019               |On 20th September 2019               |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

                                  KHAIR [M]
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARy OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Howard, Fountain Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Howells, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan.  He appeals against the
    decision of First-tier Tribunal ("FtT") Judge Smith ("the judge")
    promulgated on 11th January 2019, dismissing his appeal against a
    decision by the respondent dated 16th October 2018 to refuse his claim
    for international protection and dismissing his appeal on Article 8
    grounds.


 2. The background to the appellant's claim for international protection is
    summarised at paragraphs [6] to [12] of the decision of the FtT. The
    judge found the appellant to be an unhelpful witness.  At paragraph
    [25] of the decision, the judge considered the core of the appellant's
    claim that he was an informant for his maternal uncle.  Having
    considered the photographs in the appellant's bundle that show the
    appellant dressed in uniform, the judge concluded at paragraph [25] as
    follows:


         "... In his screening interview the appellant was asked (q.51) if
         he had been a member of the security services and he said "No". The
         photographs clearly depict a person who was dressed in a uniform
         with a rifle and whilst the appellant claims he liked dressing up
         it happens that the five separate photographs shows (sic) him in
         well-fitting cloths (sic).  Having listened to the appellant's
         account I am satisfied that he has been untruthful. The
         overwhelming impression of the photographs is then (sic) he was a
         member of the security services, a fact that he accepted in his
         witness statement which he adopted as his evidence and confirmed it
         was true but denied when first seen."


 3. The judge noted at [26], that the finding made at [25] undermines the
    appellant's account that he was an informant whilst living on his
    father's farm living in a relatively small village with almost daily
    contact with the Taliban. The judge found, at [32], that the appellant
    is of no interest to the Taliban, and therefore has no reason to fear
    returning to his home area where he has family who will provide him
    with support and in the alternative, he can return to Kabul.  The judge
    went on to consider, at [33] to [39] the risk upon return, and having
    rejected the account of events relied upon by the appellant as
    incredible and untruthful, found that the appellant will not be at risk
    upon return to Afghanistan.


 4. The judge considered the appellant's article 8 claim at paragraphs [44]
    to [46] of the decision.  The judge heard evidence from the appellant's
    partner who confirmed that she is in a relationship with the appellant,
    that she regards as enduring, even though they do not live together.
    The judge noted that the appellant's partner became distraught when she
    was asked if she would return to Afghanistan with the appellant. The
    judge noted "... It was remarkable to note that the appellant did not
    show a flicker of concern during [his partner's] distress".  The judge
    recorded the evidence of the appellant's partner that she would go to
    Afghanistan if she could be safe there, but her understanding is that
    it is not a safe country so she would be reluctant to put herself at
    risk. The judge was in no doubt that the appellant's partner is
    genuinely fond of the appellant, but noted that it is unclear whether
    the feelings are reciprocated.  At paragraph [46], the judge considered
    the article 8 claim outside the immigration rules and in the end,
    concluded as follows:


         "... I have assessed the relationship and the difficulties that Ms
         [B] has encountered mostly because of her family's insistence that
         she return to Pakistan at the age of 14 to marry. Whether or not
         the appellant is in the UK Ms [B] will require help because of that
         and I have little doubt that the appellant's removal will cause
         upset. There is no evidence that Ms [B] will suffer further harm if
         the appellant is removed. I have considered whether it would be
         disproportionate to remove the appellant who is an untruthful
         economic migrant because of his relationship with Ms [B]. Having
         considered all the evidence before me and the public interest and
         the fact that if need be Ms [B] would return to Afghanistan if she
         were safe then (sic).  I am satisfied it is not disproportionate to
         remove this appellant from the UK."


The appeal before me


 5. The appellant advances a number of grounds of appeal.  Permission to
    appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Keane on 18th February
    2019. The matter comes before me to consider whether or not the
    decision of FtT Judge Smith involved the making of a material error of
    law, and if the decision is set aside, to re-make the decision.


 6. At the conclusion of the hearing before me, I informed the parties that
    in my judgement, the decision of Judge Smith to dismiss the appeal on
    international protection grounds is infected by a material error of law
    and to that end, the decision should be set aside.  I indicated to the
    parties that I would preserve the finding at paragraph [25] of the
    decision, that the appellant is a member of the security service, and
    that I do not consider there to be any merit in the appeal against the
    decision of FtT Judge Smith to dismiss the appeal on Article 8 grounds.
     I said that I would remit the matter for rehearing before the FtT.  I
    said that I would give full reasons for my decision in writing.  This I
    now do.


 7. I should like to make it clear that on reflection, and after a careful
    reading of the decision of Judge Smith, it is in my judgement
    inappropriate to preserve the finding made at paragraph [25] of the
    decision, or to dismiss the appellant's appeal before me, against the
    decision of FtT Judge Smith to dismiss the appeal on Article 8 grounds.




 8. I take that view because in my judgement, it is far from clear,
    precisely what finding is made by the judge in the final sentence at
    paragraph [25] of the decision.  The judge states that "... The
    overwhelming impression of the photographs is then (sic) he was a
    member of the security services, a fact that he accepted in his witness
    statement ...".  The judge proceeds upon the basis that the
    overwhelming impression of the photographs is that the appellant was a
    member of the security services, but that is not to say that the judge
    found that the appellant was a member of the security services.
    Furthermore, the judge appears to proceed upon the basis that the
    appellant accepted in his witness statement that he adopted as his
    evidence, that he was a member of the security services.  I was not
    taken to the appellant's witness statement during the hearing of the
    appeal before me, but I have noted that at paragraph 4 of his witness
    statement dated 30th October 2018, the appellant referred to his
    maternal uncle who he claimed worked on behalf of the government as a
    commander of the Afghanistan army. His evidence as set out in the
    witness statement was that "He always used to fight against the Taliban
    and Daesh and would tell me often that I should also get recruited into
    the army and fight and protect our people. My uncle managed to have me
    enrolled into the army using his contacts and I took part in the army
    too ... ". The appellant's evidence as set out in the witness statement
    was not that he was a member of the security services. His evidence was
    that his uncle managed to have him enrolled into the army using his
    contacts. His role in the army does not appear to have been explored.
    It would in my judgement be inappropriate to preserve a finding, that
    does not properly reflect the evidence.


 9. Upon reflection, it also appears that the article 8 claim is
    inextricably linked to the appellant's international protection claim.
    In the final analysis, at [46], the Judge found that, if need be, Ms
    [B] would return to Afghanistan if she were safe there. The question
    whether or not she would be safe in Afghanistan, is inextricably linked
    to the question as to whether the appellant would be at risk upon
    return.


10. I had informed the parties that the matter is to be remitted for the
    FtT to determine the risk upon return. In my judgement, the appropriate
    course is for the matter to be remitted to the FtT for re-hearing de
    novo.


Discussion


11. The appellant claims that having found that the appellant was a member
    of the Afghan security services, the FtT Judge failed to assess the
    risk from the Taliban that the appellant would be exposed to, should he
    return to Afghanistan, as a member of the armed forces.  On behalf of
    the appellant Mr Howard submits that the appellant would be at risk as
    an individual who is associated with, or who is perceived to be
    supporting the Afghan government, and pro-government armed forces.


12. On behalf of the respondent, Mr Howells concedes that the judge did not
    consider whether the appellant is at risk upon return as a former
    member of the Afghan army and that discloses a material error of law in
    the decision of the judge.  He accepts that having found that the
    appellant was a member of the Afghan army, the judge should have
    carried out an assessment of whether the Taliban is prominent in the
    appellant's home area, and if they are, whether it would be unduly
    harsh for the appellant to internally relocate.


13. As to the Article 8 claim, Mr Howard submits that the judge erred in
    taking into account the appellant's reaction to the way in which his
    partner gave evidence.  That may have been for cultural reasons, and it
    does not follow that the appellant is not as fond of Ms [B], as she
    appear to be of him.  Furthermore, he submits that in reaching the
    decision on the Article 8 claim, the judge unreasonably criticises the
    appellant for having given evidence through a court interpreter, when
    considering the public interest considerations under s117B of the 2002
    Act.  He submits that the appellant was entitled to give his evidence
    with the assistance of the interpreter, and it does not necessarily
    follow that the appellant is unable to speak English.  Finally, Mr
    Howard submits that the Judge failed to adopt the five-stage approach
    established in Razgar.


14. The judge noted, at [44], that the appellant did not show a flicker of
    concern when Ms [B] was distressed giving her evidence. The judge found
    that Ms [B] is genuinely fond of the appellant but noted that it is
    "... unclear whether the feelings were reciprocated ...".  If the judge
    had gone on to find that there was no genuine relationship between the
    appellant and Ms [B], I have no doubt that the criticism made would be
    material. However, here, at paragraph [46], the judge appears to
    proceed upon the premise that there is a genuine relationship and that
    Article 8 is engaged, although the judge does not expressly state that
    she finds there to be a family life between the appellant and his
    partner.  There can be no doubt that in the assessment of
    proportionality, the judge was required to have regard to the public
    interest considerations set out in s117B of the 2002 Act.  As Mr Howard
    accepts, even if the appellant were able to speak the English language,
    that would, at its highest, be a neutral factor.  At paragraphs [45]
    and [46], the judge considered the Article 8 rights of the appellant
    and Ms [B] and in the end, concluded that it would not be
    disproportionate to remove the appellant from the UK. On its own, there
    would in my judgement be no proper basis upon which it can be said that
    the decision is not one that was open to the Judge on the evidence.
    However, as I have said, the question whether Ms [B] would be safe in
    Afghanistan, is inextricably linked to the question whether the
    appellant would be at risk upon return. It is in all the circumstances
    entirely appropriate that the assessment of proportionality is
    undertaken in light of the findings that the tribunal makes regarding
    the risk upon return.


DECISION


15. The appeal is allowed, and the decision of FtT Judge E M M Smith is set
    aside


16. The appeal is remitted for rehearing before the FtT de novo, with no
    findings preserved.


17. No anonymity direction was made by the FtT.


Signed                                  Date          16th September 2019

 Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia

