

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12273/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Birmingham                  |Decision & Reasons  Promulgated      |
|On 29th August 2017                   |On 30th August 2017                  |
|                                      |                                     |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER

                                   Between


                                     EC
                         (Anonymity direction made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
   (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal  or  a
   Court directs otherwise, no report of these proceedings or  any  form  of
   publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  the  original
   Appellant/parties in this determination identified as EC. This  direction
   applies to, amongst others, all parties. Any failure to comply with  this
   direction could give rise to contempt of court proceedings





   1. For the reasons below I found an error of law in the decision  of  the
      First-tier Tribunal and set aside the decision. I made directions that
      I would determine the outcome of  the  appeal  on  the  basis  of  the
      evidence before me and any written submissions made by 20th July 2017.
      The appellant's solicitors made written submissions under cover  of  a
      letter dated 18th July 2017. I did not receive any written submissions
      from the respondent.




                  "1.  The appellant was granted permission to appeal on the
                  grounds that it was arguable that the First-tier  Tribunal
                  judge had firstly failed to make a decision on whether the
                  appellant was entitled to international  protection  under
                  the Refugee Convention and secondly that as a member of  a
                  particular social group (PSG) her appeal should have  been
                  allowed on asylum grounds.


                  2.    The  First-tier  Tribunal  judge,  in   a   decision
                  promulgated on 6th January 2017, found the appellant to be
                  entitled to humanitarian protection.  The  respondent  did
                  not seek  permission  to  appeal  that  decision  and  the
                  appellant has been granted limited leave to remain in  the
                  UK pursuant to that judgment.


                  3.   The core of the  appellant's  claim  for  protection,
                  which was found to  be  credible,  was  that  she  was  at
                  serious risk of sustaining serious harm  from  her  former
                  husband and his cousins and that she had suffered  serious
                  abuse/harm and been forced into prostitution in the  past.
                  The judge also found that it was reasonably likely the ex-
                  husband would treat his two daughters in the same  way  in
                  the future.


                  4.   The issue before me was the narrow issue,  given  the
                  findings of  the  judge  with  regards  to  serious  harm,
                  serious risk  of  future  harm,  lack  of  sufficiency  of
                  protection  and   lack   of   availability   of   internal
                  relocation, of  whether  the  judge  should  have  made  a
                  finding that the appellant is a  member  of  a  Particular
                  Social  Group  (PSG).  It  is  plain,  and  neither  party
                  dissented from this, that if she is a  member  of  a  PSG,
                  then she should be recognised as a refugee.


                  5.   Ms Aboni acknowledged the judge had made no  findings
                  in regard to the appellant's membership or otherwise of  a
                  PSG and this amounted to an error of law;  the  judge  had
                  been made aware there was an application  for  asylum  and
                  her grounds of appeal had included that she was a refugee.
                  Nevertheless, Ms Aboni submitted the appellant was  not  a
                  member of a PSG and therefore an error by  the  First-tier
                  Tribunal judge in failing to reach findings on  the  issue
                  of PSG was irrelevant, the error being immaterial.


                  6.   In determining the materiality of the error of law  I
                  have examined the three possible PSGs mooted by Mr Howard.


                  7.   The three possible PSGs identified by Mr Howard are:


                  (1)  Former victims of trafficking
                  (2)  Single female with dependant children
                  (3)  Family, possibly female member of family.


                  Former victims of trafficking.


                  8.   Ms Aboni submitted that the appellant  had  not  been
                  found to have been trafficked. She was not a former victim
                  of trafficking and could not fall within such a PSG.


                  9.   The appellant claimed, and it is recorded as such  in
                  the First-tier Tribunal decision, that she was a victim of
                  trafficking. The grounds of her appeal to  the  First-tier
                  Tribunal include that she feared re-trafficking.


                  10.  The First-tier Tribunal judge found the appellant, in
                  general terms, to be  credible,  plausible  and  that  her
                  evidence had been consistent over time.  He  accepted  her
                  evidence as truthful and that her witness  statements  and
                  interviews could be considered as his  findings  of  fact.
                  Although it would have been  of  more  assistance  to  the
                  parties and to the Tribunal  if  the  First-tier  Tribunal
                  judge had set out in full his findings of fact, the First-
                  tier Tribunal judge has found that she has a fear of being
                  re-trafficked and that she  has  been  trafficked  in  the
                  past.  He  refers,  in  his  decision,  to  the  Competent
                  Authority decision that she was not  a  victim  of  modern
                  slavery and so was  aware  of  the  respondent's  view  in
                  reaching  his  conclusions  as  to  the  veracity  of  her
                  account.


                  11.  Ms Aboni did not address this  other  than  to  state
                  there had been no finding of fact to that effect.


                  12.  I am satisfied that on the basis of the  findings  of
                  the judge, the appellant does fall within a PSG of  former
                  victims of trafficking. But  the  judge  did  not  make  a
                  finding  whether  she  was,  as   a   former   victim   of
                  trafficking, at  risk  of  re-trafficking.  There  was  no
                  analysis by the judge of the risk faced by a former victim
                  of trafficking. Although the respondent had considered the
                  Country Guidance cases of AM  and  BM  (Trafficked  women)
                  Albania  CG  [2010  UKUT  00080  (IAC)  and  TD   and   AD
                  (Trafficked women) CG [2016] UKUT 00092 (IAC),  the  judge
                  did not engage with these cases or the submission she  was
                  a member of a PSG.




                  Single female with dependant children


                  13.   Mr  Howard  relied  upon  the   general   level   of
                  discrimination within Albania as the formulation for  such
                  a PSG.  He did not elaborate upon this other than to refer
                  me to the background material. This group is  diffuse  and
                  general. On the basis of the evidence before me I was  not
                  satisfied that it could reasonably be said that she  falls
                  within such a PSG. Thus although the  First-tier  Tribunal
                  judge erred in not making a finding on this, the error was
                  not material.


                  Family member; possibly female member of a family.


                  14.  It is widely accepted that the family is the  natural
                  and fundamental unit  of  society  which  is  entitled  to
                  protection by society and the state; "As a rule,  whenever
                  there is an indication that the status or  activity  of  a
                  claimant's relative is the basis for an  applicant's  risk
                  of being persecuted, a claim grounded in family background
                  is properly receivable under the social group category"  -
                  see Hathaway p445/6. In general the essence of this PSG is
                  that the risk is from some external force.  Hathaway  does
                  however refer to an emerging PSG where in  some  instances
                  an applicant's well founded fear of  being  persecuted  is
                  for reasons of family membership. Hathaway cites the  case
                  of a young Mexican girl's fear of  her  father  where  the
                  undisputed evidence was that  the  father's  goal  was  to
                  persecute and dominate members  of  his  immediate  family
                  (Aguirre-Cervantes v Immigration and  Nationality  Service
                  (2001) 242 F.3d 1169 (USCA,  9th  Cir.,  Mar  21,  2001)).
                  Hathaway also  cites  Gomez-Romero  v  Holder  (2012)  475
                  Fed.Appx.621 (USCA, 6th Cir., Apr.13,2012) which concluded
                  the opposite. It is also possible that in these cases  the
                  claims can be analysed in terms of the  particular  social
                  group of children rather than family.


                  15.  I heard no detailed argument  from  either  party  on
                  this. I asked Mr Howard how,  given  that  this  appellant
                  fears persecution from family members rather than from  an
                  external force, she could fall within the PSG  of  family.
                  Mr Howard acknowledged there were some difficulties in his
                  approach but reiterated that the appellant was entitled to
                  be given reasons why she had not succeeded in  her  appeal
                  on asylum grounds.


                  16.  Having considered Hathaway, which  I  can  assume  is
                  within the knowledge of both parties, and  given  that  no
                  specific submissions were made in the context of  the  two
                  cases he refers to, and the acknowledgement by  Mr  Howard
                  that there were some difficulties,  I  am  satisfied  that
                  this appellant does not fall  within  the  PSG  of  family
                  group. Her fear of being  persecuted  stems  from  and  is
                  within her family group.


                  Conclusion


                  17.  The First-tier Tribunal judge erred in law in failing
                  to make a finding whether the appellant was a  refugee,  a
                  claim she pursued in her appeal. This is a material  error
                  of law in so far as her membership  of  a  PSG  of  former
                  trafficked women is concerned.


                  18.   There have been no findings by the judge whether she
                  is at risk of being persecuted because of that membership.
                  There is thus a material error of law in the  decision  of
                  the First-tier Tribunal."








   2. The submissions from the appellant's solicitors are  not  particularly
      helpful. Firstly, they seek to re-argue that the appellant is a member
      of a particular social group namely "family". I have concluded in  the
      Error of Law decision that she is not. Any challenge to that  decision
      should be brought by way of an appeal to the Court of appeal.


   3. Secondly, the submissions confuse protection generally and  protection
      under the Refugee Convention. I have already found that the  appellant
      is a member of a PSG namely former trafficked women. There is and  was
      no need for the submissions to address that point.


   4. Thirdly, the submissions  argue  that  the  appellant  should  in  the
      alternative be granted Article 3 (i.e. humanitarian)  protection.  She
      has already been granted that, having succeeded on that ground  before
      the First-tier Tribunal and the respondent  has  not  challenged  that
      finding.


   5. Fourthly, the submissions assert that it would be unduly harsh for the
      appellant to internally relocate. Again, that is a  finding  that  was
      made by the First-tier Tribunal and not challenged by the respondent.


   6. The submissions do not address the issue of whether the  appellant  is
      at risk of being persecuted because of her membership of  the  PSG  of
      former trafficked women. I  have  therefore  considered  the  evidence
      before me, unassisted by either representative.


   7. The findings of the First-tier Tribunal included  that  the  appellant
      had been forced into prostitution by her ex-husband  and  his  family,
      that he had traced her  when  she  escaped  and  that  despite  having
      another relationship he continued to seek to control her and  threaten
      to "sell" her children. Although, as I have  said  earlier,  it  would
      have been of more assistance had the First-tier Tribunal judge set out
      his specific findings, he does find her  credible  and  there  was  no
      challenge to his conclusions.


   8. In the light of the credibility findings made as to her evidence I  am
      satisfied that if she were to return to Albania she would be  at  risk
      of being persecuted because of her membership of a PSG, namely  former
      trafficked women. I am satisfied that the abuse that she  would  be  a
      serious  risk  of  sustaining  would  be  because  of   her   personal
      circumstances and the abusive relationship between  her  and  her  ex-
      husband which had led to her being trafficked in the past.




                  Conclusions:

             The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did
             involve the making of an error on a point of law.

              I set aside the decision

              I re-make the  decision  in  the  appeal  by  allowing  it  on
refugee grounds.


             Anonymity


             The  First-tier  Tribunal  made  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
             45(4)(i) of the Asylum and  Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)
             Rules 2005.


             I continue that order (pursuant to rule  14  of  the  Tribunal
             Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).

                                    Date 29th August 2017
[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
