
                                [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12488/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard remotely via video (Skype for Business)|Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|                                             |                              |
|                                             |                              |
|On 12 March 2021                             |                              |
|                                             |                              |
|                                             |On 23 March 2021              |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE blum


                                   Between

                                    P S A
                         (anonymity direction MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr H Sing, solicitor of Twinwood Law Practice Ltd
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. This decision follows a remote hearing in respect  of  which  there
         has been no objection by the parties. The form of  remote  hearing
         was by video (V), the platform was Skype for Business. A  face  to
         face hearing was not held because it was not  practicable  and  all
         issues could be determined in a remote hearing.
      2. This is a remade decision following the identification of  material
         legal errors in the decision of Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
         Paul,  promulgated  on  10  February  2020,   who   dismissed   the
         appellant's appeal  against  the  respondent's  decision  dated  13
         December 2019 to refuse his protection and human rights claim.  The
         'error of law' decision, promulgated on 1 October 2020, was made by
         Upper Tribunal Judge Finch without a hearing pursuant to rule 34 of
         the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.


      3. The grant of  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  was
         restricted to the issue whether  Judge  Paul  fell  into  error  by
         failing  to  consider  the  appellant's  private  life  under   the
         Immigration Rules with regard to whether he had  lived  in  the  UK
         continuously for at least 20 years. The  respondent  accepted  that
         Judge Paul failed to consider and make a  finding  in  relation  to
         paragraph 276ADE(1) of the Immigration Rules and in respect of  the
         private life the appellant had established in the UK.  Judge  Finch
         found that Judge Paul failed to make any clear findings as  to  the
         appellant's claim to have resided in the UK for more than 20  years
         or to consider whether this entitled him to leave within or outside
         the Immigration Rules.

      4. Judge Finch set aside the decision of Judge Paul, but it  is  clear
         from her decision, read as a whole, that this was only  in  respect
         of the appellant's Article 8  private  life  claim.  There  was  no
         application for permission to challenge Judge Paul's  finding  that
         the appellant would not be persecuted in India on  account  of  any
         historic pro-Khalistan activities. Nor has there been any challenge
         to Judge Paul's finding that the refusal of the  appellant's  human
         rights  claim  did  not  disproportionately  interfere   with   the
         appellant's  relationship  with  AM,  a  Romanian  national.  Those
         unchallenged findings are maintained.

Background

      5. The appellant is a national of India,  born  on  15  May  1975.  He
         claims to have arrived in the UK clandestinely in July  1998.  This
         claim is not accepted by the respondent. According to  the  Reasons
         for Refusal Letter the appellant applied for Leave To Remain  (LTR)
         on 29 October 2012 on Article 8 ECHR grounds. This application  was
         refused on 4 November 2013. On 24 June 2014 the  appellant  applied
         for LTR on the basis of his private/family life.  This  application
         was refused on 4 September 2014. On  1  April  2019  the  appellant
         attended the Asylum Intake Unit (AIU) and lodged his  asylum  claim
         on 10 April 2019.


      6. The respondent indicated in her Reasons for Refusal  Letter  of  13
         December 2019 that she was  not  satisfied  the  appellant  gave  a
         credible account of the activities he claimed would expose him to a
         real risk of persecution in India. Nor was the respondent satisfied
         the appellant had produced any independent evidence (as opposed  to
         statements from friends and family) of his presence in the UK prior
         to October 2012. The respondent acknowledged the appellant's  claim
         to be in a relationship with AM and their claim to have been living
         together since September 2019, but the respondent was not satisfied
         the appellant and AM had been living  together  in  a  relationship
         akin to marriage for at least two years prior to the  date  of  his
         application,  or  that  there  was   sufficient   evidence   of   a
         relationship  between  them   or   sufficient   evidence   of   any
         cohabitation.  Nor  was   the   respondent   satisfied   that   the
         requirements for LTR under Appendix FM were met given that  AM  was
         neither British nor settled in the UK.

      7. The respondent  rejected  the  appellant's  claim  under  paragraph
         276ADE(1)  because  no  adequate  evidence  had  been  adduced   to
         demonstrate that he had resided in the UK continuously for at least
         20 years (paragraph 276ADE(1)(iii)) or that there  would  be  'very
         significant obstacles'  to  his  integration  in  India  (paragraph
         276ADE(1)(vi)).

The hearing to remake the decision

      8. The appellant did not serve any  further  documentary  evidence  in
         support of his appeal. He relied on the documents contained in  the
         respondent's bundle prepared for the  First-tier  Tribunal  hearing
         and his own 44-page bundle  of  documents  prepared  for  the  same
         hearing.


      9. The  respondent's  First-tier  Tribunal  bundle  contained  several
         letters and statement from individuals who claim to have known  the
         appellant for varying periods of time. These included, inter  alia,
         an undated manuscript letter from Mr and Mrs G who claimed to  have
         known the appellant since January 2000 when they met in their local
         Gurdwara (it was further claimed that the appellant's  relationship
         with the family deepened over the years, that they celebrated  many
         festivals together and that the couple's  children  were  extremely
         close to the appellant), an undated manuscript letter from  R  J  K
         who claimed to have known the appellant since 2005 (and  that  they
         had met up on different occasions), a statement dated  23  November
         2019 from MSS who claimed to have known the  appellant  since  2001
         (and that they had spent quality time together, were good  friends,
         and that the appellant had helped a lot with his baby), a statement
         dated  24  November  2019  from  Mr  HSD  who  claimed  to  be  the
         appellant's cousin and to have met him  in  the  UK  in  2003  (the
         appellant is said to have helped his  cousin  discover  more  about
         England through his prior knowledge and experience, to  have  lived
         with his cousin "for a long period of time" before  moving  out  to
         live with AM, and to have a very special  bond  with  his  cousin's
         three children), a letter dated 25 November 2019 from the Treasurer
         of the Gurdwara Baba Sang Ji Smethwick stating that  the  appellant
         "is a regular to 2009/2010 attendee for a  time"  and  helped  with
         events, a manuscript letter dated 25 November 2019 from SS  stating
         that he met the appellant in the  UK  in  August  1999,  that  they
         regularly meet and that the appellant  is  a  good  friend,  and  a
         statement from AM stating that they  had  been  in  a  relationship
         since January 2019 (although the answers given by the appellant  in
         his asylum interview indicated that they only began living together
         around the beginning of September 2019), that  she  was  a  nursery
         teacher with an annual income of �21,800, and had herself lived  in
         the UK since 2014.


     10. In his statement dated 22 January 2020 prepared for the  First-tier
         Tribunal hearing the appellant asserted that he had lived in the UK
         for 21 years, that he knew lots of people who were able to  confirm
         his residence in the UK, that he had a strong relationship with  AM
         and that AM could not live  in  India  as  she  had  allergies  and
         various medical conditions and would not be able to cope  with  the
         climate or food.

     11. In an undated and unsigned statement AM claimed to have been living
         with  the  appellant  since  January   2019   (this   was   however
         inconsistent with his answers in his asylum interview),  that  they
         were in a serious relationship, that she has been living in the  UK
         since 2014 and worked as a nursery school teacher, and that she was
         well-integrated. She claimed to  have  medical  conditions,  mostly
         related to her allergies, and to use an epi pen  to  combat  insect
         bites. She claimed she could not accompany the appellant  to  India
         because of her condition, and that she would not be  able  to  bear
         the heat or adjust to the food.

     12. In his oral evidence the appellant claimed to have arrived  in  the
         UK in 1998 and to have resided in the UK  continuously  since  that
         time. When he first entered the UK he lived in Leicester for a  few
         weeks, then moved to Birmingham for about a year. He also mentioned
         living in Coventry. The appellant was  taken  through  the  various
         statements and letters described above and confirmed the assertions
         in  them.  His  cousin  had  sufficient  financial  resources   and
         suggested the appellant make a residence  application.  the  cousin
         had  been  financially  supporting  the  appellant.  The  appellant
         claimed AM now  had  settled  status  and  that  they  were  living
         together. When asked why none of the  people  who  gave  statements
         attended the hearing to give evidence the appellant claimed he  had
         not been told to about this and suggested that the  Tribunal  could
         contact the individuals directly.

     13. In cross-examination the appellant confirmed that he had been aware
         that the respondent disputed his claim to have lived in the UK  for
         a continuous period of at least 20 years and he had  been  informed
         of the need to produce evidence to support his assertion.  Some  of
         the people were aware of the hearing but most  were  working.  When
         asked why there was no independent evidence of his to have  resided
         in the UK for the 14 year period from 1998 to  2012  the  appellant
         said some people's phone number had changed and  he  did  not  know
         where other people were. The appellant said he  began  living  with
         his cousin in 2008. The appellant agreed that his cousin  made  any
         asylum application when the appellant  was  living  with  him.  The
         appellant claimed he did not have the financial resources  to  make
         an asylum application when his cousin made his asylum  application.
         when told that it did not cost money to make an  asylum  claim  the
         appellant said he went to a solicitor but the solicitor  asked  for
         fees.

     14. In submissions Mr Clarke invited me to draw  an  adverse  inference
         from the failure of any of the  people  who  wrote  statements  and
         letters to  attend  the  hearing,  and  from  the  absence  of  any
         independent evidence of the appellant's residence in  the  UK  from
         1998 to 2012. The appellant's claim that he could not claim  asylum
         because of the cost was not consistent with his earlier explanation
         and was inconsistent with the absence of any fee to make an  asylum
         claim and the availability of legal aid. Mr sing invited me to find
         the appellant a credible  witness  and  to  attach  weight  to  the
         letters and statement in support of his claimed residence. Mr Singh
         accepted there was an inconsistency between the  appellant's  claim
         to have known Mr G since 2003 and Mr G's claim  to  have  know  him
         since 2000, but that this was minor. Mr Singh asserted that AM  had
         settled status and that there were compelling circumstances why the
         couple could not relocate to India.


     15. I reserved my decision.

Findings/conclusion

     16. Paragraph 276ADE(1) states:

             The requirements to be met by an applicant for leave to remain
             on the
             grounds of private life in the UK are  that  at  the  date  of
             application, the applicant:


             (i) does not fall for refusal under  any  of  the  grounds  in
             Section S-LTR 1.2 to S-LTR 2.3. and S-LTR.3.1. in Appendix FM;
             and


             (ii) has made a valid application for leave to remain  on  the
             grounds of private life in the UK; and


             (iii) has lived continuously in the UK for at least  20  years
             (discounting any period of imprisonment); or


             (iv) is under the age of 18 years and has  lived  continuously
             in the UK for at least 7  years  (discounting  any  period  of
             imprisonment) and it would not be  reasonable  to  expect  the
             applicant to leave the UK; or


             (v) is aged 18 years or above and under 25 years and has spent
             at least half of  his  life  living  continuously  in  the  UK
             (discounting any period of imprisonment); or


             (vi) is aged 18 years or above, has lived continuously in  the
             UK  for  less  than  20  years  (discounting  any  period   of
             imprisonment) but has no ties (including social,  cultural  or
             family) with the country to which  he  would  have  to  go  if
             required to leave the UK

     17. The appellant contends that he has lived continuously in the UK for
         at least 20 years and that he meets the requirements  of  paragraph
         276ADE(1)(iii). Mr Singh invites me to  find  the  appellant  is  a
         credible witness and to attach weight to the appellant's  assertion
         relating to his length of residence, as supported by the statements
         and letters adduced on his behalf.


     18. I have concerns with the appellant's credibility. I note  that  the
         respondent did not find the appellant's asylum claim credible based
         on inconsistencies in his account. Judge  Paul  did  not  make  any
         specific finding in respect of these inconsistencies and found  the
         appellant's asylum claim, by its "historic nature", to  be  "barely
         credible", although the judge then  approached  the  claim  at  its
         highest. I note also that Judge Paul found section 8 of the  Asylum
         and immigration (Treatment of Claimants, etc.) Act 2004 relevant in
         respect of the  appellant's  delay  in  making  his  asylum  claim.
         However, given the absence of any clear findings by Judge  Paul  in
         respect of the appellant's actual account of his asylum claim, I do
         not consider it appropriate to make any adverse  credibility  based
         on inconsistencies arising from the account.

     19. In his statement of 22 January  2020,  the  claimed  to  have  been
         "totally unaware of the fact that an individual can make an  asylum
         application at any time based on the fact they fear serious harm or
         threat." The appellant's  explanation  for  his  failure  to  claim
         asylum until 2019 was therefore attributed to his ignorance of  the
         ability  to  make  an  asylum  claim.  This  was  not  however  the
         explanation given by the appellant at the  hearing  before  me.  He
         claimed he had not lodged an asylum  claim  because  of  the  cost.
         Moreover, the appellant admitted that his  cousin  made  an  asylum
         claim when they were  living  together.  The  appellant  could  not
         therefore have been unaware that he could claim asylum  if  someone
         with whom he lived was making an asylum claim. I additionally  note
         that the appellant made human rights applications in 2012 and 2014.
         It is simply not credible that he would not have been aware that he
         could have claimed asylum if he had the  wherewithal  to  have  two
         separate human rights claims. Whilst I take into account his  claim
         to have previously approached a firm of solicitors for the  purpose
         of claiming asylum there is no evidence to support this claim other
         than the appellant's own word.


     20. I have further concerns with the  credibility  of  the  appellant's
         claim to have resided in the UK since 1998 based on the absence  of
         any independent evidence in support  of  his  claim.  There  is  of
         course no need for the appellant to provide  'official'  documents,
         and I would not have expected 'official' documents from someone who
         has lived 'under the radar'. The entire absence of any  independent
         informal  evidence  of  his  residence   is   however   surprising,
         particular given the length  of  his  claimed  residence  prior  to
         making his first application to the Home Office (14 years).

     21. I have carefully considered the various letter  and  statements  in
         support of the appellant's claimed long residence.  The  assertions
         in these letters relating to how long the authors  have  known  the
         appellant are generally vague and lacking in  detail.  Few  if  any
         explanations are given as to why the authors are sure that they met
         the appellant in the years claimed. This could have  been  explored
         if those who wrote the statements and letters had  been  called  to
         give evidence at the hearing.  This  however  did  not  occur.  The
         unparticularised assertions relating to when the  authors  met  the
         appellant remain untested. No satisfactory explanation was provided
         by the  appellant  as  to  why  the  authors  of  the  letters  and
         statements did not attend the hearing through remote means to  give
         evidence. Whilst he claimed some were working, there was no further
         evidence  from  these  individuals  corroborating  this  claim   or
         explaining why they were unable to take a short of amount  of  time
         off work in order to give evidence.

     22. For the reasons given above I am not persuaded that  the  appellant
         has discharged the burden of proving that he has lived  in  the  UK
         for a continuous period of at least 20 years.

     23. Although the  appellant  has  not  expressly  relied  on  paragraph
         276ADE(1)(vi), I have nevertheless considered whether he meets  the
         requirements of this paragraph. In his asylum interview  (questions
         15 to 22) the appellant stated that his father and brother continue
         to live in India, as do extended family members, and  that  he  had
         regular contact with his father and brother. There was no  evidence
         adduced at the hearing to undermine the continuing validity of  his
         answers. The appellant therefore has a network of support upon whom
         he could rely in re-integrating into Indian society. Even if  there
         is no network of support, the appellant is a healthy man who,  even
         on his own (rejected) account of his length of residence in the UK,
         would have lived in India for the formative years of his  life  and
         would have entered the UK as an adult. There is no reasonable basis
         for believing that he would have any language issues on  return  to
         India, or that he would have lost his familiarity with the  culture
         and customs. There is nothing preventing him obtain  employment  as
         an Indian national.

     24. In respect of my assessment of  the  appellant's  Article  8  claim
         outside the immigration rules, I note that he has produced  no  new
         evidence of the nature and  extent  of  the  private  life  he  has
         established in the UK. For the reasons I have already given  I  can
         only attached limited weight to the untested  assertions  contained
         in the letters and statements contained in the respondent's bundle,
         and I cannot be satisfied that the appellant has  been  in  the  UK
         prior to  October  2012.  I  take  account  of  the  claimed  close
         relationships established by the appellant with the individuals who
         wrote the letters and statements, but no elements of dependency  or
         reliance  have  been  disclosed  in   respect   of   any   of   the
         relationships, and the appellant would be able to maintain  contact
         with  his  friends  and  his  cousin  through   remote   forms   of
         communication or periodic visits by  those  individuals  to  India.
         There is no adequate evidence that the appellant's daily social and
         cultural experience and  expectations  have  been  moulded  by  his
         residence to such an extent that removing him  would  constitute  a
         disproportionate interference with the private  life  relationships
         he has established in this country.

     25. Despite the grounds of appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal  raising  no
         issue with Judge  Paul's  assessment  of  the  appellant's  claimed
         relationship with AM, I have nevertheless considered  the  evidence
         relating to that relationship. Despite the respondent taking  issue
         with the genuineness of the appellant's relationship with  AM,  and
         his failure to demonstrate that they were cohabiting, the appellant
         still only relies on a statement from AM dated  27  November  2019,
         and an unsigned statement in his First-tier Tribunal bundle. AM was
         not called as a witness and her evidence remains untested. Although
         his First-tier Tribunal bundle contains a copy of her  registration
         certificate and passport, there is still no independent or reliable
         evidence of any cohabitation. I am not satisfied that the appellant
         and AM are living together. Mr Singh claimed that AM  now  had  ILR
         (presumably under  the  Settlement  Scheme)  but  no  evidence  was
         provided in support of  this  claim.  Given  that  the  appellant's
         answers in his asylum interview were to the effect that  they  only
         started to cohabit in September 2019, even taking his claim at  its
         highest, they have not been cohabiting for the requisite  two  year
         period and she cannot meet the definition of  partner  in  Appendix
         FM.


     26. Even if the appellant was in a relationship with AM,  and  even  if
         she now had settled status, the  appellant  has  not  produced  any
         evidence  even  remotely  capable  of  demonstrating   either   the
         existence of insurmountable obstacles to the couple  relocating  to
         India (applying EX.1 and EX.2), or, alternatively, that the refusal
         of his human rights  claim  would  result  in  unjustifiably  harsh
         consequences such as to constitute a disproportionate  interference
         with their Article 8 rights.

     27. Judge Paul noted the absence of any medical evidence supporting the
         assertion that AM had allergies or other  medical  conditions  that
         prevented her from living in India and considered  such  assertions
         to be without substance. The appellant has still not  produced  any
         medical or other reliable and independent evidence  in  support  of
         this assertion. Although AM's statement claims  she  is  a  nursery
         teacher and  was  well  integrated  in  the  UK,  no  reliable  and
         independent evidence has been provided in support of these  claims.
         There is a considerable paucity  of  evidence  in  respect  of  the
         appellant's relationship with  AM  and  his  claim  that  it  would
         constitute a disproportionate interference with Article 8 to expect
         her to relocate to  India.  Moreover,  any  such  relationship  was
         established when the appellant was  present  without  lawful  leave
         and, pursuant to s.117B(4)(b) of the Nationality,  Immigration  and
         Asylum Act 2002, even if  AM  was  a  'qualifying  partner'  little
         weight would be accorded to the relationship.

     28.  For  all  these  reasons  I  find  that  the  appellant  has   not
         demonstrated that he has lived continuously in the UK for at  least
         20 years and that the refusal of his  human  rights  claim  is  not
         unlawful under s.6 of the Human Rights Act 1998.



Notice of Decision

The appellant's human rights claim is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  in
this appeal is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.  This
direction applies both to the appellant and to the  respondent.  Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


D.Blum                 14 March 2021

Signed                     Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Blum
