
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                     Appeal
Number PA/12350/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Heard at Field House
             Decision & Reasons Promulgated
On 28th March 2018
             On 5th April 2018


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PARKES


                                   Between

                                     R I
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J D Knight (Legal Representative, Duncan Lewis &
Co, Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kandola (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh. He applied for asylum on  the
    basis of his sexuality which was rejected for the reasons given in  the
    Refusal Letter of the 13th of November 2017. The Appellant's appeal was
    heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Buckwell sitting at Taylor House  on
    the 15th of January 2018. The appeal  was  dismissed  in  the  decision
    promulgated on the 15th of January 2018.

 2. The decision contains self  directions  at  paragraph  56  and  60.  In
    paragraphs 56(a) and (b) the Judge  referred  to  the  "real  risk"  of
    persecution of serious harm. In paragraph 60  in  the  first  paragraph
    dealing with his findings and reasons the Judge stated that the  burden
    was "the balance of probabilities." He then went on  to  make  findings
    rejecting the Appellant's credibility  dismissing  the  appeal  on  all
    grounds.

 3. The grounds of application  for  permission  to  appeal  focus  on  the
    wording in paragraph 60 and argue that  the  Judge  applied  the  wrong
    standard of proof. Permission was granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Baker on the 30th of January 2018.

 4. At the hearing the Home Office acknowledged  the  difficulty  with  the
    decision. Although the Judge  had  identified  the  lower  standard  in
    paragraph 56 and referred to it again in paragraph 65  the  placing  of
    the wrong, higher standard, appears at the very start of the section of
    the decision headed "Findings and Reasons".

 5. The Appellant  has  to  be  confident  the  Judge  has  approached  the
    assessment of the evidence correctly. The terminology in  paragraph  60
    fundamentally undermines that and  as  a  result  the  decision  cannot
    stand. Regrettably there is no option but to set  the  decision  aside.
    Had the Judge not made the reference to the balance of probabilities in
    paragraph 60 there would have been no issue with the  terminology  used
    but as it stands the effect of the wording cannot be avoided.

CONCLUSIONS

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making
of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision.

The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Buckwell is set aside, the  appeal
is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  for  re-hearing,  not  before  Judge
Buckwell.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made an order  pursuant  to  rule  45(4)(i)  of  the
Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.

I continue that order (pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008.)

Fee Award

In setting this decision aside and remitting it to the  First-tier  Tribunal
for re-hearing I  make  no  fee  order  which  remains  for  the  First-tier
Tribunal dependent on the findings made on the remitted appeal.


Signed:

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal (IAC)

Dated: 28th March 2018

