
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12816/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 14th June 2019                    |On 26th June 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ZUCKER


                                   Between

                            mr miran Abdulrahman
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Rogers, I A S (Middlesbrough)
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Iraq whose date of birth is  recorded  as
    27th October 1997.  He made application for international protection as
    a refugee.  On 26th October 2018 a decision  was  made  to  refuse  the
    application and the appellant appealed.  The appeal was heard by  Judge
    of the First-tier Tribunal Cope on 6th December 2018 sitting  at  North
    Shields.

 2. The substance of the appellant's case as  advanced  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal is set out at paragraph 17 of the Decision and Reasons of  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  In summary he formed a sexual relationship with a
    young woman.  This was not a relationship  approved  of  by  the  young
    woman's family.  She became pregnant. Subsequently they were just about
    to have sexual intercourse when the young woman's brother came  to  the
    premises where they were and realising what was occurring  fired  shots
    at the appellant who managed to escape.  The appellant fled,  for  fear
    of his life.

 3. There was a second element to the appellant's case based  on  political
    activity in respect of which it was his case that he had sent videos of
    his participation in demonstrations against the KRI Government  to  the
    young woman with whom he had had this relationship.

 4. Judge Cope rejected the appeal.  In  short,  he  did  not  believe  the
    appellant. He dismissed the appeal on all grounds.   Not  content  with
    that decision, by Notice  dated  4th  March  2019  the  appellant  made
    application for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  There were
    three grounds.  The first two grounds go to the characterisation of the
    evidence and the third ground criticises the judge in relation to video
    evidence  which  Ms  Rogers  contended  was  in  fact  based   upon   a
    misunderstanding of the evidence.  The point is  that  the  judge  held
    against the appellant the destruction of the  sim  card  assuming  that
    that was where the appellant was saying the video was contained when in
    fact it was the appellant's case that the video had been obtained  from
    the "cloud".

 5. I am very grateful to both parties for their help in  this  matter  and
    particularly to Ms Rogers for the very  realistic  approach  which  she
    took to this appeal relying as she did  simply  on  the  grounds.   The
    appellant, I have no doubt, was disappointed with the  finding  of  the
    judge, but the test for me is not whether I would have made a different
    decision, that is not for the Upper Tribunal.  The test for  the  Upper
    Tribunal where a challenge is made to findings of fact, and there is no
    dispute that this appeal is about a challenge to findings of fact, (the
    whole case turned on credibility), is whether the findings of the judge
    were open to him or her.  A question I have to ask myself  is  was  the
    decision against the weight of the evidence?  Another question I should
    ask is was the decision perverse, and yet another is was  the  decision
    irrational?

 6. I have read this Decision and Reasons with some care.  It runs  to  125
    paragraphs.  In my judgment the judge approached this appeal with  some
    care.  There are what I consider to be  unimpeachable  self-directions.
    At paragraph 22 for  example  the  judge  reminded  himself  that  when
    considering  "plausibility"  that  while  something  may  seem  to   be
    implausible it does not mean that it did not happen.  The  judge  noted
    that there were aspects of the  appellant's  case  where  he  had  been
    consistent about events in Iraq. He also recognised that some  of  what
    the appellant had to say was  "not  inconsistent  with  the  background
    evidence". Though that was a factor which the judge  directed  himself,
    rightly, to which he should have regard,  he  was  right  to  say  that
    consistency in itself did not necessarily lead to a favourable  finding
    on credibility.  That is obviously right because a judge needs to  look
    at all of the evidence.

 7. I have to say that I thought the grant of permission in this  case  was
    generous.  In observing that the judge's assessment of the  appellant's
    credibility was arguably unbalanced, it occurred  to  me  reading  this
    Decision as a  whole  that  what  was  being  said  in  the  grant  was
    tantamount to saying that the more  the  judge  found  reason  for  not
    accepting what the appellant had to say, the more  unbalanced,  and  so
    the more criticism there should be.

 8. At the core of the appellant's case was  the  notion  that  this  young
    woman was pregnant.  The judge found that that was something  to  which
    the appellant should have made reference at an earlier  stage  than  he
    did. That was of itself, without more, sufficient reason for the  judge
    to reject that aspect  of  the  appellant's  case.   There  has  to  be
    sufficient reason for a judge to come to a view; there was.   The  same
    observation could be made with respect to the inconsistency  which  the
    judge found with respect to the appellant's  contention  that  he  took
    part in political activities: dealt with at paragraph 59 onwards within
    the Decision and Reasons.  What the judge did was to test his  view  by
    reference to other aspects  of  the  evidence.   Even  if  those  other
    aspects which are criticised could not of themselves have justified the
    decision that the judge came to, certain it was that he was entitled to
    have regard to them in making an overall assessment of the  appellant's
    credibility.

 9. Though I understand that the appeal was being brought on  instructions,
    this is yet again one of those cases to which the observations of  Lord
    Justice McCombe in VW (Sri Lanka) [2013] EWCA Civ 522 is appropriate in
    which he said at paragraph 12:

         "Regrettably, there is an increasing tendency in immigration cases,
         when a First-tier Tribunal Judge has given  a  judgment  explaining
         why he has reached a particular decision, of seeking to burrow  out
         industriously areas of evidence that have  been  less  fully  dealt
         with than others and then to use this as a basis  for  saying  that
         the judge's decision is legally flawed because it did not deal with
         a particular matter more fully. In my judgment, with respect,  that
         is no basis on which to sustain a proper  challenge  to  a  judge's
         finding of fact".

    Whilst understanding why those acting for the appellant had brought the
    appeal, it is an appeal with very little merit.

Notice of Decision

The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.  The decision of  the  First-
tier Tribunal is affirmed.


Signed                              Date: 24 June 2019



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Zucker
